Later British Predominance in Maritime and Amphibious Warfare
This local domination of the seas had far reaching results.
ships,
better
sailing
and handling techniques,
and
the cannon,
Military forces at sea with bigger
created
the
Royal Navy.
What had started as the only tactical solution to a hitherto insoluble military problem produced
conditions whereby England turned this disadvantage of hers into, as it were, a disadvantage of
the whole world vis-à-vis herself.
Although British rule abroad has declined in the Twentieth Century, it should not be supposed
that the actual basic British advantage has thereby for this reason declined, or that the United States
will always find it convenient, desirable, or even possible in the face of other defence commitments,
to bear indefinitely the Trident she has apparently assumed from us.
Few informed American
Officers will deny,
though many normally
well-informed British Officers are ignorant of the
tremendous British contribution in general experience, material, design and staff organisation to
the initial American amphibious efforts, particularly in Europe during the 1939-45 War.
The
exact extent of that contribution, will, it is hoped, be clear from the succeeding chapters.
Factors Contributing to British Predomination Prior to 1914
The problems of British military and naval Commanders, except for once or twice a century
when a particular continental threat reached its peak, were, until 1914, not so much how to prevent
invasion of the United Kingdom as how to get ashore on an enemy coast; and very often even
less how to get ashore as where to go ashore.
For something over three centuries, the military
capabilities of shore and maritime artillery
and the musket remained approximately the same.
It was true that this placed the well-sited
defender of a port or beach at a good tactical advantage, other things being equal, compared with
the attacker.
However, the British found that very often other things were by no means equal and,
from the time that Drake singed the King of Spain's beard at Cadiz until the Dardanelles, the
British took calculated risks, pitted their ships if strictly necessary against shore forts and
batteries, landed their infantry in open boats, risking musket fire with an accurate range of only
some 100 yards, and thus captured the ports and bases required for subsequent military operations.
It did not always succeed, but it was
' an operation of war."
Further, although gunpowder had
cast the die slightly in favour of the defender, the improved mobility of, say, the eighteenth century
man-of-war, more than counter-balanced this.
The most well-organised post-horse and eighteenth
century continental military road system, although it might give news in Paris of an attack on
Toulon slightly quicker than the news went from Ghent to Aix some two centuries before, would
not move the infantry to its defence one whit quicker.
Therefore, until 1914, an amphibious assault was largely a matter, firstly, of good intelligence,
for it would be an obvious folly to attack a port which superior numbers of first class enemy infantry
could reach before our own
forces were well ashore.
it was a matter
Both tactical and strategican surprise were lars a ho the handso, he as a mate commise.
of the Hon. Sir Thomas Mackenzie, later in this Chapter, on the ill advised bombardment of the
outer Dardenelles forts in November, 1914, are relevant.
Thirdly, it was a matter of concentrating
sufficient conventional forces for the task and making a normal professionally good job of it.
Little
special material was required and, if it was, it could be improvised satisfactorily locally.
Limited Requirement for Specialised Equipment
The immediate object of an amphibious operation was usually the capture of a port, unless a
withdrawal was contemplated when the operation came into the category of what is now known
as a raid. A port having been captured, further operations were either of a purely military or
of a transportation character.
There are, however, historical exceptions to the rule that no special material was required;
special improvised material has been used for large scale operations,
notably the crossing of
the Hellespont by Xerxes in 492 в.C.
In this case,
pontoon equipment supported by inflated
goat skins formed a bridge for the passage of many thousands of men.
It is evident that such a
plan, which in the event turned out extremely successful, could not have achieved its object under
assault conditions and, for this reason, nearly all the early Commanders avoided the issue by marching
round the sea obstacle, after the style of Hannibal in the 2nd Punic War, 218в.c.
land battles,
During the Middle Ages, the horse came into prominence as the decisive factor in winning
culminating in the supreme achievements in the with Century of Jenghiz Khan
and his Golden Horde, which consisted of some 250,000 mounted men manoeuvred under a single
command. Nevertheless, neither Jenghiz nor anyone else attempted amphibious operations, other
than river crossings, on any scale with horses between the Twelfth Century and the present time,
Over the whole of this long period, horses were only transported across the sea as part of a build-up
and thus became the subject of a transportation problem rate a than the ot amphibious warfare,
It follows, therefore, that, until World War I, amphibious assault operations were concerned
chiefly with the landing of infantry and artillery without providing for movement thereafter,
until a bridgehead had been firmly established.
with the craft already available to the naval forces of the combatants.
These requirements were met, usually adequately,
The lead in amphibious warfare tactics had been held by Great Britain in the last two and
a half centuries, mainly as a result of the use of sea power to conduct numerous small wars.
Continental powers were not interested.
Up to 1913, the War Office held all the resources for landing horses and indeed a considerable
part of the floating equipment for landing guns, but neither the horse boats nor the flats were at all
suited for use under assault conditions and they were never intended to be so used.
After 1913 the
Admiralty assumed responsibility, not only for landing troops as heretofore, but also for all ancillary
equipment required by the Army.
Financial provision to enable amphibious landings to be made
fficiently was not made despite this, and the Navy had ready in 1914 only the methods employed
by Nelson and his predecessors, with the added disadvantage of having far fewer suitable shallow
draught vessels available.
Prior to the 1914 War, the last amphibious operations conducted against a major power in
Europe had been those carried out by the British and French against the Russians in the Crimea and
the basic conditions were the same as had obtained for three centuries.
Although this campaign has
become famous chiefly for tactical mistakes such as the Charge of the Light Brigade, and logistic and
medical difficulties of an acute kind, the basic fact remains that the Allies were able to land where
and when they liked, ports were captured and the main battles took place after, not on, landing.
Russia with all her vast manpower, could not garrison her sea coasts.
SECTION (i)
THE FIRST WORLD WAR, 1914-1918
The Drastic Changes-Industrial Productivity, Weapons, Fire Power and Communications
World War I brought the first really basic changes in the factors affecting the application of
amphibious strategy and tactics for three centuries.
It was the first war fought to attrition by
modern industrial states with the material that their factories and productive genius could
deliver.
It saw the horse being replaced by the internal combustion engine and the arrival of air
power. Further, well-developed continental railway systems, operating on interior lines of com-
munication, enabled the Central powers to move forces to the defence of any threatened sector of
their sea perimeter almost as quickly as, or quicker than, the maritime powers could build up
their attack by sea.
Worse still, modern communications, coupled to a good intelligence system,
and assisted by a lack of appreciation of what this meant in terms of security and cover plans fot
future operations,
destroyed any great
probability of tactical or strategic surprise.
straw was the defensive capability of well-handled small arms of the type which had come into
the hands of the armies of the world since 1875.
The Boer, at the turn of the century, and the
Briton, in 1914, used the rifle brilliantly in defence against superior numbers. Continental armies
made up in quantity what they often lacked in quality, but before 1915 dawned on the battlefields,
the machine-gun was master.
The development of artillery was scarcely less spectacular, but the real
achievement here lay in the tremendous industrial organisation which enabled such vast quantities
f shells and guns to be produced relatively quickly and cheaply
For the first time in history
ot only could the defender obtain information of the attack from the sea in time, but he coul
move forces, adequate to contain and finally obliterate the bridgehead, quicker than his opponent and
he could lay the attackers in bloody heaps on the beach itself or leave their wooden boats, full of
wounded and dead, drifting and sinking before their helpless Commanders.
After forty years, this is easier to see in its proper perspective; but men were not lacking who
saw, in part, the problems involved at the time.
The following is an extract from the autobiograpny
of Admiral Sir Sydney Freemantle, which deals with a period when he was Head of the War Division
at the Admiralty in 1910 :-
" The functions of the Navy were unfortunately at that time considered very much
in isolation from those of the Army, and still more so from those of other government
departments, such as the Foreign Office and Board of Trade, which were concerned with
National Defence.
Our only normal contact with the War Office was through a naval
captain who enjoyed the title of ' Naval Assistant to the Director of Fortifications,' but
who had become in practice a liaison officer for general purposes between the Admiralty and
WO 277/21
27
