operations.
Another feature of the Dieppe operation was the use of H.Q. Ships specially fitted for Channel
or this type of operation.
No fully equipped L.S.H. was by that time ready, nor would one have been suitable
It was decided to use Hunt Class destroyers, but one alone was found
some measure of duplication to allow for casualties was also provided by this der ce.
in the Calpe were the the Aland military Force Commanders with a senior representative of the Air
orce Commander; the Air Commander himself remaining at his headquarters at Uxbridge.
ad been intended originally that all aircraft taking part should be controlled from Uxbridge
hut permission had been obtained to fit the necessary V.H/F sets in the H.Q. Ship for communica-
ton with fighters should this be desired. In the event all direction of fighter airiato in the assica-
area was carried by the H.Q. Ship with extremely successful results.
Command and Control
evolution of technique, equipment, ships and headquarters during all this period was
governed by a developing pattern of command and control. In any modern force, the Commander's
methods are to some extent restricted by the available means of communication. In the complicated
circumstances of an amphibious force, there is particular need for him to do so; the interlocking
of three Service Commands in conditions, which are nearly always unfamiliar and are generally
most exacting as regards the use of radio, calls for a signal system which is closely matched
to that of command and control. It follows that the signal planners must combine close study of
tactical progress with something of a gift for prophecy and must frequently suggest lines of
operational development which are opened up or, in some cases, enforced by available technique.
The Signal Staff of C.O.H.Q. made this study their special concern and provided a strong measure
of continuity between successive operations including those planned by other authorities.
The signal communications provided for the control of amphibious operations developed from
the Madagascar landing onwards.
The larger number of signal personnel required for the North
African landings and subsequent operations, and the limited time available for training, meant
that a lower standard of operational efficiency had to be accepted.
This disadvantage was to
some extent offset by the provision of specially equipped Headquarters ships.
When the time came to plan the communication facilities for the Normandy landings, the
communication procedures developed by Force " J"
in the Channel were incorporated in the system
which had been developed in the larger operations in the Mediterranean.
India, 1942-1943
Signals entered the Combined Operations sphere in this theatre in July, 1942, when British
2 Division were ordered to raise the first Beach Signal Section in India in anticipation of future
operations. A small Combined Training Centre was in existence at Kharakvasla, but there was no
signals wing and no signals staff to formulate the theory and practice of signals in the assault.
A second Beach Signal Section was formed by 2 Division in October and, at the same time,
a small instructional staff was appointed to the C.T.C. exclusively for the training of assaulting
formations in landing technique as applied to signals.
With the arrival of 36 Division from Madagascar, a major reorganisation took place. This
Division took over specialist training from 2 Division but the C.T.C. continued to give basic instruc-
At 36 Division Headquarters Combined Operations Signals were organised on an inter-
Services basis, there being army, naval and air force signal officers on the staff.
A Combined Signal School was formed at Bandra, the task of which was to give initial training
to newly-formed beach sections of the three Services; refresher training to sections on return from
training to brigade and divisional Signal Sections of formations undergoing basic
training at the C.I.C.; and to act as a landing depot for all Combined Operations Sections in India,
irrespective of Service.
Help on the naval side arrived in December when No. 3 R.N.B.S.S.
(Royal Naval Bear Signal Section) joined the Combined Signals School.
170717
WO 277/215.
27
30
