disinfectants, chemicals, etc., needed for new methods of fighting malaria, and
by food analysts' requirements, and the application of pestology.
Another matter, which created additional work in S.T.6 at this stage, was
the increase in the number of ration scales referred to the branch for approval.
Indigenous produce was being used in overseas theatres as substitutes for
ration articles, and this caused amendments in the scales.
Once again, S.T.6 was re-organized, in June, 1945, when the duties were
re-allocated between sections, as follows: —
S.T.6 (a) = Provision policy; ration scales.
S.T.6 (b) = Supplies distribution, home and overseas.
S.T.6 (c) = Organization and planning.
S.T.6 (d) = Liaison Staff, Ministry of Food.
The establishment of S.T.6 at this time included one D.D.S.T., four
A.Ds.S.T., 13 D.A.Ds.S.T., 14 staft captains, one quarter-master, and 37 clerks.
This was the peak, and thereafter the rundown programme began to
take effect.
Supply Branch, R.A.S.C.
The Supply Branch of the R.A.S.C. included clerks, bakers, butchers, and
issuers.
The clerks provided clerical staff, not only for R.A.S.C. supply,
transport, and barrack offices, but also for War Office and all subordinate
formation headquarters.
The bakers and butchers were employed at their
trade to a limited extent in those stations where there were R.A.S.C. bakeries
and abattoirs, and as bread and meat issuers in supply depots.
The issuers
were non-tradesmen, who served only on a short service engagement of two
years with the colours and ten with the reserve, and could gain no advance.
ment in pay or rank.
The supervisory personnel in supply depots were there-
fore provided by warrant officers and N.C.Os. of the baker and butcher classes.
These supply
personnel were administered in peace time by Supply
Companies of the R.A.S.C., of which there was one in each home command
and one in Egypt, besides a Depot Company at Aldershot.
During the war,
the supply personnel employed in R.A.S.C. offices, Command Supply Depots,
etc., at home, were administered by Supply Personnel Sections, on the scale
of one per District.
Method of Supply in Peace
The system of rationing in force in the Army before the war, both at home
and, with local variations in overseas garrisons, is described in Chapter XII.
It is sufficient to summarize it briefly here. It was based on a ration scale and
a cash allowance. Certain items were drawn from the R.A.S.C., and all others
from the Navy, Army, and Air Force Institutes, (N.A.A.F.I.), within the tolal
value of the ration and the allowance.
Of the R.A.S.C. items, bread was
merally supplied under lonal contenet excent where there was a R.A.S.C.
bakery; frozen meat was supplied under War Office contract.
sall, preserved meat, and biscuits, were issued in bulk from Tha, suga.
Reserve Depot, as also were certain hospital supplies, e.g., wines and spirits.
and dry goods. Perishable hospital supplies, e.g. pesity, fish, and fruit, were
obtained under contract.
Forage, in the years immediately before the war, was a shrinking require
ment, due to the progress of mechanization. It was obtained under loca
contract, under R.A.S.C. supervision. Paillasse straw for units in camps was
obtained under contract, and issued by the Officer i/c Supplies.
Petrol was delivered, under War Office contracts, by the oil companies
through their normal channels of supply.
Wherever possible, delivery was in
bulk into kerbside pumps, located in R.A.S.C. or unit lines, and thence issued
by pump into vehicle tanks.
Where this was impracticable, or for training
purposes, issue was made in the ordinary commercial 2-gallon can.
Lubricants were issued by the S.R.D. to R.A.S.C. depots, and thence to
units, in 5-gallon drums for oils, and tins for grease.
Officer i/c Supplies, R.A.S.C., accounted for the supplies issued under
R.A.S.C. arrangements, but deliveries were often made direct to units, and
the functions of Os. i/c supplies were mainly clerical, apart from responsibility
for periodical inspection of deliveries under contract.
Q.M.G. 16/S.T. 4—Catering
The importance attached to the soldiers' messing in the Army until 1938,
may be gauged from the fact that there was only one Inspector of Army Cater-
ing, who was attached to Q.M.G.6.
The theory was that anyone could cook
the ration, although some attempt was being made in the years between the
wars to train cooks.
They were, however, unpaid, apart from unit funds.
It was not sufficiently recognized by those responsible for shaping policy
that health and morale depend to a considerable extent on properly cooked
food, and that the fighting efficiency of the soldier is best maintained by
providing a varied and palatable diet, with adequate nutritional value.
In 1938, the head of the catering firm of J. Lyons and Co. was appointed
Honorary Catering Adviser to the Army, and great progress was soon made.
An expert from the catering industry was appointed as Chief Inspector of
Army Catering, and, in the early part of 1939, there were also, at the War
Office, an Assistant Chief Inspector and two Inspectors, and in Commands,
five Command Catering Advisers and two Assistant Command Catering
Advisers, all but one from the civilian trade.
A number of reforms were introduced, which are described in Chapter XII.
By the outbreak of war, the catering part of responsibilities of Q.M.G.6 had
reached such an important position that a separate branch was formed at the
War Office to deal with it, with the designation of Q.M.G.16, later to be
changed to S.T.4. The establishment comprised one A.D.S.T., one D.A.D.S.T.,
one Chief Inspector of Catering, one Assistant Chief Inspector, and two
Inspectors.
In 1940, the Branch was reorganized into sections, as it had reached such
large proportions.
These were:-
S.T.4 (a)-Training-D.A.D.S.T. and Q.M.
S.T.4 (b)—By-products-D.A.D.S.T. and Q.M.
S.T.4 (c)-A.T.S. catering-Inspector of Q.M.G.
Services and staff
subaltern.
Technical-Chief Inspector of Army Catering.
Assistant C.I.A.C.
Three inspectors.
Inspector of Cookery Training Centres.
Assistant inspector of C.T.Cs.
Inspector of messing by-products.
WO 277/21.
27
W027 1/26
