EXPEDITIONARY FORCE
33. V.A.C.T. also acts as Naval Force Commander to the Expeditionary Force until such time a
a separate Force
For this purpose he has a separate operational staff headed
and in return advises on the Combined Operations Training of the Expeditionary Force.
to seek the advice of the Commander of the Expeditionary Force in the training carried out at the C.T.C.s
34. H.Q.C.T. are shared by the Headquarters of the Expeditionary Force.
The C.C.O. has agreed
EXPERIMENTS AND DEVELOPMENT
35. The Commandant of the Combined Operations Developmint Catti (C.C.O.D.C.) is responsible
to the C. C.. Con examining and experimenting with craft oct equatmont in co nection with combined
operations and also for keeping up to date with current doctrine at home and abroad with a view to
anticipating future developments.
36. There is a branch of the Combined Operations Development Centre in H.M.S. Monck.
apples That comb red opinion at miraty,
War Office and Air Ministry Technical Departments
aircraft and equipment.
operational authorities should maintain full co-operation with the departments concerned through the
Au comolen
normal Service channels.
TECHNICAL ADMINISTRATION OF BASES AND MAINTENANCE AND
REPAIRS OF SHIPS AND CRAFT
38. Under R.A.L.B. the S.E.O.C.O., the S.C.O.C.O., and the S.O.C.O, are responsible to the C.C.O.
for the technical administration of all Bases and Establishments in the Combined Operations Command.
39. These technical officers are also responsible for hull and machinery items for ships and craft
under the orders of or attached to C.C.O.
40. Maintenance and repair arrangements for machinery and hull work and the allocation and
distribution of spare gear will be co-ordinated by them.
APPENDIX 10
C.O.S. (42) 103 (O) (FINAL)
OPERATIONS ON THE CONTINENT
Memorandum
The Defence Committee at their Meeting* on
14th April, gave general approval to the proposals
brought over by Mr. Hopkins and General Marshall for Anglo-American operations in Western Europe
in 1942 and 1943 in the following terms :-
"A policy for assigning responsibility for the development of these proposals is now required
in order that planning and preparation for operations in 1942 and in 1943 may proceed concurrently
and with the maximum efficiency."
2. We propose to develop the offensive in the following stages and to delegate responsibility for
planning, as set out in the succeeding paragraphs :—
(a) The conversion of the United Kingdom into an advanced base for operations in Western
development of preparations on a front stretching from the Shetlands to the Bristol
(c) A series of raiding operations to be carried out during the summer of 1942, coupled with
(d) an active air offensive over North-West Europe:
(e) the capture of a bridgehead on the Continent within the area in which adequate naval and air
cover can be given during the summer of 1942 if the opportunity occurs :
(f) A large scale descent on Western Europe in the spring of 1943.
Advanced Base
offensive footing.
i T to merican proposals will involve the conversion of the United Kingdom from a defensive to an
Many additional aerodromes will he required: extensive accommodation will have t
be provided for the American troops either by new construction or by wholesale evacuation of the civilian
Population; the harbours, and possibly railways, in southern and eastern England will require extensive
Skilled labour is likely to prove the bottle-neck.
*D.O. (42) 10th Meeting.
218
4. We therefore propose
dromes, cantonments, store parks, hards. etc. :
(b) to ask the United States to provide a large part of the labour and machinery required for
combined requirements:
developing these facilities and that the War Office and Air Ministry should put forward
(c) to ask the United States to leave in this country all labour and equipment now engaged on
construction work, such as the Rosneath base.
Offensive Preparations
5. It will not be possible to conceal our preparations from the enemy.
to our real objectives, preparations for an assault will be made along the coast.
In order to mislead them as
" Sledgehammer" in 1942 will be confined to the south
Preparations for Operation
and south-east coast by lack of equipment, but
as the landing craft become available, the area from which the operation might be launched will spread
6. Responsibility for initiating these preparations will rest jointly with the Chief of Combined
Operations and the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces.
Large Scale Raiding Operations in 1942
7. We have already approved a policy of raids to be undertaken in the summer of 1942 on the largest
scale that the available equipment will permit.
These raids will be carried out on a front extending
from the north of Norway to the Bay of Biscay and will be planned and launched by the Chief of Combined
Operations in consultation with the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces.
Active Air Offensive
8. The Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Fighter Command,
in consultation
Commanding-in-Chief, Bomber Command has
been charged with the task of inflicting the greatest
possible wastage on the German Air Force in the West.
This air action has already started and should
reach maximum intensity as soon as the German offensive* against Russia begins.
Sledgehammer, 1942
9. Our air offensive may in itself achieve a measure of diversion, but we must be prepared to employ
land forces in order to compel a heavier diversion of air forces.
10. The situation may arise in which we shall have the opportunity to capture a bridgehead and
possibly to extend this so as to include a port, enabling us to establish our forces on the Continent before
the weather deteriorates at the end of September. We must clearly be prepared for such a situation.
11. The Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, the Commander-in-Chief, Fighter Command, and the
Chief of Combined Operations in consultation have therefore been charged with the responsibility for
working out plans for the contingencies referred to in paragraphs 9 and 10 above. Such American forces
as are available in the United Kingdom will be employed as required.
Operation " Super Round-Up"
12. The Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, in conjunction with the Air Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, Fighter Command (and other R.A.F. Commands as necessary)
and the Chief of
Operations have already been charged with the responsibility for planning Operation
1 " Super Round-Up"
in full consultation with the naval staff.*
This project will now be expanded on the general lines of the
proposals contained in General Marshall's Memorandum, and members of the United States Planning
Staffs will be associated with the plans and preparations, both in Headquarters, Home Forces and in
Combined Operations Headquarters.
13. The object of " Super Round Up" will be to destroy German forces in Western Europe.
method of achieving this object will be determined by the Commander-in-Chief, Home
consultation with the other authorities concerned.
Action by S.O. (E)
14. The action by S.O. (E) will require to conform to the general plan.
A draft directive should be
prepared by the Joint Planning Stat in consultation with the Chief of Combined Operations staff.
Action by Patriots in the Occupied Countries
15. It will be necessary to organise and co-ordinate the action by the patriots in the occupied
countries, both when ous ay ting talis place and in the subsequent operations on the Continent,
extract from a Memorandum by General Sikorski is attached (Annex).
The Joint Planning Staff should
examine and report on this paper.
* Reference C.O.S. (42) 21st Meeting (0).
219
(C52794)
WO 277/21
27
30
