Africa at once asked for authority to buy 7½ million dollars worth of M.T.
This too the War Office considered excessive, and East Africa was
told that purchases of M.T. spares and stores must be made through London
and the British Purchasing Commission in the U.S.A., who had been authori-
zed to procure spares, etc., as far as dollars
were available, i.e., up to
800,000 dollars, which was the value of the M.T. spares awaiting shipment
from New York to East Africa.
Building operations began at the end of 1940 of a new Main Supply
Depot not far from Nairobi.
War Office then suggested that, in order to
provide for dispersion and for ease of working, the formation of a number
of small M.S.Ds., on the lines of the British B.S.D., type "B", would be
a preferable method of dealing with the rising feeding strengths.
however, especially in view of the work already done, held to the opinion
that the original scheme was more convenient, and would avoid the decentra-
lization caused by the control of several depots under different officers, and
this won the day, the depot being completed in July, 1941. It was constructed
to meet the requirements of a force of 70,000, and was capable of 50 per
Important reforms were introduced early in 1941. It had all along been
obvious that to have two separate services-
-South African and East African—
was not only wasteful, but would be fraught with difficulties if major opera-
tions took place.
The entire supply organization for the campaign was
therefore consolidated under the D.D.S.T., who had taken over charge of
the supply and transport services in October, 1940.
The next step was the
unification of the South African and East African supply and transport organi-
zations, with consequent hopes of a more business-like administration in the
impending operations.
The large number of reserve M.T. companies now existing called for
Hitherto, they had been disposed in two groups,
working from the two railheads of Nanyuki and Thika, under the O.C.,
were grouped in ten
" Non-divisional
Groups", each under a commander, the number of units in a group being
Two A.Ds.S.T. were appointed, one for Base, and the other for
L. of C., and the groups were roughly shared between them.
Until November, 1940, the control of petrol was effected by D.A.Q.M.G.,
through A.D.S. (Petrol), which was
unsatisfactory
from the S.T. point of
view, and arrangements were therefore made for the latter to come under
the direction of D.D.S.T.
The building up of P.O.L. stocks had been proceeding satisfactorily.
Besides the bulk stocks in the oil companies' tankage,
accumulated forward.
reserves were also
The railways manufactured 20 12,500-gallon tanks,
which were sited at airfields and railheads, and, for further ease of distribution,
13 8,000-gallon rail tank wagons were put in service.
A reserve stock of
nearly 8,000,000 gallons of packed petrol had been built up just before the
In case of the source of supply from Middle East and Persia and
Iraq being cut off, 9,000,000 gallons were held at Durban, representing about
three months' supply, of which one third was packed ready for immediate
396
Before going on to describe the nature of the preparations made further
forward for the impending advance, it is necessary to give a brief description
of the topography of the country concerned.
The Northern part of Kenya, abutting on the 900-mile long frontier of
the Italian possessions, was a desert waste, over which the only way was
by the few and poor roads, often little more than camel tracks.
Belts of lava rock, sometimes 40 miles wide, consisting
of sharp-edged rocks, which tore tyres to pieces, and had a ruinous effect on
springs and radiators; fine sand, sometimes two feet deep; treacherous black
cotton soil, which became glutinous after the least rain; and flooded areas;
were the chief examples.
Fine dust penetrated into carburettors,
clutches, and dynamos, and had to be cleaned out before a vehicle could go
There was a great scarcity of water.
The width of this area
Italian frontier was about 300 miles.
The distance from our railheads to the frontier averaged about 300 miles.
It was partly the fact of the bad conditions to be encountered that deterred
the Italians from advancing
into Kenya after they had driven back our
advanced troops near the Sudan frontier in July, 1940. They preferred to
adopt a containing policy as far as our forces in Kenya were concerned,
and to make a more spectacular conquest of British Somaliland, from which
our small force, hopelessly outnumbered, was obliged to withdraw in August,
It was over the roads traversing this country that the transport units
worked between June 1940, and February, 1941, maintaining the forward
troops, and building up large reserve dumps of food, petrol, ammunition, and
other war material.
The main dump was at Garissa, about 200 miles
Nairobi. This was based on the Thika railhead, 30 miles from Nairobi.
would appear that it would have been easier and more economical to supply
Garissa direct from Mombasa, but the road connecting them was poor, liable
to interruption by flood, and involved ferrying at two points, besides passing
through the coastal malarial belt. It was therefore more economical in time
and labour to avoid splitting the stores arriving in bulk at Mombasa, and
to send them up to the M.S.D. at Nairobi, whence they were sent to railhead,
the reserve M.T. companies filling the gap thence to refilling points, as
The South African reserve companies, with European drivers,
were used for the carriage of water, as it was vital that there should be no
failure of supply in this respect.
The Advance into Somalia
When the force moved forward in February, 1941, the chief problem from
the S. and T. point of view was that of the physical endurance of the personnel,
especially those of the transport units.
respite for nearly nine months, bringing up stores, and now they had to
ace operational conditions without any opportunity for rest and refit.
to drive a lorry in the deplorable road conditions was a
and in addition the heat was so intense that it was difficult to keep awake
The advance was extremely rapid, the Italians offering little resistance, and
the port of Kismayu was occupied after only four days,
the distance from
Garissa being 200 miles. The unexpected rapidity with which the L. of C.
397
(37452)
