(c) Operations and plans; advice to the General Staft on the supply aspect
of present, projected, or possible operations, or security measures in any part
of the world.
(a) Formulation of supply plans for the mobilization of the Regular and
Territorial Armies.
(e) Consideration of the supply aspect of all questions connected with
defence schemes at home or abroad.
) The policy aspect of peace-time rationing at home and abroad, and
messing standards in the Regular and Territorial Armies.
2. EXECUTION AND ADMINISTRATION
(a) Provision and control of supply reserves of all natures for the Field
Force, and for garrisons at home and abroad; and co-ordination with the
policy of the Food (Defence Plans) Department, the Oil Board, and other
departments and services.
(b) Executive arrangements at supply depots in connection with mobiliza-
tion for the Field Force, Air Defence of Great Britain, troops at home and
the Territorial Army.
(c) Provision of current requirements in peace, in co-operation with the
Director of Army Contracts, for troops in peace at home and abroad, in-
cluding both the Army and the Royal Air Force.
(d) Administration and control of reserves at Supply Reserve Depots, of
petrol installations and tin factories, and of the Army School of Cookery.
(e) Arrangements for the inspection of messing, of frozen meat, and of
(*) Settlement of ration scales. Provision of all natures of supplies, either
through War Office or local sources.
Provision of fuel and light.
(g) Executive work connected with supply installations.
Preparation of
design, in conjunction with branches concerned, and formulation of require-
ments, in connection with reserve and other supply depots, cold storage in-
stallations, bakeries, petrol storage and fuel installations, transport of perish-
able and other supplies by sea and air.
(h) Training of messing officers and cooks, of technical supply personnel,
and of personnel in petroleum technology.
(0 Financial policy, in conjunction with finance branch, in relation to all
questions of major policy, and detail connected with allowances for messing,
rations, fuel and light and forage.
(1) Provision, in conjunction with D.A.C., of coal, coke, and other forms
of fuel and light. Setlement of mates of allow an cos and of scales for issue in
3. TECHNICAL
(a) Liaison with the canned and fresh foods and oil industries, and wit
others connected with the provision of items coming under the heading of
Technical investigations into sources of supply, availability, productive and
agricultural methods of all iteme of sunnly and the technic of packing
and storage: control of research experiment, and desion. in connection with
14
foods, packs, and containers, carried out by the W.D. Analyst, the S.R.D., or
the Army School of Cookery; liaison with the W.D. Chemist, and with
Ministries.
(b) Forecast and provision of reserves in relation to expected demands and
turnover; allocation of reserves to depots, and system of stocks; provision and
turnover at home, and in relation to local reserves held abroad; scrutiny of
demands for current and reserve requirements, and arrangements for distribu-
tion and despatch.
(c) Control of inspection of current contracts, of the premises and plants
of potential contractors, and of samples.
(d) Maintenance of supply intelligence and data, and of records; production
of specifications; upkeep of supply training manuals.
(e) Technical research; liaison with the trade, etc., in regard to progress
and techniques in connection with cold storage, bakery plant, petrol storage,
etc., plant, special equipment and clothing; research in connection with the
transport and storage of frozen meat in tropical climates; experiments in con-
nection with cooking apparatus required in peace and war.
All the above functions were carried out by Q.M.G.6 until the executive
work connected with the provision was delegated to an Assistant Director
of Supplies (Provision), in June, 1939.
This appointment was first proposed
in November, 1937, when the D.S.T. submitted that the heavy increases in
staff and executive responsibilities, and the technical burden, imposed too
great a strain on Q.M.G.6, and that the provision side,
the technical develop-
ment side, and the executive control of reserves and their allocation, should
be made the province of a specially appointed officer.
This organization
would be essential on mobilization, but could not be created at short notice.
The matter was, however, shelved, until October, 1938, when the Munich
crisis prompted its revival, and nine months later it was given effect.
time, the existence of two Supply Reserve Depots, and the inception of a
third, called for unity of control of reserves and despatches, of contract
demands, technical questions, and other problems of provisioning.
A.D.S.(P) held the rank of colonel, and had a staff of one officer for technical
petrol duties, and one for the provision office.
The post became later that
of Deputy Director of Supples (Provision), and, finally, of Chief Provision
Officer (Food Supplies).
This organization was the medium through which Q.M.G.6 carried out,
throughout the war years, the complex executive task of provision, and con-
trolled the ever-increasing reserve and maintenance stocks in supply reserve
depots and main supply depots, and their movement inwards and outwards.
A more detailed account is in Chapter XII.
Formation of Catering and P.O.L. Branches
The next step in the process of simplifying and lightening the task of
Q.M.G.6, took place in October, 1939, when catering became an independent
branch under D.S.T., known at first as O.M.G.16, and later as S.T.4.
This
recognized the fact that catering in the Army, hitherto left mainly to com-
manding officers, had emerged as a distinct and very important aspect of the
functions of the Quarter-Master-General's department.
(37452)
15
117
WO 277/21.
27
WO277/26
