crew had rations and water for four days. In the fast launch company, certain
artificers, with hand tools and essential spares, were carried on each mother-
ship.
SECTION 2.—THE ASSAULT AND THE BRIDGEHEAD
Operation "Overlord" launched
Operation " Overlord", for which there had been so much careful pre-
paration, was launched on 6th June, 1944, after a postponement of 24 hours
on account of weather conditions.
The initial stages of the operation on the
British sector went according to plan. Once the beach maintenance area
depots were established they worked well, and the plan required no major
alterations.
In the early stages of the campaign, a considerable proportion
of the stores landed on the beaches consisted of supplies and petrol.
Each man in the force landed with two twenty-four hour packs to cover
the first two days, and after that the only rations employed for some weeks
were the 14-man Compo packs.
Airborne supplies for 6 Airborne Division,
which made a landing behind the German front lines on the night of 5th/ 6th
June,
were carried initially by packing normal first line scales on the man
and in containers; in addition, all spare space in the aircraft and gliders
taking part in that part of the operation was used for the stowage of supplies
and ammunition.
P.O.L. was supplied initially in packed form, but bulk supply was intro-
duced as soon as the necessary equipment could be installed.
Gradually the bridgehead was extended, although not so rapidly as had
been planned.
The British rôle was to hold the main German forces on the
left of the Allied line, while the Americans swept south and east against weaker
opposition.
At last the break-out from the bridgehead began on 25th July.
From the administrative point of view, the intervening period was one of
development from the first hasty
dumps on the beaches to the vast and
intricate organization of the rear maintenance area.
The DUKW Companies
The most interesting feature of the landings from the transport point of
view was the operation of the DUKW companies.
Ten of these were em-
ployed exclusively in coveting stores from ants or from Mulberry B, the
artificial harbour, to dumps ashore.
Part of the other company was used to
evacuate casualties to craft, and the rest brought stores ashore.
The com-
panies were an outstanding success, and contributed greatly to the mainten-
ance over the beaches.
The nature of their share in the operations may be
judged from the fact that, in one day, they brought ashore nearly 11,000 tons;
that. after five davs. thirty-six DIXWe were out of action as the result of
enemy action; and that one company lost three oficers killed on "D" Day.
The work of the DUKW companies and of the transportation units con-
structing Mulberry
B was considerably assisted by the two
Motor Boat
Companies, which arrived during
the first two days.
The fast launch com-
pany was used to control the DUKWs, and the harbour launch company
chiefly in the ferrying of transportation personnel.
330
the stores brought ashore by Rhino ferries.
Ordinary R.A.S.C. transport was employed to clear beached craft and
sector stores dumps located just off the beaches. and later to hagch maintan.
They conveyed the stores to
ance area depots, when these opened on D +2.
Build-up of Supply Organization
The flow of supply units to 21 Army Group began with the landing of
six D.L.Ds. on 6th June, ISlart of the Beach Groups. A seventh Danding of
tvo Port Detachments, followed the next day.
and two more D.I.Ds. came next, on 8th June.
Three Base Supply Depots
By the end of the month, four
HO, C.R.A.S.C. Supply Units, ten B.S.Ds., 25 D.L.Ds., eight Field Bakeries
Mobile), and two Port Detachments, had also crossed
the supply units in the Order of Battle followed in their turn.
The remainder of
these units proved to have been on a generous scale.
Provision of
Progress of Supply Maintenance
The process of maintenance of 21 Army Group gradually became normal,
as for any other overseas theatre.
By 11th June, 1944, all supplies for the
period D + 8 to D + 17 had been called forward, and loading was proceeding.
This involved the despatch of over 20,000 tons from the S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds.
named above, principally to London, Southampton, and Hull.
The demande
on C.P.O. (F.S.) to cover the period D+31 to D+40 had been placed and
totalled 32,000 tons, for which 21,000 tons of shipping space was allotted on
large ships and the balance on coasters.
During the first six weeks, all coal and coke, primarily for hospitals,
bakeries, and workshops, was landed in sacks over the beaches, and delivered
by DUKWs to the specially allotted D.I.Ds., a total of 8,000 tons being
shipped in this period.
The build-up of stocks on the Continent progressed satisfactorily.
3rd July, 1944, the actual stock in the theatre amounted to over seven million
rations (about 13 days for the force ashore), and more than three-quarters of
a million rations in excess of the planned figure for that date.
By 11th July,
loadings had been completed and called forward up to D+30, and sub-
Stantial tonnage had been loaded and called forward up to D + 50.
The total
tonnage loaded by 11th July was 83,000 tons.
By that time, the allocation
of tonage space, thl to age ras, and tonnage called forward, had become
an even flow.
The agreed maintenance programme continued until shipments
up to D +83 (28th Auged n and atter that date commodity demands dition,
The first of these balanced stocks to a level of 28 days on D +93. In addition
si million balanced ration stocks accepted by 21 Army Group, bringing stocks
to 35 days on the ground at that date.
200 tong each of carrote and turning were shioped as a trial in the middle
of August. and 600 tons a week of notatoes were then being shipped. Up to
12ih September, the total of fresh supplies sent from the United Kingdom
root vegetables, and 400 tons of mild-cured bacon.
21 Army Grounis demande for the meriod D+31 to D+60, included 60
tons of foodstuffs for issue to E.F.I. canteens.
commitment up to D + 90, after which S.T. was only to be responsible for the
This was accepted as a S.T.
supply of flour, sugar. and tinned mill for this purpose
331
717
WO 277/21
27
W027 7726
