CHAPTER VIII
NORTH-WEST EUROPE, 1944-1945
Introductory
This chapter deals with the campaign in North-West Europe, which began
on D Day, 6th June, 1944, when the Allied Expeditionary Force landed on
the beaches of Normandy, and ended in Germany on 8th May, 1945, when
the German forces finally surrendered.
The Allied Expeditionary Force included both British and U.S. Armies.
We are concerned here with the British Force of 21 Army Group, and mainly
with the Second Army, which, with the First Canadian Army, composed that
Group.
The Order of Battle of 21 Army Group was as follows: —
Six Armoured Divisions, including one Polish Division.
Ten Infantry Divisions.
Two Airborne Divisions.
Nine Independent Armoured Brigades.
Two Special Service (Commando) Brigades.
G.H.Q., Army, and corps troops.
Certain other Allied contingents.
From the point of view of Supplies and Transport, the story is told in
four parts; first, preparation, which included planning and mounting arrange.
ments; second, the assault, known as Operation " Overlord", including the
landings and the operations in the bridgehead; third, the break-out, cover-
ing the move forward to Antwerp and Brussels, between 25th July and
26th September, 1944; and fourth, the "last round",
campaign, the crossing of the Rhine on 23rd March, 1945, and the final
sweep forward into Germany, culminating in victory.
It has not always been practicable to adhere strictly to that division,
as some of the matters dealt with concerned more than one phase, and an
attempt to split them up would have destroyed continuity and clarity.
SECTION 1.-PREPARATION
The preparations for Operation " Overlord" fell into two parts, those
concerned with the provisioning of the force, and its maintenance on the
Continent of Europe,
and those concerned with the task of moving the
Force from its locations in the United Kingdom across the channel to the
point at which it went ashore.
The former is conveniently called "Plan-
ning", and the latter
"Mounting".
They will be dealt with in that order.
The Branches of the S.T. Directorate at the War Office were primarily
responsible for both Planning and Mounting, within their respective spheres.
Supplies-Preliminary Planning
for operations in North West Europe, began as early as June,
Planning in respect of foodstuffs, solid fuel, and other items of supl
a section of the
Administrative Planning
During the next year,
until a committee of COSS SAC (the Chict of
Staff, Supreme Allied Commander, organization) took over, preliminary con-
sideration
was given to a number of the problems involved,
doubt
had been clarified, and executive action
taken
with regard to a
number of matters.
292
The figures of strengths to be maintained were at this stage subject to
variation, and included those of First Army, so that they bore n subject to
relation to the eventual commitment.
Some basic decisions were taken on
policy,
such as that the Army would be responsible for maintainine on
R.A.F. and about 12,000 R.N. personnel, and as to the types of ration which
would be required for the voyage and for the early stages of the invasion.
Types of Rations
In planning the provision of special operational ration packs for " Over-
lord" there was no problem to be solved regarding the feeding of the
troops after
the initial stages of the assault,
and before bulk supplies
could be accepted.
This was due to the fact that the 14-man composite
ration pack (containing one day's balanced rations for 14 men in one case)
had been proved completely satisfactory in North Africa for this purpose.
Feeding the troops during the actual assault on the beaches did, how-
ever, present a considerable problem.
The assault ration (the 48-hour mess-
tin ration), which had been used to maintain the soldier for the first two
days of both the Madagascar and the North Africa landings, was considered
too heavy and too bulky in proportion to its nutritive value.
There was
plenty of room for improvement.
Soon after the North Africa operation was launched, therefore, experi-
ments began with a view to the evolution of a highly-compact lightweight
ration of high nutritive value.
In these, various scientific and research bodies
assisted.
Inquiries naturally led through compressed foodstuffs to dehydra-
tion, both of which saved space or weight.
In turn, this led to " square"
packaging of compressed blocks of food, as against " round" packing in
tins, and further saving in space resulted.
In June, 1943, a ten-day test under arduous conditions was carried out
of two experimental rations; one produced by the War Office, and the other
by the Dietetic Adviser to the Chief of Combined Operations.
As a result,
the final ration was determined, combining the merits of both those tested,
and was named the " 24-hour Ration".
The greatest difficulties now arose.
The War Office order was for
73 million of these rations, to be ready within nine months; the ration
was completely unconventional, and involved the setting up of new processes
of production.
Firms who had previously made soup powders in compressed
cubes adapted their machinery to make blocks of dehydrated meat, and
bulk salt makers turned over to tea-sugar-and-milk powder blocks.
The final product (for details of which, see Appendix IX) was eition
of 4,000 calories duct for detailshan 90 cubic inches capacity, and wei hig
35 ounces, which co rather lessed in the larger half of the mes vin.
mention was that the see std 24-hour ration should be carried where the
individual liked; but limited numbers were packed in a form to fit
smaller half of the mess-tin.
wave of assault, and ss-ein called the
These were for use only by troops in the first
" 24-hour Ration (Assault)".
By strenuous efforts, the production plan was at last put into operation,
March, 1944.
and the requirement was satisfactorily completed by the target date, 31st
293
WO 277/21
27
WO277726
