to were a mila by cold it in trend nave civilian Porte,
Apart from a few vehicles in Trinidad, all transport was hired. Officer
i/c transport also acted as local movement control
had to arrange the receipt of all stores arriving in Trinidad, and for onward
shipment of all commodities to other islands.
After the other islands were based on Trinidad, the main difficulty was
one of conveyance of stores to them by sea.
The Royal Navy was able to
provide a monthly or two-monthly service to Grenada, St. Vincent and
Dominica; and the U.S. Commanding General agreed to transport our
requirements in his own vessels to British Guiana, St. Lucia and Barbados,
at which places U.S. troops were located.
Petrol and lubricants were supplied by local contract.
Except for Imperial troops, there were no barrack services as understood
at home, and no R.A.S.C. or civilian establishment existed.
Such services
were provided by the Public Works Department.
Coal was obtained from
Admiralty stocks as required.
This small group of islands lies about equi-distant from Halifax (Nova
Scotia), New York, and the nearest of the West Indies, and was important
as being the base port of the West Indies and South America squadron of
the Royal Navy, with a naval dockyard capable of repairing vessels up to
It was also a stage for trans-Atlantic aircraft, and had a
United States naval and air base established on leased land.
In peace-time Bermuda had a very small garrison, and the R.A.S.C.
detachment consisted before the war of only two officers and six O.Rs.,
together with 31 civilians, including
transport drivers, and barrack and
water transport personnel. During the war, the number of other ranks was
increased to 21.
The ration strength, at most 1,250, does not really indicate the duties
performed by the R.A.S.C. detachment.
All the executive work of move-
ments, embarkation staff officer and military forwarding officer were carried
out by one R.A.S.C. Officer, in addition to his normal supply, transport,
and barrack duties.
The O.C., R.A.S.C., was occupied with the duties of
"head of the service",
, and the junior officer, originally a subaltern, had to
do the executive work. He was consequently upgraded to captain.
The supply, transport, and barrack services continued to operate during
the war as in peace.
Until 1942, supplies were obtained as far as possible locally, though local
resources are in fact limited to
vegetables, milk, and fish, and Bermuda
depends on Canada and the U.S.A. for much of its food.
A demand was
submitted to War Office for items not obtainable under local arrangements.
In March that year, Bermuda reported to War Office that the future
supply situation was causing anxiety, particularly in view of the reduction
in the amount of foodstuffs obtainable under local contract, and it was
WO 277/21
W027773
accordingly agreed that B.A.S., Washington, might be asked to supply the
command should the necessity arise.
B.A.S., Washington, after investiga-
tion of the situation, arranged to make monthly deliveries of all R.A.S.C.
Demands were accordingly submitted to
Washington, and not
on the United Kingdom.
Canadian troops in Bermuda were to draw the
standard British ration from the R.A.S.C.
It was decided in 1942, by B.A.S. Washington, that, in view of the
shipping situation, reserves must be provided on the basis of 45 days' G.S.
reserves and 135 days' working margin, except for those fresh items obtainable
Before the war, direct shipments of coal for the garrison were arranged
as necessary by the War Office.
Throughout the
war, however,
requirements were obtained from Royal Navy stocks, as this saved
by permitting co-ordinated demands for naval and military coal.
R.A.S.C. transport in Bermuda consisted in peace-time only of 30 horses
and a variety of horse-drawn vehicles, with local civilian drivers.
outbreak of war, eight M.T. vehicles were sent out, and, at the end of
1942, four more were added.
Hiring took place from the Public Works De-
partment, who possessed the only other mechanical transport load carriers
under R.A.O.C. (later R.E.M.E.) arrangements.
All maintenance and repair work was carried out
Water transport was easily obtainable locally as required.
The supply of petrol and lubricants presented no difficulties, and barrack
services operated in the normal peace-time manner.
445
(Wt. 25345-8515) 810 6/54 W.O.P. 37452
