(6) There should be, in wartime, an adequate technical staff at the Wat
Thice, and in the headquarters of the Ariny in the field, to tackle the
problem efficiently and intelligently.
(0) Further, in order to deal with the manifold problems of port dis-
charge,
distribution, utilization, and production, there should be:-
) More eflective technical control at ports, to see colliers quickly
discharged, and the coal sent to the correct consumers.
(i) Supervision at Army, and even down to Corps, level, over
requirements,
allocations, utilization, etc., within those forma-
tions' areas, and similarly in L. of C. areas.
(i) Teams of mining engineers should be ready to get production
going again rapidly in uncovered mines, and to minimize the
risk of sabotage.
Civil Affairs
Civil Affairs commitments had been increasing from the start of the cam-
paign, and it became clear that demands for food would be greater as the
advance progressed into Holland.
The Civil Affairs organization had been
allotted certain supply units on a lower establishment than normal, but these
proved inadequate for their task, and, by January, 1945, two B.S.Ds. and a
D.I.D. had to be lent from 21 Army Group resources.
The Civil Affairs
depots, however, could not cope with the increasing responsibilities and
mounting tonnages, and on 15th February, S.T. took over the entire respon-
sibility for handling Civil Affairs supplies, and a separate chain of depots was
organized for the purpose.
One C.R.A.S.C. Supply Units, six D.I.Ds., and
some Port Detachments were made available to Civil Affairs.
This was a
soniceable inroad on the available manpower for supply duties, but the situa-
tion was eased by the fact that the Dutch soon took over the handling of all
relief supplies for their own people.
A civilian road transport company with a lift of 500 tons, organized by
the Ministry of War Transport, was sent out and employed in Civil Affairs
tasks in Holland, and, although it was not a S.T. responsibility, it released
other military transport for employment with the armies.
Antwerp Administrative Control
Some initial dificulty occurred at both Ostend and Antwerp when these
ports were opened buite facurret at bot. its were sent in at once to carry
out the local supply, transport, and P.O.L. duties.
fortnight there were only ten lorries at work, and it was only after two weeks
In Ostend, for the first
that a transport platoon, a D.I.D., and a Petrol Depot arrived.
At Antwerp
there would have heen difficulty in feeding the early arrivals if captured
supplies had not been available.
daily tonnage of about 18,000 tons.
Antwerp was eventually developed to the extent of handling an average
It therefore became imperative to set
up an organization to conteal and co-ordinate the antivities de the various
services concerned with the traffic in and out of the port area.
cluded port clearance rail alarance barge degrance trin loading and harge
360
The control established was called " Antwerp Administrative Control »
(ANTAC), and its purpose was to ensure the best use of transport agencies
and depot facilities, so as to avoid delay or congestion. It was composed of
representatives of " Q" (Movements), S.T., and Labour, under a " Q" Staff
The latter supervised and ruled on priorities. The "Q" (M)тер-
resentative advised on train and barge loading and unloading requirements;
the S.T. representative effected liaison with and issued instructions to Trans-
pot Columns, so the transport requirements were promptly met; and the
labour representative arranged supply of labour urgently required.
There were two transport columns under command, one of which was
normally responsible for local details, and for train and barge loading and
unloading, and the other for port clearance.
Their resources were treated as
one transport pool, and transport was allotted according to the priority of the
work concerned.
Both in Antwerp and Ostend, the road transport in the docks was execu-
lively controlled by the R.A.S.C. and not by "Q" (Movements).
In each
case, there was a S.T. organization known as the Central Vehicle Control
(C.V.C.), staffed from the resources of the C.R.A.S.C., Transport Column,
detailed for docks clearance.
By the use of R.A.S.C. personnel to control
their own transport coupled with an organization capable of exercising com-
plete control, and by close liaison with the Transportation and Movement
authorities, the maximum use of transport was obtained, and the flow of
stores into depots was related to their reception capacity.
Where the number of G.T. companies employed in carrying forward stores
from the base sub-area by road L. of C. exceeded five, it was found essential
to have a separate C.R.A.S.C. Transport Column to control the forward
movement.
Supplementary Transport Resources
To relieve the strain on L. of C. transport, and to give G. T. companies an
opportunity for maintenance and rest, considerable quantities of horses and
equipment captured from the enemy were brought into use in adition to
tequisitioned civilian horsed transport In the first half of December, a tota.
d 9500 tons was litted be this neans, most in the Antwerp area.
Earlv in Decemher. corps railheads were established for supplies and
P.O.L. in order to reduce the transport commitment, and minimize the delay
which mi ht he caused hu to bradle an of tha roade during thou conditions.
Amunition was drawb frtm Army roadhead.
the possibility of still further demands for transport units being made, to help
At the end of Octoher § T.. 21 Army Groun. warned S.T.. War Office of
in meting expandil rother transport requirements.
Preliminary investiga-
tions in the United Kingdom showed that 35 platoons could be made availabl
from selected C.(MT. companies. three and a half from the War Office Trans.
Port Columns, and 11 from the Airfields Transport Column.
There were now, however,
loan to 21 Army Group from War Office resourses and the situation regard-
already a total of 18 G.T. companies on
ing them was discussed with DST 21 Army Groin
ficit of P A S.C. reinforcements nd while it was the intention to replace
He had a substantial
361
WO 277/21
27
WO27 7/26
