Training of a Striking Force in the United Kingdom
Whilst the C.T.C. in the Middle East was being established, an amphibious striking force was
being built ve in the UK exerone 0th Aust, apt, was pintele to stage the first full scats
was intended as a rehearsal for the
combined exercise.
projected attack on the Canary Islands. Many lessons were learned from it, chief among which was
the vital need for a central authority to co-ordinate the training of amphibious forces.
responsibility for mounting this exercise was split between the Admiralty, for the assault and
support ships and craft; the War Office, for a large part of the troops taking part and administra-
tive arrangements ashore; and the D.C.O. who, apart from his advisory capacity, was responsible
for the C.T.C. at Inveraray.
In addition to this division of responsibility, the D.C.O?'s concentration on the training of
his available forces for immediate operations comficted with the long term necessity for budingu
the Combined Operations Organisation for the ultimate invasion of the Continent.
was a failure and its effects on the command and control of combined operations are given in
Chapter 11.
System of Control of the Training of Amphibious Forces
Up to September, 1941, the training of troops and landing ships and craft crews for combined
operations was the responsibility of the D.C.O., until such time as the units were handed over to
the Force Commanders for a particular operation, when the intention was that the D.C.O.'s con-
tribution should become mainly advisory.
Force Commanders would necessarily be free to work up
their force and be responsible that the final training, including rehearsals, was adequate for the
specific operation in hand.
The difficulty arose because the D.C.O,'s desire for immediate offensive action conflicted with
the Chiefs of Staff policy, the former deeming that he should use his appointment in an executive
capacity even after his forces had been allotted to Force Commanders.
When Admiral Mountbatten was appointed, his new directive made it clear that his executive
powers only related to the training of combined operations forces and the mounting of small raids.
Apart from these he was confined to giving technical advice for the conduct of combined operations.
Expansion of Training Facilities
From 1941 onwards, the Combined Operations Command expanded rapidly.
Material was
beginning to arrive in increasing quantity from America and our own building programme was
hearing trult.
New training establishments were opened to train the crews for the new ships and
craft, and for training the troops earmarked for amphibious operations.
By the spring of 1942, the
following training establishments were in existence in the U.K
1. Headquarters Combined Training
Largs.
2. Combined Training Centre
Inveraray.
3. Combined Training Centre
Auchengate, Troon.
4. Combined Signal School ..
Auchengate, Troon.
5. Combined Training Centre for R.A.C.
Castle Toward.
6. Initial Training Centre for Naval Personnel and combined
Hayling Island.
operations training for South-Eastern Command.
7. Raiding Craft Training
Centre and
training for Southern Command.
combined operations
Warsash.
8. Parent Ship
of Raiding Craft and combined operations
training for Eastern Command.
Brightlingsea.
9. T.L.C. Training Base
10. Special Training Establishment ..
Bo'ness.
Acharacle.
Apart from these,
with establishment of the Headquarters of the
Expeditionary
Force
(H.O.E.F.) at Largs, which was suggested by the C.C.O. at the end of 1941, a C.T.C. had been
set up in the Hollywood Hotel with a small training staff on an inter-Services basis.
selected officers of all three Services were instituted at this C.T.C.
Courses for
Tho training staff ramn under the Mirector of Combined Training who. before he mated t
rnf.O. in Tanana: ma the trainin antivitiest the Cambid Oneratinne Command
Operations point of view as a Staff College.
of combined operations and, in consequence, the C.T.C. at Lares was looked upon from the Combiner
Thus in April, 1943, it was the custom to run courses which enunciated the principles
Training in Cliff Assaults
In the first annual report of the I.S.T.D.C., it was recommended that unlikely places should be
chosen for landing raiding parties in preference to likely beaches. An enemy would consider a coast
with cliffs an unsuitable place for a landing.
The need for special cliff-climbing equipment was stressed, including a light type of ladder, and
early in 1940, it was recommended that trials should take place.
The cliff assault technique was thus introduced and training was later carried out at the
Mountain Warfare Training Centre, where a large number of troops were trained.
This technique figured in several operations, an example being the raid on Dieppe where Com-
mandos, attacking a coast defence battery, scaled the cliffs to reach their objective.
Án extract from
an enemy document captured at a later date records that the troops-
" showed great skill in climbing the steep
coastal cliffs...
They were able to climb the
cliffs at various points where small wooded rugged ravines lead down to the sea.
This is
terrain where observation is difficult and progress is possible only for trained climbers.
Training Organisation
With
the expansion of the training organisation, the duties of the Vice-Admiral Combined
Training Centre increased and in April, 1942, he became Vice-Admiral, Combined Training with his
headquarters in the same building as H.Q.E.F. at Largs. In July, 1942, when he assumed the title
of Director of Combined Training (D.C.T.) with the responsibility of all combined training, he
moved to Montague House which was adjacent to C.O.H.Q. Here he set up a separate office with
the Major-Central Ombie whira was adia ent Cochined Training Stat.
(C52794)
AEDTLES
The close association of the H.Q.., and the staff of the Senior Officer Assail S hinter servict,
which were in the same building, did much to foster co-operation and understanding.
Inter-Services
problems could be discussed and exercises arranged to try out new methods with the minimum
espenditure of time and a conspicuous absence of paper-work and misunderstanding
The close proximity of the C.T.C.s at Inveraray and Castle Toward and the Combined Signal
School at Auchengate,
Troon, ensured that all establishments were in constant touch with the
H.O.E.F. and thus the latter always knew what was taking place and what developments were
contemplated. In fact this grouping proved extremely effective.
The training of naval officers for combined operations was giving cause for anxiety. The
facilities available at the R.N.V.R. Training Establishment at Hove (H.M.S. King Alfred) were
not sufficient to compete with the numbers required.
After much debate it was finally decided
that the Combined Operations Organisation should train their own officers.
Luckily at about this time, the Army Battle School at Lochailort, near Mallaig, became
vacant.
This was duly taken over and from August, 1942, until the end of the war, the naval
officers required for combined operations were trained there.
It is interesting to note that the officers'
course lasted six weeks.
Those who were successful were commissioned from raw officer candidates
and probably found themselves, on their first appointment, as First Lieutenants of L.C.T.s with
the probability of commanding one of these craft after about six months' such experience.
The large number of Service authorities, units, establishments and ships of, or associated
with, the Combined Operations Command at about this time, is illustrated in the contents of the
Combined Operations Directory of March, 1943.
This lists no less than 45 establishments in the
U.K., the majority of which were engaged in training, and the following eleven overseas :—
Algiers
Bougie
Djidjelli
Freetown
Kabrit
Bombay
South India
Me noumiC
Newcastle
Comax
Washington
.. N. Africa.
W. Africa.
Middle East.
India.
Australia.
Canada.
U.S.A.
029
7
WO 277/21
27
3
