bergen raid.
The section had previously, in September, 1941, taken part in the Spitz.
In this case, operational craft had to be taken with the ex-
pedition, and suitable vessels were requisitioned round the coast of Scotland:
these were limited to a size capable of being slung off the transports with their
own derricks at destination.
The section had to be entirely self-supporting,
and fuel, spare engines, machinery spares, boat gear, timber and paint, suff
cient for four months' maintenance, were carried in the store ships.
Reserve Policy
There was difficulty in getting regular shipping between the United King-
dom and Iceland, and War Office decided to increase the transit margin in
the island from 30 to 60 days, the authorized reserve standing at 90 days.
Iceland, however, contended that local conditions were such as to necessitate
a six months' reserve, and based its demands accordingly.
This was on the
grounds that the scarcity of local sea transport, the danger of strong gales, the
possibility of ice formation isolating the northern and eastern sectors of the
island for long periods,
lack of internal road communication, and possible
enemy action, all combined to make the duplication of reserves essential. The
authorized G.S. reserve was therefore increased to 120 days, with 60 days
working margin.
The reserve of tinned potatoes was increased to 60 days
on account of the quantities of fresh potatoes which it had been necessary
to condemn, owing to frost while in transit to outstations.
The cold storage situation in Iceland was found to be that Reykjavik
had a capacity of 60 tons, Akureyi three tons, and Seydisfjordur 13 tons. The
feeding strengths of these places were then 13,000, 2,800, and 1,700 resper:
tively.
S.T.6 considered a reasonable meat ration would be: frozen beef,
two days a week; fresh or frozen mutton, three days a week (procured and
held locally); M. and V. ration, one day a week; and preserved meat one day
a week.
On this basis, the total cold storage space required for frozen bet
would be 15 tons a week.
It might seem reasonably safe to calculate os
fortnightly sailings to Reykjavik; but it was not so for the other two ports
and it was suggested that replenishment for them should be on a six-wel
Eight 10-ton cold storage containers were therefore required, on ti
basis that, at worst, there would be monthly sailings from the United Kingdo.
and that coastal services to the other ports might not be better than on"
a month.
Reykjavik would have four containers to hold bef awaitin trang
to the other ports; Akureyi would have three, and Seydisfjordur one. d
vessel with refrigerated space for 31 tons of meat was also sent for ost
service between the ports.
Before the containers could be despatched adi-
tional local purchases of mutton made it necessary to send only two.
the cold storage position in the island improved by about 60 tons, bu lis
was abated considerably when the local slaughter season began in Augus, e
space was required by the Icelanders.
The ching interest in connection with the catering services in Ireland is
in the problems due to the cold climate.
Arctic rations, under the Force Catering Adviser.
At the winter warfare schont tests were carried out in the treatment i
The ration scale used to
composed of pemmicans, biscuits,
cheeses, raisins, sugar, margari, bung
138
porridge, oats, boiled sweets, cocoa or tea mixture.
It was imperative that
the cooking should be very simple and quickly done.
Under Arctic condi-
tions, hot food was essential whenever practicable, and men were trained to
realize this.
Valuable lessons were learnt in methods of improvisation in a
cold climate.
It was in Iceland that the fullest use was first made of petrol
tins, oil drums, and concrete slabs for improvised cooking equipment, as no
bricks were available.
Solid fuel was in short supply, as all wood, coal and
coke had to be imported. A feature was therefore made of cooking with waste
oil and water.
Solid Fuel
The provision of solid fuel for the British force in Iceland was the concern
of S.T.6 originally, and later of S.T.7. Local issue was carried out through
the R.A.S.C. supply organization.
In the initial stages, small shipments of bagged coal were made; but, by
the end of 1940, requirements had increased to 4,000 tons a month, while a
reserve of 7,000 tons of coal and 3,000 tons of coke was needed. This neces-
sitated bulk shipments,
which were arranged from the United Kingdom
through civilian agents, in conjunction with (Movements), M.O.W.T., and
the Ministry of Fuel and Power.
When the U.S. Forces came to Iceland, they became the largest users of
fuel. The possibility of their being supplied from the U.S.A. was examined,
and one cargo was actually arranged, but all other shipments came from the
United Kingdom.
Until September, 1942, British H.Q. demanded for both
British and American requirements.
Afterwards, all demands were made by
the U.S. Forces H.Q., who forwarded monthly stock returns to S.T.6.
Cargoes
were vouchered to the U.S. Forces, and the British Army and R.A.F. drew
from American stocks.
Supply Arrangements
In 1942, it was decided that the Americans should be mainly responsible
for the occupation of Iceland, though a small number of British troops would
remain there.
All foodstuffs for the British would be provided by the U.S.A.
British Force H.Q. recommended the retention of one D.I.D., to draw
rations from U.S. depots, to look after bulk rations, and to issue in detail to
the R.N., R.A.F., and any remaining British troops.
This was agreed as a
temporary measure, to help the R.N. and R.A.F.
The British troops ration
scale would continue, except that, it necessary, U.S. Army type rations might
be issued.
Three months' reserve would be left for British personnel.
All
rationed items were to be shipped from U.S.A. (except fresh vegetables, fresh
potatoes, and wines and spirits), A.D.S.T., Iceland, demanding on D.Q.M.G.,
North America, who and spirits, de shipment.
In January, 1942, a joint Services agreement was reached, by which any
permanent commitment for troops in Iceland must be avoided, owing to heavy
military demands elsewhere.
War Office adhered to this policy, but within its
framework, was willing to help the other Services by the loan of certain units
for a limited period.
The supply units to be made available thus were one
bakery.
bake, type "B", one B.S.D. (special W.E.), and two sub-sections of a field
The Admiralty and the Air Ministry were asked to send out the
139
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
