CHAPTER 20
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SHIPS
AND
CRAFT
Section (i)
The Development of Ships and Craft up to 1940.
Section (ii)
The Development of Landing Ships and Major Landing Craft.
Section (M2)
The Development of Minor Landing Craft.
Before describing the history of the development of ships and craft, it is necessary to understand
the Admiralty definitions of staff targets and staff requirements.
They are as follows :—
Staff Iargets.—Are intended to provide points of aim for research and development.
They are stated in general terms and look ahead as much as possible.
They take no account
of the technical promise of their being met and are therefore purely a Staff Appreciation of
what they would like to have.
They also take no account of whether two targets are in
practice mutually interfering and whether therefore compromise may be necessary.
Staff Requirements.—Aimed research having shown that a staff target is a practical
possibility, staff requirements can be stated.
These are designed to guide development of
the staff target along the desired channels and are broad statements of the main features of
the equipment, and the function it is required to perform.
Staff requirements are liable to
be, and should be, amended at intervals to keep them up to date.
It will be seen that the Staff, when formulating requirements, must keep within the bounds
of possibility. If the assault technique requires a performance from a ship which cannot be met
by existing equipment, and invention or development is necessary before it can be evolved, then
it is termed a " staff target."
It was no use requiring a speed of 20 knots when the only engine
available could give 10 knots.
In all amphibious operations, a certain number of ships and craft are required to " beach."
They must, therefore, have shallow draught, but this requirement conflicts with seaworthiness.
Again the requirements of carrying capacity, armament, speed (which means heavy engines) and
seaworthiness conflict with shallow draught.
Designs were therefore difficult and every means
had to be adopted to reduce weight without loss of speed or strength.
The Americans overcame this by the extensive use of acetylene welding, as opposed to our
riveting, and by using diesel engines instead of steam in their L.S.T.s.
We were handicapped by not
having these facilities.
This largely explains the good performance of the L.S.T. (2) vis-a-vis the
British later type of L.S.T., although the British got out the basic design of both.
From the beginning of the war up to and including the first L.C.T. and L.S.T., there were no
" staff requirements" formally stated, as we now know them.
The ships were designed by the
Director of Naval Construction (D.N.C.) and Thornycrofts at the instigation of a few naval officers
who had a knowledge of the existing technique of assault landings and also of existing army
equipment. These officers were either members or recent members of the staff of C.O.H.Q. The
staff requirements" of these vessels were written out subsequently for record purposes.
operandi with the Admiralty, the procedure became
Lat with ith dafat it i bad set led down, gained experience and elved a wins
considered and stated by the combined staff in C.O.H.Q., in consultation with Admiralty staff
divisions and technical departments, before designs were begun.
SECTION (i)
THE DEVELOPMENT
OF SHIPS AND CRAFT UP TO 1940
Development of Special Crait up to 1939
During World War I, the only ship especially adapted for landing operations was the River
Clyde, an ex-collier. The troops were to disembark through large sally ports cut in her sides on to
if necessary, by lighters.
staging and then cross a hooper which formed a bridge to the shore and which was reinforced
This ship was used in the Gallinoli Campaion but, in the event, it proved
a task of the utmost difficulty to secure the hopper and lighters in the appropriate position; and,
despite great heroism and determination, nearly all, who attempted the assault, became casualties
The lesson derived from this operation appeared to be that it was
to assault land from a vessel without the means of very rapid disembarkation and without some
degree of dispersal.
After the failure of the Gallipoli campaign, little further thought was
warfare until the end of the war when lighters were produced for use in given to maphibiess
self-propelled lighters carried horses or troops in the hold, disembarking them over the bows by
means of portable ramps.
In Britain, the period between the two great wars produced no revolutionary thought and little
in practice with regard to the development of special ships and craft for amphibious warfare. It
was left to the Japanese to design, in secret, a stem launching landing craft carrier, a landing ship
fitted with bow doors and which carried vehicles and some small ramped landing craft; these they
used with success in operations in the Hai-Ho River in 1937.
Generally speaking, British effort was confined mainly to academic studies conducted by Staff
However, one small water jet-propelled landing craft capable of carrying vehicles was
produced in 1922, and three more were produced between 1928 and 1930.
war brought about the further construction of six similar craft.
These were the fore-runners of
The Small Craft Situation during the first year of World War II
When war broke out in 1939 the amphibious fleet consisted only of the following special
12 Assault Landing Craft (L.C.A.).
10 Mechanised Landing Craft (L.C.M.) old jet-propelled type.
1 Support Landing Craft (L.C.S.).
All these vessels were lost on amphibious operations at Narvik during the second quarter of
1940, and the activities of the Inter-Services Training and Development Centre had ceased as
regards practical work except that, at the end of 1939, two prototype new design L.C.A. were
completed to meet the requirements laid down by them.
By May, 1940, nine new L.C.A. and two new L.C.M. had been built.
evacuation of Dunkirk during which six craft were lost.
Although 48 L.C.A. and 30 L.C.M. were
ordered after Dunkirk, no priority could be given for their construction due to the urgent needs of
the Navy for all other classes of warship.
In June, 1940, the Prime Minister appointed a Director of Combined Operations, with
As a result C.O.I.Q, increased the other
time, the Navy was fully extended and, with the threat of invasion, the possibility of launching an
amphibious operation on any scale seemed remote.
Therefore the construction of the larger special
vessels came to a standstill.™
Long-Term Plans for Invasion
It was not until September, 1941, that the British planners were ordered to put up a paper on
the possibility of a return to the Continent. The result caused food for thought, as the Staff solution
recommended the assault being made by three armoured divisions and thirteen infantry divisions with
a consequent demand among other things for a very large number of landing craft of different types.
The concept of an invasion of Europe mounted from Great Britain thereafter influenced the design
of all or nearly all special amphibious equipment.
SECTION (i)
THE DEVELOPMENT OF LANDING SHIPS AND MAJOR LANDING CRAFT
Tank Landing Ships " Winettes" and " Maracaibos"
In September, 1940, the first expedition against Dakar was launched and failed. At a meeting of
the Directors of Plans summoned by the Prime Minister after the event, it was made clear that no such
operation could succeed without supporting armour and that no vessels capable of carrying tanks
and transporting them over a long sea journey were in existence. After some discussion the Prime
Minister stated that this was a problem that would constantly recur and no offensive would be
possible until it was solved. He stated the need for a ship capable of carrying large numbers of
tanks across the oceans of the world and landing them directly on the enemy shore.
The Admiralty
were directed to produce these ships as a matter of urgency.
171
707717
WO 277/21
30
