It is true that, in the event of mobilization being ordered within ten or
15 years of the end of the Second World War, there will be the veterans of
the late war to provide a stiffening of experience, and the young men will
have had some training as national-service men.
But the former are a wasting
asset, and the National Service Act may at any time be repealed.
The position
in 1965 may be much as it was in 1939.
More than one example will be found in the following pages of civilians
being employed in tasks which were properly those of trained soldiers, and of
the difficulties which resulted.
Another aspect of this method of providing
the personnel for the performance of R.A.S.C. services was to be seen in the
continued use of N.A.A.F.I. to supply part of the Army's food at home, thus
perpetuating an unsatisfactory state of affairs which complicated and weakened
the supply service.
This is dealt with at greater length in Chapter XII.
The policy of employing civilians to the greatest possible extent in peace.
time supply installations in the United Kingdom obviously runs counter to
the desirability of training R.A.S.C. supply personnel for their duties in war.
Other defects in planning, which appeared as the result of the implementation
of the plans, are dealt with in Chapter IV, in the account of the B.E.F.
SECTION 3.-MOBILIZATION PLANS AND THEIR
IMPLEMENTATION
The action to be taken by War Office branches, in the event of mobilization
becoming imminent of being actually ordered, was laid down in peace-time
in the War Office War Book, and included in Branch Mobilization Schemes.
The following were the principal matters requiring to be dealt with by the
Directorate of Supplies and and Transport.
Q.M.G. 3
(a) Precautionary period, if any.
(i) Arrangements, in conjunction with Ministry of Transport, Home
Commands, and A.D.G.B., for provision by hiring of the trans.
port necessary to complete the deployment and effect the sub.
sequent maintenance of anti-aircraft units, special retaining fees
being paid where necessary.
(ii) Reservation and provision of transport for certain special War
Office services.
(iii Preparation at the R.A.S.C. M.T. depot of all technical M.T.
vehicles held as mobilization reserves, and employment of addi-
tional civilian artificers to carry out the conversion of peace-held
(iv) Authorization of increased powers of local purchase by M.T.S.D.
for the essential provision of spare parts and stores.
(v) Issue of preliminary instructions, if considered essential, for the
formation of vehicle collecting centres, and the expansion of
V.R.D., Feltham.
(vi) Issue of preparatory orders, through the Chief Inspector of
selected for impressment duties, regarding
the procedure to be
40
(b) On mobilization being ordered.
(i) Issue of orders for the formation of vehicle collecting centres to
be completed.
(ii) Issue of orders for the collection into V.C.Cs. of peace-held
R.A.S.C. vehicles for conversion into technical vehicles.
(iii) On receipt of notification that the Secretary of State for War had
signed the statutory order authorizing the issue of requisitions of
emergency for the impressment of vehicles, food, etc., issue of
directions to C.I.S.T. to proceed with the impressment of vehicles.
(iv) Instructions to the R.A.S.C. M.T. depot to proceed with the pro-
vision of the bulk supply of spare parts and stores for the Base
M.T. Stores depot of the Field Force, with the issue of such stores,
etc., to complete R.A.S.C. units being mobilized, and with the
preparation of reserve vehicles for despatch to V.R.D. in the
Field Force.
(v) Issue of instructions for the issue from M.T. Depot, Feltham, and
V.C.Cs., of vehicles required to complete War Establishments of
units in the Field Force, as in the pre-arranged programme.
(vi) Arrangements for the issue of R.A.S.C. vehicles (after the initial
requirements of the Field Force had been met) to
Territorial
Army and other units in the home organization.
(vii) Co-operation with the Air Ministry in regard to the acquisition
by that Ministry of vehicles required for R.A.F. purposes in the
later contingents of the Field Force.
Q.M.G. 6
(a) Precautionary period, if any.
(i) Completion of arrangements with the Director of Army Contracts
for the provision of first requirements, particularly of hay, petrol,
lubricants, frozen meat, and coal.
(ii) Warning to commands regarding the opening of Embarkation
Supply Depots.
(iii) Notification to Movements Branch, War Office, regarding
the
provision of shipping for supplies and petrol, a frozen meat ship,
and a collier.
(iv) Ascertaining from Movements Branch if there were any changes
in ports of embarkation, or of the numbers to pass through each.
(v) Warning to the S.R.D. to be prepared to take in and despatch
supplies.
(vi) Warning to the petrol-tin factories to be prepared to start pro-
duction.
(b) On Mobilization being ordered.
(i) Issue of orders for the opening of E.S.Ds. and any other neces-
sary supply depots.
(ii) Arrangements with the D.A.C. for the completion of the thirty
days' supply at the S.R.D. for the Field Force (Regular Contin-
gent) and of 60 days' supply of certain articles.
WO277/21
27
W027 7/26
