The Narvik Operations
"Avonmouth" sailed on 12th April; it was not then known that the enemy
was holding Narvik in strength.
The port of Narvik is within the Arctic Circle, and snow falls for eight
months of the year, from October until May.
During the period of these
operations, there were falls of up to 30 feet in depth.
of the year was almost continuous.
Daylight at this time
It had been assumed that the force would be able to make a peaceful
landing at an organized and friendly port, and that subsequent movement
inland would be along the railway, which was practically the only means of
transport inland, such roads as existed being little more than tracks, and
impassable to wheeled traffic, especially in the winter.
When the force arrived, however, and found Narvik occupied, it was
decided to land at Harstad, a port on the Loften Islands at the mouth of
the Narvik Fjord, and to establish the base there.
The port had many dis-
advantages, of which the most marked was that transports could not come
alongside the three small quays, and everything had to be ferried ashort.
Early difficulties
The loading of the ships had been carried out without due consideration
for priority of discharge; for example, landing rations were stowed at the
bottom of the holds, instead of in positions which would have permitted
their being at once accessible on arrival in Norway.
This circumstance led
to it being made a primary duty of the newly established Embarkation Supply
Depots in the United Kingdom to ensure that in future supplies were correctly
loaded in ships in this respect.
Stores and supplies of all sorts were landed
on the quays in complete confusion, and the dock area was soon badly con-
gested.
The resulting disorder was accentuated by the shortage of transport,
both military
and civil.
The only
R.A.S.C. transport which accompanied
the first flight was five cars, six ambulances, and four Scammell tractors, the
latter with two 5-ton trailers each.
Hiring proved difficult.
There were few
M.T. vehicles available locally, and most of these had to be left with the
civil authorities for A.R.P. work and the maintenance of inland villages.
Local drivers resented overtime and weekend working,
and could not be
relied on when bombing was in progress.
A pool of 14 cars, 14 lorries, and
four buses was assembled, but was quite inadequate, and the shortage was
aggravated by units and individuals waylaying empty vehicles, and making
them do other jobs.
relief drivers.
The Scammells did sterling work, 24 hours a day with
It was evident that load carrying transport required to be landed as eanty
Mobile cranes
as possible, to deal with stores as they were brought ashore.
were greatly missed, as many vital hours were used in manhandling heavy
packages, especially R.A.F. stores, without proper lifting gear.
Vehicles were shipped with empty fuel tanks.
There was only one quay
at Harstad able to take the weight of vehicles.
it, where enough petrol was issued to enable each vehicle to reach is any
A petrol point was set up of
With the very limited space available, this led to bunching,
delayed the discharge of ships, which
was particularly undesirable in vien
132
of the constant bombing risks, and which would have been avoided if vehicles
had been shipped with full tanks.
Gradually, base units began to take shape, and by 18th April, the trans-
ports of the first flight had been cleared.
Supplies
The base and L. of C. supply units included a base supply depot, one
section of a field bakery, one section of a field butchery and cold storage
depot, and a supply personnel company headquarters and seven sections.
The base supply depot was established in a canning factory, and intake
of supplies proceeded satisfactorily, although, in consequence of shortage
of local labour the B.S.D. personnel had to unload and stack 350 tons of
supplies in four days, without help.
Labour difficulties were increased by a
Pioneer company being sent back to the United Kingdom, but it was turned
round at sea and ultimately landed.
A provisional ration scale, specially designed for consumption in Arctic
climates was brought into use, but it was the intention to use the B.E.F.
scale had the campaign extended into the summer.
rations were used for the Independent Companies,
The special mountain
the forerunners of the
Commandos.
The field bakery had its Aldershot ovens working within three days of
landing, in spite of having to clear three feet of frozen snow to instal them.
With the help of a civilian bakery, 8,000 lb. a day were being produced by
the end of the month, and, after the arrival of steam-pipe ovens, output rose
to over 20,000 lb. a day.
Solid fuel was supplied from the United Kingdom
in sacre
Transport
No supplies were available locally, except fresh fish, and the supply o1
this was reduced by the employment of a large number of fishing vessels fox
military purposes, both for unloading store ships and for inter-communication
with outlying posts.
They were manned by their own crews, who were not
very reliable.
The water transport services were handled entirely by Trans-
portation Branch.
An early demand was made on War Office for the supply
of larger craft with British crews, but there was no time to implement this.
The shortage of road transport was greatly eased by the arrival, in early
May, of the R.A.S.C. section allocated to the Light A.A. Regiment, the
greater part of its 36 vehicles coming into the pool for general duty. By the
middle of May, a Reserve M.T. Company arrived; but, although the person-
nel were landed, the discharge of the vehicles was delayed, as priority was
given to the discharge of stores.
they were not off-loaded until the end of May.
In spite of the most urgent representations,
Yet, in consequence of lack of
transport, discharge of stores was at times definitely held up, and the trans-
port situation generally tors chaotic until this company began to operate.
What military transport there was suffered from the effects of faulty plans
ning and mismanagement.
were meagre.
There were no workshops, and local facilities
Scammells.
There was no proper supply of wheel-chains, except for the
Those for the other vehicles were of the wrong size, and without
WO 277/21
27
WO 277726
