was considered that the system justified itself only
completely detached from brigades for special tasks involving
Sections now became specialized, as one for supplies, one for
ammunition, one for petrol, and one for workshops, in each company.
supplies section worked in double echelon between road and railhead and
meeting points, on the standard R.A.S.C. system.
In September, 1942, the supply and transport units in the command were
The new lay-out did not conform with the common organi-
zation existing elsewhere, but it was recognized to be the most suitable from
the point of view of both manpower and local requirements.
Supply platoons
were substituted for the Supply Personnel Companies, and D.I.Ds. were
In 1944, the supply units were placed on a static basis, instead of
the quasi-field force basis.
Supply platoons disappeared, as well as field
bakeries and butcheries,
and Command Supply Depots and supply points
A B.S.D. and three M.S.Ds. remained in service.
Developments, 1942-1943
After the end of the operations in Ethiopia, there was a gradual process
of withdrawal during 1942 and the first half of 1943, including the evacua-
tion of Italian civilians to East Africa and to Italy.
The outstanding event
during this period was the mounting of the expedition to Madagascar in the
Hostilities there ceased in November, 1942, and there-
after the East African Command became more static, and the lines of com-
munication were gradually shortened.
By June, 1943, Ethiopia was largely evacuated, and Central and South
Madagascar had been evacuated by July that year.
The 11 East African
Division sailed for South-East Asia Command about the same time.
As from August, 1943, the command consisted of Kenya,
Uganda, and British and Italian Somaliland.
It was divided into a Northern
and a Southern Area, with an A.D.S.T. for each, and Os.C., R.A.S.C., in
maintained jurisdiction over Madagascar
until after the war; it was included in Southern Area, with the Seychelles and
The function of the command, after the end of the campaign, was the
Division.
Besides that
formation, a transport column was sent to Ceylon, which proved so useful
that it was retained till 1945, when it left for Burma.
The transport situation at August, 1943, was that there were six Infantry
Brigade Companies, and 17 G.T. companies,
totalling 91 platoons.
G.T. companies were largely employed on the long road lines of communi-
cation, from Nairobi to Diredawa, 1,700 miles, and from Nairobi to Northern
Rhodesia, 1,600 miles.
constant work for R.N., R.A.F., and civil government.
They also provided an operational reserve, and did
S.T. was also responsible for the maintenance of 780 affiliated lorry
The full assumption of responsibility in this respect was held up
by delay in the implementation of the formation of three workshop platoons
authorized for the purpose, owing to lack of technical vehicles and personnel,
in both of which E.A.A.S.C. had had to meet heavy calls for transfer to
E.A.E.M.E., when the latter formed.
The formation of the E.A.E.M.E. occasioned some discussion as to the
system of maintenance to be adopted in the command.
Local staff opinion
considered that all vehicle repairs should
be undertaken
(E.A.E.M.E.), in view of local conditions,
was upheld by the
local representatives of Ordnance and E.M.E.
The D.D.S.T., however, con-
sidered that second line repairs should remain an E.A.A.S.C. responsibility.
The question was referred to War Office, who recommended that the War
Office policy of gradual implementation of the new organization (see Chap-
ter III) should be followed.
The matter was settled on the basis of local
arrangements between the two corps for vehicles
to be repaired by which-
ever workshop was the nearer—a mutual exchange of maintenance
A new departure was an organized water transport service.
port only began to operate in this command in November, 1941, with a
few launches run by various formations and units for ferrying personnel.
The numbers increased, but no organized system of control was established,
and the vessels were scattered over the coast of the command with no proper
May, 1943, Command H.Q.
co-ordination of the craft under S.T. control, 15 vessels being taken on charge.
They were in a deplorable condition, due to lack of regular maintenance; the
majority had ancient engines, and had been attacked by worm.
It was soon clear that additional vessels were needed to meet commit-
ments, which included the carriage of personnel and stores to and from the
islands, security duties, target-towing, and port duties.
The dispersion of
units in the command, and their location, often made water transport the
only practicable means of communication.
The coast line extended from
Berbera in the north to Tanga in the South.
The distance involved in
visiting the Islands was 7,000 miles by air.
A Water Transport Company was clearly necessary, and it was formed
to operate a vessel strength of 57.
Difficulty in finding the British man-
power cover of 60 was overcome by adjustment between the various arms
of the Service, as the matter was one which affected all.
bought in South Africa, or shipped from the United Kingdom.
for use as fire-boats were provided from the Admiralty building programme
P.O.L. Situation, 1943
The War Office policy for reserves in 1943, was, in respect of petrol,
that there should be 90 days based on a consumption of five gallons a
carburettor for a day, plus 30 days' working margin based on actual con-
The acquisition of Madagascar and the Islands, together with a
considerable reduction in the overland L. of C. to the northern sub-area,
meant that maintenance could only be achieved by a regular shipping pro-
Against this was the fact that with the cessation of hostilities in
the command priorities in shipping space fell to a low level.
to the M.T. fuel commitments, the provision of aviation spirit to airfields was
still an S.T. responsibility, and considerable operational demands had to be
This was especially so in the islands area, where large reserves had
to be maintained at air bases in connection with submarine hunting.
