was packed in containers, in order to cover the contingency that bomber
was at might be used to carry the freight, although it was hoped to use
Dakota aircraft as a normal procedure.
The balance was packed in airborne
panniers, or in bundles without special containers.
To enable
Emergency Supply to be brought into operation within 24
hours, to economize transport, and to form a cushion to meet sudden demands,
dumps were formed close to the airfields.
These contained 3,000 tons of the
commoner types of ammunition, and 2,500 tons of P.O.L.
was so near, it was unnecessary to hold Compo rations in the dump.
As the S.R.D.
As far as the relatively small commitment of Schedule Supply was con-
cerned, no special arrangements were considered necessary as, in this case,
stores were to come direct from depot to aircraft.
Further details of the
arrangements made in regard to supplies and P.O.L. are given later in this
chapter
A pool of General Transport Companies in the airfields area both met
the requirements of the Air Despatch organization, and could be called on by
D.D.S.T., Airborne Troops.
As the Air Despatch organization expanded and
the tempo of operations increased, the pool grew to six G.T. Companies,
under a C.R.A.S.C., War Office Transport Column.
S.T.3,
War Office was responsible for the control of the whole Air
Despatch organization, which was carried out through a control centre in War
Office, known as the Air Operations Room.
This held up-to-date states of
stocks in dumps, both pre-packed and unpacked, and of transport availability.
It acted as the centre in the War Office for the collection of all information
relating to supply and maintenance by air, and from it all S.T. activity in this
connection was co-ordinated.
It maintained direct communication with
Movement Control, War Office, regarding requirements of commodities to be
moved by air, and with air despatch for the actual arrangements involved.
An Air Freight Control Centre was set up, under R.A.F. auspices, in the
airfields area at which were located the R.A.F. group concerned and H.O,
Air Despatch R.A.S.C., with a small Movement Control staff.
Petrol, Oil and Lubricants by Air
The arrangements made by S.T. 2 to meet the requirements of the various
forms of Air Supplv in connection. with " Overlord" are described below.
petrol depots.
P.O.L. consigned by air despatch was supplied by War Office controlled
To avoid delay, stocks were called forward as required by the
Air Despatch organization, from petrol dumps located in the airfield area.
table of pre-arranged loads, designed to cover requirements of all grades o
P.O.L. for a representative force, flown into the theatre in blocks of 20 air-
craft, was evolved by S.T. 2, and is at Appendix XG.
(a) Emergency Supply.
For this commitment twn POT. dumne were petahliched near airfields
holding 3,000 tons.
These stocks were in tha hande of a Tuna 6p* petrol
depot, working under the command of C.R.A.S.C., Air Despatch.
The break-
down of the stocks held was as shown in Appendix XG.
The units employed
came in turn from 21 Army Group Order peatie or a Tour of duty before
going to the theatre of operations.
312
(b) Schedule Supply.
P.O.L. required for this commitment was called forward from the dumps
named above.
(0) Maintenance- Ground Forces.
A forecast of reguil dents of P.O.L. for maintenance by air of ground
forces was made by 21 Army Group, and on this basis S.T.2 prepared a
breakdown, details of which are at Appendix XG.
Stocks to meet the com-
mitment were sent to packing areas, and were replenished from 9 Poom-
Depot. At the packing areas, P.O.L. was pre-packed in panniers.
(d) Maintenance-Airborne Forces.
P.O.L. stocks for the use of airborne forces were held at 9 Petrol Depot,
representing five days' maintenance and intended as a reserve.
A further five
days' maintenance requirements were held pre-packed in dumps.
Stocks of
kerosine were held at Grantham, Bulford and Swindon.
stocks were avail.
able to be drawn by airborne troops at very short notice by their own trans-
port.
Permanent reserves were later established for release on demand to
C.R.A.S.C.,
Air Despatch, and stocks were earmarked for this purpose at
9 Petrol Depot and by Eastern Command.
Arrangements by S.T. 6
The arrangements made by S.T. 6 to meet these commitments were as
follows: —
(a) Emergency supply by air.
A total of over 6 million Compo rations, together with nearly a
million water-sterilizing outfits and 350,000 A.F.V. rations, were ear-
marked at certain S.R.Ds.
(b) Maintenance of ground forces.
To meet the possible need for maintenance of normal ground forces
by air, five days' Compo rations for Brigade Group, and seven days'
Compo rations for an Infantry or Armoured Division were earmarked
at a S.R.D.
These would be drawn as required by C.R.A.S.C., Air
Despatch, for pre-packing and holding in packing areas near the supply
loading airfields.
The S.R.D. would automatically make up the ear-
marked stocks to the required level.
(c) Maintenance of airborne forces.
Five days' supplies for the two Airborne Divisions were held in dumps
near the supply loading airfields, under the control of H.O., Airborne
Troops.
These supplies were pre-packed in containers and panniers, and
consisted of Compo rations and certain miscellaneous items, such as
water-sterilizing outfits and anti-louse powder.
Seven days' maintenance, in the form of 24-hour rations and other
items. was issued for pre-packing bv S.A.S. brigade for their consump
tion, and a further fourteen days had been earmarked at a S.R.D. for
issue if required F fourtede dayds hot replenishment of airborne trops
War Office, direct.
dumos fif required was ta he placed hu tO airhorne troops on ST
arrangements for the maintenance of airhorne forces through the norma
Allowance had been made in 21 Army Group's
L. of C. where possible.
313
NO2947
17
WO 277/21
27
W0277726
