CHAPTER 14
COMMANDOS IN COMBINED OPERATIONS
The Need for a Raiding Force
The history of Commandos during the Second World War is one of gradual expansion from a
small makeshift beginning, to a large organisation fighting in all the British Theatres of operations.
inti ny ase fren exising Aray volunters, they developed through subsequent teorganisattos
into an inter-Service force almost equally composed of soldiers and Royal Marines.
time, thit origin preceded the formation of C.O.H.Q., but, for most of the war, they were closely
linked and the Commandos were one of the main components of the Combined Operations team.
In June, 1940, the whole of the northern coast of Europe was held by the enemy, and to the
threat of imminent invasion at home was added the task of defending the sea link through the
Mediterranean and the Suez. Canal.
The Army had been driven out of Europe and was fully
committed in defence, but in order to maintain offensive morale as well as to hamper the enemy's
preparations for the expected invasion, it was essential that a method be found for carrying the
war into the enemy's camp, if only in a minor way. This was the problem to be solved and it was
against this background that the idea of Commandos was conceived.
Lt.-Col. Dudley Clarke, on the staff of the C.I.G.S. was thinking over this problem while
walking home on the evening of 4th June, 1940 ; the day of Mr. Churchill's famous
" fight to the
end " speech.
Remembering the occasions in history when small, highly mobile forces, particularly
in the Boer War, had succeeded in harassing a very much larger enemy, he felt that similar results
might now be achieved by means of amphibious Commandos which, as we still had command of
the sea, could carry out mobile hit and run raids across the Channel.
In addition to being good
for morale at home, these might provide valuable intelligence, and must also force the Germans to
devote some at least of their attention and troops to coast defence over a wide area.
The next
morning he was told by the C.I.G.S. (General Dill) that an immediate means of fostering the
offensive spirit of the Army was needed and he forthwith explained his ideas.
General Dill was
impressed, submitted the idea to the Prime Minister and the next morning the scheme was approved.
The inspiration and the name for these new forces had come from our enemies in a previous war.
Formation of Commando Units
Traditionally, this type of amphibious warfare belonged to the Royal Marines and, earlier in
1940, landing parties of that Corps had, on occasions, been employed. In the summer of the same
year, however, they too were very short of men and the Royal Marine Brigade was one of the few
trained formations left in the U.K. which could be used in a counter-invasion role.
Apart from
this, the requirement at this time was tor small, detached independent units capable of being
moved rapidly from point to point to carry out lightning raids on the enemy coastline.
therefore decided to disband the Army Independent Companies that had been raised for the
Norwegian campaign, and to form Commando Units in accordance with a War Office letter' and
thus, although the first Commander of Raiding Operations was a Royal Marine Officer (Lieutenant-
General Sir Alan Bourne), the Army found and continued to find all the personnel until the formation
of the first two Royal Marine Commandos in 1942. The administration of the Army personnel also
remained a War Office responsibility.
No. 1 Commando was formed from the disbanded Independent Companies.
It was eventually disbanded.
No. 2 Parachute Commando was the original airborne unit of the British Army.
Nos. 3 and 4 Commandos were formed from Southern Command.
Nos. 5 and 6 from Western Command.
No. 7 from Eastern Command.
No o Commando fan Tando Dietriat and Con Pende tie interestino to note
that Lt.-Col, Laycock (later C.C.O.) who formed it, managed to get one officer and 12 other
ranks Royal Marines from the Adjutant-General Royal Marines).
1 War Office letter 3/1890 (A.G./7A) dated 24th October, 1940.
108
TAEDTLEI
No. 8 Commando also contained the original Special Boat Section.
Nos. 9 and 11 Commandos were formed from Scottish Command.
No. 10 Commando should have been formed originally by Northern Command but, as
they could not produce the personnel, it was later formed as an inter-alliet with a troo,
consisting of French, Dutch, Belgian, Polish and Norwegian soldiers, together with a troop
of pro-British Germans and Austrians.
All Commando personnel were volunteers for mobile raiding operations.
During 1940 while resources were still very small, the Commandos were only used for raids
from Great Britain, but, in succeeding years, they were used further and further afield.
Nos. 7, 8 and 11 Commandos were sent to the Middle East where they joined up with two locally
raised Commandos.
In 1942, No. 5 Commando took part in the Madagascar landings.
there were four Commando Brigades, two at home, one in Italy and one in S.E.A.C.
The First Commando Raid
The first Commando raid of the war was made on 24th June, 1940, only 12 days after the
appointment of the Commander of Raiding Operations and the night before the France-German
armistice came into operation. It was only a small raid and of necessity was not elaborately planned
with so little time available.
It was, however, fairly successful ; a reconnaissance of German
defences in the Boulogne area was made, two Germans were killed and the party returned safely
though somewhat disorganised to England.
The only casualty was Colonel Dudley Clark who
accompanied the raid as an observer and was slightly wounded.®
Control and Development
As mentioned above, a Commander of Raiding Operations had been appointed on 12th June,
but he was succeeded in July by Admiral of the Fleet Sir Roger Keyes as
Director of Combined
Operations responsible for both training and the initiation of raids. It was under him that the original
organisation of the Commandos took shape.
Initially the Commandos were raised from the men who had volunteered for independent
mobile operations in the Independent Companies, and further recruits were also all obtained from
volunteers.
and a Commanding Officer could return any officer or man to regimental duty without warning at
any time. For this purpose the pick of the Home Forces was available at first, but later were allowed
to recruit from Young Soldiers Battalions.
as it avoided
milking" units; and recruits, with no preconceived ideas to forget, did very well after further
Commando Training.
The requirements for a Commando were self-reliance, imagination, fitness and tactical ability,
and the rigorous training was designed to foster these.
Normal barrack life was avoided, the men
worked in small parties and usually found their own accommodation in billets.
They received a
special lodging allowance for this, but otherwise received no extra pay.
In November, 1940, all these irregular forces were reorganised into a Special Service Brigade
of five Special Service Battalions. Each Battalion consisted of a headquarters and two Commandos
with a total strength of over a thousand.
This was soon found to be too cumbersome for efficient
control and, in 1941, these
units were again reorganised into Commandos of about 450 men,
sub-divided into a headquarters and five troops, all the Commandos coming under the one Special
Service Brigade.
Commando organisation during the period 1940-1943 is contained at
Appendix 30, Diagrams A and B.
Commando Raids, 1940-1941
The first raid in June, 1940, was followed by many more which, as time went on, became more
daring and went further afield.
Small parties were constantly
landing on enemy territory,
bringing back information and prisoners, and thus helping Intelligence
in England to keep in
touch with changes in German defences and preparations on
north-west coast of Europe.
Under the direction of Combined Operations, the scope and range of the raids was also expanded
and, in addition to these reconnaissance raids, 194l saw destruction raids carried out further
north against Vaagso, the Lofoten Islands and Spitzbergen.
These operations were all successful
in damaging German controlled installations and in hampering their supply of raw materials, and
they undoubtedly had a beneficial effect on morale at home.
Whether or not they were regarded
so favourably by the Norwegians is open to question.
The troops were warmly
welcomed when
they first arrived, but the Norwegians' attitude often cooled when they found the raiders were
not staving
This was understandable as their means of livelihood was destroyed, and the Germans
were apt to inflict vicious reprisals on the innocent inhabitants after the raid was over.
2:
