transport and the very long distance involved would have made it extremely
danicult, it not impossible, to maintain the advancing troops much longer
from Tessenei.
Supply Problems in Eritrea
of the force.
There were a number of complications in con ration with the supply
The chief of these was the variety of ration scales which had
to be dealt with by non-European supply personnel, handling items with
which they
were not familiar.
Besides the ordinary British and Indian
rations, there were Free French European and African personnel, European
and native prisoners of war (18,000 of each), Eritrean labour, and
S.D.F., and finally the Irregular Patriot Force of about 20,000 men. For.
tunately, it was found that there were ample local supplies to maintain the
latter, and the supply depots which had been set up were withdrawn.
A great deal of trouble was experienced as the result of the hot climate,
which affected tinned supplies, particularly cheese and fruit.
There were
no refrigerated railway wagons, and so, although there was plenty of meat
on the hoof, it was impossible to consign dead meat by rail.
Detachments
of an Indian field butchery
were split up among the D.I.Ds. and F.S.Ds.
as was also the Indian field bakery, and bread was available even in the
forward areas.
Vehicle Maintenance in Eritrea
There was no R.A.S.C. Base M.T. Installation in the Sudan, and all light
recovery, heavy repairs, and issue of spares and M.T. stores were dealt with
by the R.A.O.C. or I.A.O.C.
R.I.A.S.C. transport companies at this time
had not their own company
workshops.
Maintenance certainly suffered
through the long hours, bad roads, and the fact that there were many small
detachments, with consequent lack of supervision.
The Kufra Convoys
In April, 1941, at the time of the retreat in Libya, it became necessary
to maintain from the Sudan the oasis of Kufra, which lies some 650 miles
north west of Wadi Halfa on the Nile.
From the oasis, the Long Range
Desert Group was operating in a sort of guerilla warfare against the enem
right flank, and protecting the L. of C. to the Free French territory in West
Africa.
The first convoys were performed by the service company of the
S.D.F., with Ford 30-cwt. and Chevrolet 3-ton lorries.
The route was across
the desert, and there was water obtainable at only one point.
The extreme
heat caused ranid wear to fanbelts, and there were many cases of cracked
cylinder heads, broken big ends, etc.
no workshones, an reassention and many Chauraget lorries that hroke
The service company at this time had
down were loaded on the 10-ton Mack lorries returning empty.
These 10-t0n
lorries were brought into service on the route in June, 1941, and were driven
by R.A.S.C. drivers.
journer with a total delivered load of about 250 tons.
Durine 1941 five convous a month were run each section mating onl
Seven or eight days
was the normal time taken for the run.
the 3-ton lorries, and 63-74 for the 10-ton.
in each convou were available for pou-londond the balance was require
Loads were restricted to 23 tons for
About two out of three vehicles
180
suppli
200 mhc.
.O.L. of the convoy.
Extra petrol was sent out to
om Wadi Halfa, but the ratio of two to one was never
illy
altered.
After August, 1942, every possible vehicle had to be pressed into service
to supply Kufra, and convoy turnrounds were speeded up.
Une convoy
actually left again 23 hours after arriving at Wadi Halfa.
This could only
be done by using maintenance squads, who took over the vehicles as soon
as they came in, giving the drivers a few hours rest.
In addition to this
expedient, the workshops of the various units engaged were grouped under
one control to make the best use of the available resources.
this time,
the S.D.F. Service Company had become part of the Sudan Service Corps,
as described below.
early in 1943, Kufra could be supplied from
Cyrenaica, and the need for the convoys ceased.
Sudan Service Corps
The Sudan Service Corps, as a separate part of the S.D.F., was formed
in February, 1942, taking over the control and administration of the Service
Company, the
A nimal
Transport
Company, the
S.D.F. Supplies Service,
and the Reserve M.T. Company, which had till then been an R.A.S.C. unit.
In the first part of 1943, six additional general transport companies
were formed, of which five served in other parts of the Middle East.
The
Supplies Service took over all supply depots in the Sudan, except the peace-
time depot at Khartum.
A S.D.F. Petrol Depot was formed and took over
from the Indian Petrol Depot.
By the middle of the year, it consisted of
100 British officers, 680 British other ranks, and over 4,000 native troops.
The organization corresponded to the standard R.A.S.C. system.
When the German invasion of Greece began on 6th April, 1941, the
British land forces there consisted of 1 Armoured Brigade Group, a New
Zealand Division and an Australian Division.
of Yugoslav resistance in the south of that country, the British and Greek
forces were obliged to withdraw from the northern frontier, and gradually
to evacuate th 21st April, the, which was effected to the extent of about
On 21st April, the Greek army capitulated, and it was decided
80 per cent. by the end of the month.
Before the arrival of the British Military Forces in Greece early in March,
1941, an R.A.F. contingent had already
been operating there for
months, and a supply depot and D.I.D. had been established in Athens
The plan for the maintenance of the military force provided for the
establishment of an advanced base at Larisa, 150 miles north of Athens,
which was to be stocked by road and rail from the latter place.
Consionments of cuanlies arrived in advance of the force and the Athens
Subaly Danat herame so concasted that sunnly traine loaded at the docks
were sent straight me so tanges, whete there was only a detachment of a
Cypriot transport company to handle them.
The intention was to build up
reserves of 90 days, of which 30 days for forward troops would be held at
the advanced base hut this was never fully implemented owing to the rapid
181
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
