APPENDICES
APPENDIX 1
From : The Director, Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich.
To: The President, Royal Naval College, Greenwich.
S.C.3.
22nd February, 1936
The attached memorandum on the naval side of Combined Operations is submitted for your approval
and remarks.
It has resulted from the experience gained in exercises with the Army and Air Staff Colleges when
Combined Operations were studied for periods of several weeks.
(Signed) B. C. WATSON,
Captain, R.N.
Rd. 930/15
Forwarded for Their Lordships' favourable consideration.
2. I am in complete agreement with Captain Watson's remarks on the importance of the subject
of Combined Operations and on
the comparative lack of progress made since the war.
Experience at
the War College bears out both these contentions.
smal ram da in ete it on te thef permie no committee and, i me inio banci
and should lead to real and rapid progress.
(Signed) R. M. COLVIN,
President.
MEMORANDUM ON
THE NAVAL SIDE OF COMBINED OPERATIONS AND THE NECESSITY FOR ITS DEVELOPMENT
IN PEACE
1. The object of this memorandum is to suggest improvements in the organisation and development
of the naval side of Combined Operations ;
and to record the experience gained in exercises with the
Army and Air Staff Colleges, when a special opportunity for studying the subject was afforded.
Navy's Interest Greater
2. In the first place, it is desired to emphasise the fact that the Navy is more directly interested in
the question of Combined Operations than either of the other Services;
and that consequently, any
progress in their organisation and development must depend largely on the initiative taken by the Navy.
3. In any war in which the British Empire may be engaged, the seizure of enemy bases will be of
great importance in order to ensure the safety of our trade routes; and of this, our past wars provide
many instances.
But unlike the past, a future war may urgently require the seizure of an advanced base
in enemy territory—
or even the recapture of one of our own bases without which our main fleet or
air forces will be unable to operate effectively.
Navy's Responsibility Greater
4. But the Navy is not only more directly interested in Combined Operations than the other
Services; it also bears, under present conditions, the greater responsibility for their success.
a Combined Operation consists of four separate steps :-
In general,
(i) The planning and preparation.
(ii) The transport to the scene of action.
(ili) The landing.
(iv) The subsequent operations to secure the objective.
5. With all these steps, the Navy is intimately concerned, and in particular with the transport and
available
operation depended then mainly on what happened after the landing, and for this. the chief responsibility
were sufficient even for landing troops in face of opposition.
But, in past wars, neither of these presented any special ad iculty, and the normal means
The success or failure of the
belonged to the Army.
The Landing-A Vital Problem
200
the expedition may be planned, and however competent the military forces may be to secure their objective,
the whole expedition will collapse and may suffer destruction unless a landing can be effected.
therefore, it may be said that to-day, the Navy's responsibility is relatively greater th be hated the other
Services.
7. In this matter of the landing, the Navy's responsibility comes under three headings :—
(a) The transport of troops to the beaches.
(b) The destruction or neutralisation of beach defences and the support of the troops after
(c) The exploitation of the principle of surprise.
In the past, the Navy required few, if any, special means to carry these out, beyond those
employed in the ordinary course of its duties.
he ordinary means will be quite inadequate if there is to be any certainty of success.
But to-day, owing to the increased power of the defence,
Need for Special Training and Development
8. In fact, it must be admitted that the problem of landing a force to-day in face of opposition,
has become one of extreme difficulty, which can only be solved by means of highly specialised training
and material. And, if this is so, the training and development of material must be carried out in peace,
and cannot be relegated, as formerly, until after the outbreak of war.
9. If Combined Operations were the sole responsibility and interest of the Navy, there can be little
doubt that this change in their nature would have been recognised long ago, and steps taken to ensure
the necessary training and development. But, belonging as they do to all three Services, they can claim
the concentrated attention of none, with the inevitable result that no real progress has been made.
The Present Situation
10. Nothing that has been said above is intended to imply that the study and training in Combined
Operations has been neglected since the war.
On the contrary, great interest has been taken in the
subject; but this interest has been of a general nature, with no definite aim, which has naturally resulted
in vague and unpractical conceptions.
11. At present, schemes are worked out every year by the three Staff Colleges working together;
practical exercises tre canied out by the fleets, and bombardment practices are
carried out by most
But, as there is no expert Authority on Combined Operations to whom all questions can
be referred, and whose function it is to supervise these activities and to record the results, little progress
12. But the chief handicap to progress is the fact that no real effort has been made to solve the
vital problem of the landing; and until this has been done, and a practical knowledge gained of its
requirements, planning and training is likely to be misdirected and on wrong lines.
Planning Unsuited to Modern Conditions
13. At present, our planning and training are mostly on the lines laid down in the Manual of Combined
Operations, which embodies the experience of the late war and particularly of the Dardanelles.
as far as can be foreseen, modern conditions of war will require a simpler and swifter type of operation
if success is to be achieved; or even if the attempt is to be considered a practical proposition.
14. Interesting though the experience of the late war may be, its value lies more in principles than
in details; and surprise, with its essential elements of speed and simplicity, has been proved time and
again to be the basic principle of Combined Operations.
only a brigade we can
surprise the enemy in trinciple st Combined O, arations it for instand, in one are de we can
success than several divisions a few months later.
Principles Submerged
15. To-day, however, though this principle is recognised in theory, the methods contemplated
would make its achievement impossible.
In fact, delay is to be found at every turn-
-in the planning
or the pration; in taking up and Aid maty there i he and tom pha ton of the tg th, but of
the ments one he supporting are Are, which demand the employment of large numbers of aloe
umber of apse it antide the impose com prison aired, tooty by day, bomby the lang
Summary
16. To sum up, it is suggested that the Navy's outlook on Combined Operations requires alteration,
and that they should be recognised to be what they are-
our special interest and responsibility.
present, te me eared eve it eat the done war vote prepared to com in ta preton: bit
17. This is solely due to the greatly increased power of the defence which it will be impossible to
overcome in the future with the normal means available.
Intensive training
and development of
material will alone supply with ths no and these cannot be left until after the outbreak of war without
sacrificing the fundamental principle of success surprise.
201
7/17
wO 277/21
3ф
