lonelts of the Inactive Period
The months of inaction beween September, 1939, and May, 1940, had a
B.E.F. to get iself into shape for active operations.
east the advantage that they gave time for the R.A.S.C, organization in t
ans setled down afer their initial difficulties, and were carrying out the
The base and L oC
In the forward area, supply columns and petrol co
can a duce a pratial conditione, and, in five cat, en
Ammunition units were not so favourably after
ay rate become familiar with their louds
s they had no practice in the system of ammunition supply, but they did a
It would sorcely have heen the fault of the R.A.S.C., if operational co
does baring bad to be faced immediatel yee lack in France, the sie
of minterancs fat broken down through sheer lack of practical experien
of the duties involved. The controlling principle in peace-time had bee
coony, at whatever cost of unreadiness, and inefficiency, and the take!
the RASC. had been to " make bricks without straw ".
ture proved to have been built on firm foundations.
At least the stro
SECTION 3-PERIOD OF ACTIVE OPERATIONS
Introductory
On 10ch May, the Germans entered the Low Countries, Belgium, t
Netherlands, and Luxemburg, and, in accordance with our plan of as
paiga, the British Forces entered Belgium, and moved forward to the line d
the River Dyle. Fine days later, the Netherlands capitulated; this inched
a withdrawal of the British to a new line.
The German thrust to the cus
was already taking shape, and by 23rd May, they had entered Boulope
and the B.E.F. was cut off from its L. of C.
The Belgian Army surrendent
and the British and Freach were left to face the enemy in a position of fa
disadvantage
In consequence of the oversbelming superiority of the enemy forces, $
British withdrew to Dunkirk, and evacuation to England began.
Sth Junc, when it caned, four-fifths of the B.E.F. had got away.
Some British divisions were stil south-west of the Somme, and bever
9th and 12th June, attempts were made to reconstitute a modified eyes
tonary force in that ata, and 52 British Division and 1 Canadian Dinin
were sent from the United Kingdom.
The French Army was breaking f
however, and of the lth the despaich of troops and material to France ces,
The main portion of the Brish forces in Prance withdrew to the 5L. Nud
area for evacuation, and others to Cherbourg
Not without considents
sales, indigen that to deanino of the a Lancastes* s
The British Expeditionary Force had ceased to be.
Se Nanite lated elt tes essention was completed on 2ird la
Supply and P.O.L. situation
the base or advanced supply depots were equivalent to 62 days' require-
ments for that number.
Reserve stocks of P.O.L. were as follows: -
M.T. petrol in containers
40,000 tons.
M.T.
petrol in bulk
tankage
32,000 tons.
Dieselite in cans
3,000 tons.
Lubricating oils
4,000 tons.
Operational requirements of P.O.L. were estimated at 1,200 tons a day
(at 100 tons for a division plus corps troops, and 50 miles for each vehicle)
and on this basis reserve stocks were equivalent to 63 days' consumption,
M.T. petrol for 33 days being held in containers.
Several days' reserves of supplies and petrol had been held north of the
Somme for some time past, but these were a small proportion of the whole.
They were, however, ali that were available for the maintenance of the B.E.F.
ten days after active operations had begun, for by then all rail and road com-
munications with the bases had been cut.
Without the
various unofficial
reserves and expedients,
the mobility of the force could not have been
Precautionary Measures in the United Kingdom
It was very soon appreciated at War Office that normal maintenance of
the B.E.F. might not prove possible if the operations were to develop as, in
up a special ration
Appendix IX), for use as the basis of shipments of a floating reserve, intended
to ensure that adequate supplies of a " ready-to-eat" nature would be avail-
able within shore reach of the B.E.F.
S.T. 2 also took action to provide for emergency requirements of P.O.L.
both at home and for the B.E.F.
By the third week in May, there were
supplies of P.O.L. at all ports where a sudden call might be received, reserves
were located at supply depots convenient to ports, for prompt replenishment,
and a War Office Mobile Petrol Reserve was in the vehicles of a transport
company at Aldershot, so that it would be possible to meet at once all urgent
requests at home or at the ports.
Maintenance of the B.E.F.
During the advance to the Dyle, and while the B.E.F. was holding that
line, the normal maintenance system operated as a rule.
locations carrying two days'
All units left their
preserved rations, the unconsumed portion of
the current day's ration, and fresh rations for the following day; and all first
line vehicles started with full petrol tanks.
Supply columns, on loading for
the last time at old railheads, filled up to capacity with all kinds of supply
commodities from dumps and railhead depots.
They dumped reserves
surplus to two days' requirements in their new locations.
Petrol points in some divisions continually ran dry, even though they were
replenished on an " endless band" system.
Batteries exceeded the authorized
limit of ammunition to be dumped, and much had consequently to be
abandoned.
123
weste714
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
