In districts, however, all A.T.S., including those in C. (M) T. Companies,
came under the jurisdiction in A.T.S. matters of a General Duty Group Com-
mander, A.T.S.
This arrangement was not always satisfactory, as the officer
holding that appointment was not always knowledgeable in M.T. matters and
in the peculiar problems of mixed transport units.
The re-introduction of
M.T. Group Commanders, A.T.S., or the addition of an A. T.S. officer to the
staft of Os.C., R.A.S.C., of districts, were considered, but, partly owing to
shortage of personnel, it was decided that the existing organization must stand.
In 1943, a general re-organization took place of the static chain of command
in Home Commands, with consequent repercussions on establishments for
static S. and T. services.
D.A.Ds.S.T.
It was found practicable to devise standard establishments for these Os.C.,
R.A.S.C., any inequalities of load being adjusted by use of a pool of R.A.S.C.
regimental officers and other ranks, allotted to each command for addition to
Os.C. R.A.S.C. stafis as considered necessary at the discretion of the command,
to meet variations in the volume of S. and T. duties to be carried out.
In addition, R.A.S.C. regimental staffs were provided to meet the special
requirements of those stations where there was a large permanent R.A.S.C.
establishment, e.g., Aldershot and Catterick.
These staffs included regimental
serjeant-majors and regimental quarter-master serjeants.
The standard establishments were applicable to all districts and certain
sub-districts, except London District, Northern Ireland, and the Orkneys and
individual establishments to be laid down.
In West Scotland District, an
Nong ga vin no bic
R.A.S.C., owing to its size and special commitments.
The Headquarters of an O.C. R.A.S.C., District (lieut.-col.), included a
major (2nd in command), a major (senior supply officer), a major (barracks),
a captain (adjutant), and a captain (petrol).
district (major) was allowed a captain as assistant.
The O.C., R.A.S.C., of a sub-
the war.
Air Defence of Great Britain—S.T. Organization
The original R.A.S.C. organization in A.D.G.B. consisted of the usual
Territorial Army Divisional R.A.S.C. in each of the two A.A. Divisions, with
the addition of a D.A.D.S.T. to 2nd A.A. Division, on account of the territory
covered by the formation, from London to Yorkshire.
Before the war, a T.A. Divisional R.A.S.C. consisted of only about one
hundred officers and men, with a regular adjutant and a few permanent staff
under the command of A.A. Corps.
in 1938, the A.D.G. B. organization was expanded into five A.A. Divisions,
This meant the formation of three
additional Divisional R.A.S.C. The D.A.D.S.T. with 2 A.A. Division was
moved to headquarters, A.A.
Corps, from which all questions of transport,
ammunition, petrol, and supplies, were then to be dealt with.
Early in 1939, A.A.
Corps became an independent command, and an
A.D.S.T.
was appointed, with a D.A.D.S.T. and staff captain to assist him.
This staff became responsible in all respects for the direction and control of
she R.A.S.C. services feeding A.A. troops from A.D.G.B. supply depots, for
the supply of P.O.L., and for the delivery of ammunition.
On the outbreak of war, the whole S.T. staff was withdrawn, and was
replaced by a technical adviser, S. and T.
The idea that an officer, serving
only in an advisory capacity, could cope with all that had to be done was
proved to be a fallacy, however, and, a year later, the adviser was re-designated
an A.D.S.T.
The appointment was upgraded to D.D.S.T. (brigadier) in May,
1941.
When A.A. Command was reorganized into groups in October, 1942,
it was decided that it would be necessary to have an A.D.S.T. at each group
headquarters, with staff status, but having authority to exercise direct control
over the R.A.S.C. companies in the group.
After six months' trial, however,
the appointment of A.D.S.T. was changed to that of C.R.A.S.C., who was to
be regarded, first, as a commander, and, secondly, as adviser to the group
commander.
The organization then remained unchanged to the end of the
war.
Functions and Development of Q.M.G. 6 and Q.M.G. 3
Such was the general nature of the organization for the control of the
supply and transport services in peace and war.
We will now consider in
detail the functions of the two original branches of the S. and T. Directorate
at the War Office, as they were at the beginning of the war, and their sub-
sequent developments.
Q.M.G. 6—Responsibilities—Supplies
Supplies, together with petrol and lubricants, catering, and certain aspects
of barrack services, were the responsibility of the branch known before the
war as Q.M.G.6, and later as S.T.6.
For the performance of these duties, it
comprised two assistant directors of supplies and transport, ten other officers,
of whom four were specifically for catering duties, and the appropriate clerks.
One A.D.S.T. was responsible for the control of the branch, and the other was
Services liaison officer with the Food (Defence Plans) Department of the
Board of Trade, which department subsequently became the Ministry of Food.
The work of the branch had three distinct, but closely connected aspects,
namely, the staff side, the implementation of higher policy by setting in motion
the necessary administrative and executive action, and the technical side.
1. THE STAFF SIDE
(a) Consideration of, and active participation in the settlement of, questions
of major policy in connection with Army contract problems, such as the
provision of reserves of food stuffs, petrol and lubricants.
(b) Participation in committees relating to national and inter-service food
defence.
13
137452)
WO 277/21.
27
WO277/26
