secured.
The technique of despatching stores from aircraft by parachute or
free-dropping required a standard of skill comparable to gun-drill.
Air Despatch Organization, R.A.S.C.
A R.A.S.C. organization was evolved for carrying out these tasks, the
basis of which was the Air Despatch Company.
This unit had a headquarters
similar to that of a normal transport company, and included the following
components: -
(a) One or more air loading platoons, for the packing,
loading and stowing in aircraft, of stores to be conveyed by air.
preparation,
platoon consisted of two officers and 80 other ranks, and was designet
to load 30 aircraft simultaneously.
The personnel were also trained
as despatchers, to form a reserve for the air-dropping platoons.
(b) Up to five air dropping platoons, each with an officer and TO other
ranks, for the provision of 15 despatching crews, each of four men,
who vere responsible for the loading of their aircraft, and ejection
from it of the stores over the dropping zones.
When not engaged on
air-dropping sorties, these platoons were employed as air loading
platoons.
(c) Transport platoons, if included, were employed on the delivery of
stores from packing areas to supply loading airfields, and on normal
company duties, leaving the general transport companies free for
their other tasks.
(d) Workshop platoon, included if necessary.
C.R.A.S.C., Air Despatch, commanded a group of air despatch companies,
and was responsible for exercising control over Army personnel and material
at supply loading airfields.
The carriage of stores from depots, railheads, etc., to packing areas was
the function of the general transport companies provided for the purpose, and
organized in a general transport column.
They were allotted to specific tasks
under the direction of the Commander, Air Despatch Group, either as a central
pool, or sub-allotted to a C.R.A.S.C., air despatch.
Commander, Air Despatch
appointed, when the number of Cs.R.A.S.C., air despatch, reached three. His
functions were as follows: —
(a) To command and administer all army personnel in the group;
(b) to make executive arrangements for implementing air despatch oper:
tions as required by controlling authority and higher headquarters
(c) to allocate Cs.R.A.S.C., and companies to airfields;
(d) to control the maintenance of separate commodity dumps (containe,
pre-packed and bulk reserve stores) for army, airborne, special it
service, and any other formations, in accordance with expected d
supply and maintenance commitments, and the requirements of 5
controlling authority; and
(e) to allocate transport and Air Despatch Companies to Cs.R.A.SC
air despatch, in accordance with operational requirements.
94
The controlling authority in the United Kingdom was the War Office,
where S.T.3 operated a control room, whose function was to maintain states
of all stocks held in air despatch dumps, and of road transport availability.
It acted as the centre where all information relating to supply and maintenance
by air was gathered, and from which all S.T. activity concerning air despatch
was co-ordinated.
System of Supply
Demands for air supply and maintenance were signalled back by Forma-
tion H.Q., or G.H.Q., in the field, to the headquarters controlling authority
@ Movements) who determined priorities where necessary, and passed the
information through the control room to air despatch group, which in turn
issued the necessary orders to the units under command.
From two to five air despatch companies were allotted to the same number
of supply loading airfields.
Air Reception
The organization and operation of dropping zones was the responsibility
of the formation receiving its requirements by air-dropping, and the task of
receiving stores in this manner normally devolved upon the R.A.S.C. of that
formation.
The organization and operation of the army aspect of the receipt
of stores at the delivery airfields was in the hands of the senior army com-
mander in whose area such airfields were located; and, in this case, the air
freight reception tasks were normally carried out by general transport com-
panies, under the command of a C.R.A.S.C., general transport column.
In the case of supply dropping, the responsibility for marking out drop-
ping zones, receipt, unpacking, and distribution, of stores, was the responsi-
bility of brigade, etc., transport companies concerned.
Division of Responsibility, R.A.S.C./R.A.O.C.
Originally, the R.A.S.C. in air despatch were responsible for a number
of duties in connection with ammunition and other items of ordnance supply.
The division of responsibility between the two corps was revised in December,
1944, and the R.A.O.C. then undertook the preparation, holding, packing, and
issuing of all ordnance stores, excluding ammunition, required for despatch
by air, and the inspection, maintenance, and repair, of ammunition.
Packing
of ammunition was actually carried out by the R.A.S.C. under R.A.O.C.
supervision.
The R.A.O.C. also held reserves of technical equipment normally
used by air despatch companies
during
operations,
particularly for
the
dropping of stores; but the holding, packing, and issuing, of parachutes was
a R.A.F. responsibility.
Air Supply
in the Far East
The organization of air despatch in South-East Asia Command differed to
some extent from the foregoing, as will be seen in Chapter XI, the essential
variation being that the staff controlled and co-ordinated the operation at
both the despatching and receiving ends, as well as deciding policy and priority
as at home.
95
37459)
H 2
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
