to discharge these extraneous duties as well.
accordingly removed from the R.A.S.C.
Some of these duties were
The establishment was in any case too small, and in all aspects the
R.A.S.C. was consistently understaffed for the duties to be performed.
Victualling of R.N. Ships
Some difficulty was found in 1941 in dealing with the victualling of ships of
the
Royal Navy.
The position was that the supply
on a figure of 1,750, including 300 R.N.
of rations was based
increased to 2,500.
The actual strength had, however,
The reserve was 60 days, and the working margin 45 days, and these had
to be maintained in man-rations, in accordance with military practice.
The system of victualling in the Navy was different, and H.M. ships made
demands for commodities by quantities, and not for numbers of rations.
The
accountancy aspect of this could be overcome; but on occasion ships had put
in and made demands of considerable size which it was not always possible
to meet in full.
The War Office accordingly informed the Admiralty that
the Army could not accept a liability which might jeopardize the maintenance
of the garrison, or, alternatively, could not be satisfactorily discharged with
the means available locally.
The Admiralty was asked to make its own
arrangements for victualling ships there; but naval personnel living ashore or
employed in local defence craft would still be maintained by the Army.
It was consequently arranged that H.M. ships
would be victualled at
Scapa Flow, but that they might draw fresh items (including bread-making
ingredients, meat, and vegetables) from the R.A.S.C., Faroes.
This would be
subject to adequate notice being given of fluctuations in numbers.
The Force on Vaagö
In March, 1942, it was decided to construct airfields on Vaagö, one of the
islands of the group, and a special force was despatched which was to be
maintained from the United Kingdom.
The R.A.S.C. element of this fort
comprised a detachment of 15 vehicles for the bulk movement of stores from
ships to depots and airfields, one section of a D.I.D., and a detachment o
a field bakery.
Rations were to be drawn in unit first line transport.
Owing to climatic conditions, it was essential for sufficient reserves to ke
held on Vaagö to guard against shipping difficulties.
The scale was fixed al
90 days, and shipments, based on a strength of 3,500, would be 950 tons i
July, and 750 tons each in August and September,
1942.
Obviously the
storage accommodation on Vaagö would be greatly strained.
The strength
was expected to increase to 4,700 by April, 1943.
This would place a cor
siderable strain on the small supply detachment, and its strength was aunt.
ingly increased to 41 other ranks.
Adequate storage accommodation, including
a 10-ton cold store, was sent.
Owing to winds, marquees were uses, and
even a large corrugated iron hut was blown away with its contents.
reduction to be made in the establishments.
By the end of 10d? the two forces were amalgamated. which enable?
followed suit.
process of reduction of the force began, and the R.A.S.C. establishmen
1943, a progressin
142
The ration strength reached its peak,
apart from the separate force on
Vaagö, in July, 1943, when it included 473 Royal Navy, 1,768 Army, 89
R.A.F., and 20 civilians.
Solid Fuel
Fuel for the main force was at first obtained from R.N. stocks, except
where military detachments were stationed on small isolated islands and were
allowed to buy from local contractors.
For the supply of the force on Vaagö, arrangements were made by S.T.7
with (Movements) and civilian agents for shipment from the United King-
dom.
Weather conditions prevented winter shipments, and, in 1942 and
1943, sufficient fuel was, therefore, shipped between April and September of
each year to meet a consumption of about 500 tons of coal and 180 tons of
coke monthly, including enough to build up winter stocks.
P.O.L.
Petrol was supplied in barrels,
4-gallon non-returnable tins being also
provided for detailed issues to units, in cases where a barrel was too big.
he
pumps sent were unfortunately of the wrong pattern, owing to an error at
the stores depot, and all can-filling had to be done by siphoning.
that the personnel could not keep up with the demand, and might have had
serious consequences.
Transport
The transport element of the original force was only five drivers and their
vehicles, but that of the force on Vaagö was larger, consisting of 12 3-ton
lorries, one Bedford-Scammell with trailers, one 15-cwt. truck, one utility, one
breakdown lorry, and two motor-cycles.
This proved insufficient for the
task, and in July, 1942, two more Bedford-Scammells and trailers and four
ambulances were sent.
During the summer, there was perpetual daylight, but in the winter the day
was only five hours long.
This, added to the difficulty of shipment in the
winter, meant that intensive work had to be done in the summer, when the
working day was from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m.
In the first six months of the project,
36,000 tons of stores of all sorts were cleared by the R.A.S.C. transport on
Vaagö.
Unit transport was also employed to a considerable extent, but its use
presented a grave problem which could have been overcome to a great extent
by central control over operation and maintenance.
The roads were very bad, causing a severe strain on vehicles, and innumer-
able broken springs.
On arrival of the force on Vaagö, no workshops of any kind were available.
A L.A.D. had been included, but its arrival was delayed, and when it was
ready to operate, it as swamped with work which it could not possibly cope
with.
The RA,Sit was swampet, therefore, did not attempt to make things
worse by trying to use its services, but asked War Ofice for an increase in
fitter staff, which was approved.
This made the detachment completely self-
supporting and it was anly on this account that it was possible for a high
percentage of the R.A.S.C. vehicles to be kept on the road at a time when
143
(37452)
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
