distinguished.
and that R.A.S.C., M.E.S.C., and Lend /Lease shipments should be dearly
As an example R.A.S.C. depots were stocked with wheat
presumably belonging to M.E.S.C. who had apparently not been advised of
shipments.
was rectified.
Serious storage problems were liable to result unless the matter
The War Office ruling was that supplies advised by War Ofice
as for R.A.S.C. should be accepted on arrival from U.S.A., all other supplies
being regarded as for M.E.S.C.
The U.S. authorities agreed to consign
supplies, shipped against War Office orders, to O.C., R.A.S.C., Egypt, and
all others requested by British authorities to M.E.S.C.
Another difficulty, in connection with supplies received in Middle East
direct from U.S.A.,
arose through
over-shipments.
were due to
causes inherent in the operation of the Lend/Lease scheme in the USA.
(see Chapter XIII.
of supplies arrived at the right time and place.
They made it difficult to ensure that the right quantity
The British Food Mission
in U.S.A. was told that, unless shipments were made to order, stock control
would be completely lost in Middle East, and questions of storage and turn-
over would prove insurmountable problems.
Cold Storage
Cold storage space formed a big problem in connection with the main-
tenance of reserves in the Middle East.
By 1940, it was the accepted policy
that all available cold storage in Egypt should be kept filled to capacity.
The aim was to arrange the arrival of refrigerated ships so that they were
detained for the minimum time; but if there was not enough empty storage
for a cargo, the ship had to be detained.
Demands
were placed on War Office by Middle East four months in
advance, and difficulty was of course experienced in forecasting requirements,
as well as ensuring that cold storage space would be available to receive the
meat.
Additional factors
were the
prolonged operations in the Westen
Desert, during which 20 per cent. of the Middle East ration strength at
preserved, instead of frozen, meat, thus reducing withdrawals from storage,
and uncertainty whether demands would be met in the form of bone-in, o
boneless, meat, which, with a difference of 3}-oz. a man, could upset calal.
To relieve the situation, and to save shipping, as much meat a possible
was imported " on the hoof" from Sudan and Iraq.
Severe weather held up
the How from Trad, and an unernected quantity of frozen beef was suddenly
Ta Anonet 1010 Midlla Boat took action to put the matter on a sound
that installation by
Port Said, with 3,000 tons, was chon the main store, and dames f
enemy air action would have been catastrophic. Pr
A 1,700 mom
jects were put in hand to supplement this accommodation.
store was constructed; 40 10-ton transportable containers were
there war. hones of arrancing for cold storage hulks, totallinn
dependent
were placed for refrigerated barges.
War Ofice Araviding refrigerating emminment: and contro
projected totalled 14,000 tons.
Altogether the space available and
plant required for these projects had been consigned to Middle East, but m
By the end of 1941, a large proporio de.
fortunately some was lost bu enemy action en route, and had to astr alast
166
In March, 1942, the situation in Egypt and Palestine was that over 12,000
tons of space was available.
If the necessary cold storage space was allotted
for desiccated yeast, butter and margarine, then 10,600 tons of frozen meat
could be held, representing 56 days' supply for the
existing strength of
600,000. This was precisely the amount of the authorized reserve.
In fact,
the whole of the Middle East cold storage space had to be filled to capacity
to ensure the holding of the authorized reserve, and therefore no working
space was available.
When the whole of the projected cold storage had
been erected, about the middle of 1943, the facilities in the command reached
their peak of 17,500 tons, and the problem was then solved.
Port Detachments
Port Detachments, R.A.S.C., played a large part in ensuring the proper
handling of supplies
through Middle East ports.
Before June,
1940211
supply shipments were routed to Port Said, where the Command Supply
Depot supervised discharge and clearance.
After August, 1940, after a gap
due to the closing of the Mediterranean, supply shipments arrived so often
and in such numbers that the ports of Suez, Alexandria and Haifa, came into
use. The depots at the two latter were able for a time to effect the necessary
supervision, but a small party had to be sent to Suez to supervise discharge,
and to obtain from Movement Control the necessary rail transport for the
despatch of the supplies, as directed by G.H.Q.
As depot holdings increased
it became impossible for them to handle import clearance in addition to their
normal depot working.
Port Detachments were therefore established at all
main ports, and proved of great value in ensuring proper handling in dis-
charge, in expediting clearance of supplies from ports, and in supervising the
handling of supplies being shipped to other theatres.
They became the
representatives of S.T. in the port organization, and the technical advisers of
Movemeats and Transportation at the ports on all matters affecting supplies.
Catering Services
No provision was made of catering advisers for Middle East until the
appointment early in 1940 of one each for Egypt and Palestine. Later in the
year the number was increased to six.
But when War Office asked if
Divisional Catering Advisers were required for British divisions formed
the Middle East, Middle East declined.
An inspection of catering conditions in Middle East in 1941 found that
these varied according to the location of units.
Almost every type of cook-
house was seen, and the standard of cooking varied considerably.
There was
a large shortage of trained cooks, with a great many units under establish-
ment, and replacements hard to find.
It was found necessary to reorganize
the catering service completely, as well as the Middle East School of Cookery
and to establish a cumber of Emergency Cookery Training
increased responsibilities due to the expansion of the A.C.C. in Middle East,
with the various commitments for the transfers, classification, and training,
of over 5,000 cooks, called for an increased establishment, and the upgrading
of certain appointments.
Adviser at
A Chief Catering Adviser at G.H.Q., a Command
HO Pritich Troons in
Divisional Adviser rivise Trooint in
Egypt, and Command,
Corps, and
Specialist messing officers were pro-
vided for base hersonnel depots and convalescent denots. and a Supervising
167
17
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
