Landing Craft Personnel, Ramped. (L.C.P. (R.))
On arrival of the Combined Operations Mission in America at the end of 1941, the firm of
Higgins was trying to devise an easier method of disembarkation from L.C.P. and had produced
a new design with a narrow gangway forward which led to a ramp over which the troops could
disembark.
Five of these modified™
craft (later
called L.C.P. (R.) ) were ordered for trial, in
substitution for the last five L.C.P. (L.) then on order.
The L.C.P. (R.) were not as satisfactory as the L.C.P. (L.). When heavily loaded
they were
inclined to trim by the head and to scoop water in over the ramp. Before very many of them had
been delivered, the design was again changed and the ramp and gangway widened to the whole
or Bren carrier to be embarked.
wits the signate a ta diab a feei (Parrie Short marked.. The cre
The craft built for this
Landing Crait Vehicle, Personnel. (L.C.V. (P.))
dim eat re liter the trials of the first reCy Out riot proction at siched to.
this design and no more of the earlier type were built.
332 were assigned to the British.
They were used by the Americans in all their operations to carry the early waves of the assault
troops except when, in the later stages of the war, amphibians were used instead.
Landing Craft Infantry, Small. (L.C.I. (S.))
These craft were required to lift 100 armed men, to have a speed of 15 knots and an endurance
of 200 miles.
The design and production was undertaken by Messrs. Fairmile in 1942.
The boat was made of wood, similar in many respect to certain coastal force craft.
The
scantlings were very much reduced and the side planking was of plywood. The protection was
fitted in the form of plates of steel not forming part of the hull proper. Two Hall Scot Invaders,
which in later boats were supercharged, were fitted to give the speed required.
The troops were accommodated in hold compartments into which the boat was divided by
transverse bulkheads, and disembarked by ladders from the upper deck.
Upholstered seats with
accommodation beneath them for kit, were fitted.
The draft was very small for a ship of its size
and its beaching qualities were good. Stern anchoring arrangements were similar to those in L.C.T.s.
The kedge was, however, seldom used for beaching because the hand-operated winch could not be
worked sufficiently fast which meant that the kedge wire was liable to foul the propellor when the
craft was retracting.
Owing to their twin out-turn screws and comparatively high speed, the L.C.I. (S.) proved
extremely manœuvrable.
They were good sea-boats, but not sufficiently robust to withstand
going alongside other vessels in a seaway.
These craft were never used for their original purpose, raiding, as large-scale raids were no
longer the policy at the time of their completion.
troops in the Normandy and Walcheren operations.
They were however used to land the assault
L.S.D.—Embarking vehicles.
(52794)
Normandy landings Rhino ferry.
22947/17
WO 277/21
27
