to close down, and that after all the stocks required by 21 Army Group had
been forwarded to the new advance base the remainder in the R.M.A. should
be handed over to the War Office for disposal.
At the beginning of this phase, the rail service from the R.M.A. was
limited, and consequently the bulk of the maintenance had still to be brought
up by road.
The measures adopted to supplement the available transport
resources are described below.
Supply Situation, September, 1944—January 1945
The last shipments of supplies, apart from fresh meat and vegetables for
local consumption, reached the R.M.A. in the first week of October, and from
that time onwards until the opening of Antwerp, supplies were shipped to the
Channel ports.
Both Army roadheads were stocked by rail, Second Army
from R.M.A., and First Canadian Army from Dieppe.
Plentiful local supplies were obtained in Belgium from October onwards,
and bread was produced in civilian bakeries.
It was decided, as a precaution against the possibility of heavy sea and
air attacks on Antwerp, to establish the base depots in three groups, so
that each group would have alternative ports from which to accept imports
from the United Kingdom.
These were located at Antwerp, Ghent, and
Brussels, and contained four, five, and three, base supply depots respectively.
A survey on 12th November showed that maintenance was proceeding
normally.
Cold storage in ample capacity had been found in the advanced base area;
some of the cold stores held in the United Kingdom against the original fore-
cast were able to be released for use elsewhere.
A reserve was retained in
case any was required as the advance into Germany proceeded. 130 insulated
ralway
wagons were found,
of which 80 were handed over to 21 Army
Group, although no difficulty had, in fact, been met so far in moving frozen
meat in ordinary covered wagons.
Direct Shipments from America
The prospect of Antwerp being used for the intake of supplies opened up
the possibility of direct shipments from North America.
The first demand,
totalling 18,000 tons and covering one Month, was arranged to arrive in
January, 1945, for February consumption, and included flour, sugar, tinned
fish, dried fruit, tinned milk, egg powder and luncheon meat.
Later, how-
ever, only four and preserved meat were shipped direct, as there were ade;
quate stocks of the other commodities in the United Kingdom to maintain 21
Army Group for six months.
On 2nd December, 1944, the first ocean-going refrigerated vessel dis-
charged at Antwarn and from then it man anecilla to maintain daily issues
of frozen meat to all personnel to whom delivery of fresh supplies could be
The basis of planning in this respect yast that ships would, where
possible, sail direct from South America. though some trans-shipment in th
United Kingdom might be necessary. 300 tons of nort for Christmas reached
Ostend at the end of November.
356
Ration Scale Amendments
In December, 1944, certain increases in the ration scale were authorized
for the purpose of providing more nourishment in bulk, in view
thing conditions and weather experiences.
These were as follows: —
of bad
For forward
For all troops: Oatmeal, f-oz.; flour, 1-oz.; baking powder $.-0z.
troops.
Skimmed milk powder,
}-Oz.; cheese, jam,
preserved meat, and flour, l-oz. each; rice and oatmeal -oz, each,
For hospitals: Egg powder, 54-lb. for 1,000 patients a month.
In January, 1945, an addition was made of f-oz. daily of egg powder, for
forward troops only (limited to 500,000 men daily).
A new sea passage ration, on the lines of the old B.E.F. voyage and land-
ing ration, was introduced (see Appendix IX for its composition), to cover
both feeding on the voyage and ships' reserve, while one 24-hour ration world
be issued as a landing ration.
This new procedure obviated the waste which
had previously resulted from 14-men Compo ration packs being broken open
for the sake of the attractive items, when the necessity for consuming the full
ration did not arise.
Bread Production
Increasing commitments and the manpower shortage, together with the
remarkable success of the reorganized mobile bakeries, led 21 Army Group
to convert their eight field bakeries to 14 mobile field bakeries.
represented a nominal increase in bread-baking capacity of 152,000 lb. daily.
It saved more than 200 tradesmen bakers, of whom there was an acute short-
age, and effected a net saving of 28 all ranks.
The equipment for the new
units was sent from the United Kingdom, the ovens of the disbanded bakeries
being kept for operation by German prisoners of war.
At the end of September, 1944, 21 Army Group agreed to the reduction
of stocks held against possible air supply of non-airborne forces, then stand-
ing at seven dave for a livicion and fue dous for a brigade group, the scales
which had keen deridad for a snacific nie maintenance commitment at the
start of the invasion of Europe.
Commitments and the arrangemante for their storage and protection during
These stocks were now too large for existing
the winter would have abran a very large and expensive task.
The holding
for a division or armourad division was therefore reduced to five days, and
that for a brigade mour was abolished.
When Rruscela and Antwern were reached maintenance bu air became
imperative, and a H.O. C.R.A.S.C. transport column, trained in air freight
organization was brought up from R.M.A. to take control.
By 13th Septem-
ber, this H.Q., with two D.I.Ds. had handled 6350 tons of stores, and th
400 to 500 tons a day.
tonnage of air fraight induraced throudhant the month with an average o
and in the Civil Affairs Section of A.F.H.Q. in the North African and Italian
Solid Fuels Section, S.H.A.E.F.
Although thare had heen in the ST Directorate of the B.E.F. in 1940
campaigns, small staff sections dealing with coal problems of a military nature
357
249t7
717
WO 277/2k
27
WO277726
