R.E.M.E. liaison officers were attached to deal with the supply of assem.
blies from base workshops.
In all, over 5,000 vehicles were reconditioned
in a period of four months by about 600 personnel of all categories, about
75 per cent. of the vehicles being classified as third line repairs.
expedient not been adopted, it was considered doubtful
Had this
required for Sicily and Italy could have been equipped.
if the transport
The percentage of spare
engine assemblies for R.A.S.C. vehicles was
increased in 1941 from 25 per cent. to 33 per cent. on the grounds that
R.A.S.C. vehicles covered a greater mileage in a given period than did those
of R.A.O.C.
maintenance, for which
the 25
per cent.
figure had been
accepted as adequate.
It may be noted here that, after the second battle of Libya, D.D.S.I.
Eighth Army, expressed the opinion that the provision of mobile workshops
as an integral part of R.A.S.C. transport companies had again fully proved
its worth.
Inspectorate of M.T.
An Inspectorate of M.T.
was formed in Middle East in October, 1940,
under a C.I.M.T.
The main duties of the branch were: —
(a) Technical advice to D.S.T.
(b) Guidance of Os.C. M.T. units in the inspection and maintenance
(c) Investigation of defects.
(d) Production of necessary modifications of vehicles and equipment.
The C.I.M.T. was also permanent chairman of the Defects Committe,
a member of the M.T. Advisory Board, Middle East, and member of the
G.H.Q. Fuel and Lubricants Technical Sub-Committee.
When the branch was formed, the number of vehicles on R.A.S.C. charge
was about 4,500.
As this number grew, it became necessary to expand the
number of Inspection Sections, each of which consisted of one inspector, two
mechanist staff serjeants, and a technical M.T. clerk.
During the period ol
the most intensive operations, May, 1943, and of the greatest length of the
L. of C., there were ten sections at work, the scale of allotment being one for
3.500 vehicles.
It was the original intention that every vehicle should be inspected once
every
three
months,
but,
owing to shortage of staff, and the enormous
distances, this figure dropped to once every six months for a time; but finally
a frequency of once every four months was obtained.
In January, 1943, the Branch was amalgamated with the Petrol Insper:
torate (q.v.), and the combined organization was named the
" Inspectorate
of M.T.
10 Colonel.
and P.O.L.", the appointment of Chief inspector being upgraded
Horse Transport
With the
general shortage of M.T.
desert L. me Sonal with the need for the strictest economy in petrol and
owing to the lengthening of the
1 of C. areas
as much use as possible was made of horse transport in base and
The first horse transport company,
was formed, mainly
for work in the Base Ordnance Depot, in early 1941.
Two more companies
were formed that year, another in 1942, and four more in 1943.
176
Each company was composed of seven British R.A.S.C. officers, 43
ted up to 200 wagons, with a maximum load of two tons each.
Briish other ranks, and 486 locally-main, non-enlisted cis lians, and opera-
the wagons were locally produced, and had pneumatic tyred wheels.
These units were used for short hauls in base areas and installations,
and on dock clearance.
At times the two companies in Syria handled as
much as 28,000 tons a week, whilst the two in Palestine averaged 20,800
tons, from which it is clear that the saving in M.T. was considerable.
loads were of all natures.
The companies were also used on road and
airfield construction, and did valuable work during the building of the
Haifa-Beirut railway.
The companies in Palestine and Syria were controlled from the technical
point of view by a group headquarters.
The Campaign in Eritrea and the Sudan
Soon after the entry of Italy into the war in June, 1940, the Italians
captured the frontier posts of Kassala and Gallabat, in the Sudan, and thus
threatened Khartum and Port Sudan,
and consequently our Red Sea com-
munications.
They did not exploit this advantage, however, and withdrew
from Kassala in the middle of January, 1941, pursued by 4 and 5 Indian
Divisions, each less a brigade, until they took up a very strong defensive
position at Keren, 150 miles east of Kassala, our railhead.
A major operation was necessary to dislodge the enemy, but the admini-
strative difficulties were considerable.
There was insufficient road trans-
port both for maintenance and build-up of battle reserves, but this deficiency
was overcome, and the main attack began on 15th March, 1941, the position
being taken 12 days later.
4 Indian Division was then withdrawn to fight in the Western Desert,
and 5 Indian Division took up the pursuit, capturing Massawa, the port
and principal town of Eritrea, on 8th April.
resistance were then Amba Alagi and Gondar, in Abyssinia.
The main enemy centres of
The opera-
tions in connection with the latter place are described in Chapter IX,
Section 2 (East Africa).
Amba Alagi was 235 miles south of Massawa, and 5 Indian Division
attacked it on 4th May.
The town surrendered on 15th May, and the Italian
forces in East Africa capitulated next day.
The operations in the Gallabat sector were of a minor character only.
S.T. Organization in Sudan, 1939-1940
Until September.
1940, the senior R.A.S.C. officer in the Sudan was
the O.C., R.A.S.C., Khartum, a major.
There were six R.A.S.C.
vehicles
in that place, and a service company of the Sudan Defence Force had about
30 load-carriers.
The supply depot in Khartum held 120 days' reserves and
30 days' working mare su for 2,300, the normal British garrison.
The normal
supply routes were by sta from Port Said to Port Sudan, and thence by
rail or by the Nile Valley route.
Rations were not normally issued to the Sudan Defence Force in peace-
time, except on patrol,
when supplies were bought locally under unit
177
WO277zt
27
WO 277/26
