arrangements.
Although authority was given to issue rations to all me.
bers of the Force away from their home stations, and later to all the S.D.F.
they organization remained practically separate from the R.A.S.C. supply
service.
The Sudan Government had laid in a reserve of 2•4 million gallons of
petrol in the early months of 1939, to cover both military and civil require.
ments.
Neither G.H.Q., Middle East, nor O.C., R.A.S.C., Khartum, knew
anything about this reserve, which was spread over 32 locations, in 4-galon
non-returnable tins, which were oiled to prevent leakage and corrosion.
In September,
1940, an A.D.S.T., an R.A.S.C. officer, was sent to take
charge of the S.T. services in the Sudan.
Although the greater part of the
work in connection with these services was carried out by R.IA.S.C. units,
the Directorate Staff was composed of R.A.S.C. officers, except for the
D.A.D.T., who was R.I.A.S.C.
Developments in Sudan in 1940
After Italy entered the war, plans were approved for the establishment
of Base Supply Depots at Khartum and Atbara, and R.A.S.C. officers were
sent to Port Sudan and other places, but without any staff.
In September,
1940, the situation improved with the arrival of a number of R.I.A.S.C.
supply units, which were used to establish a Base Supply Depot at Khartum,
an Advanced Supply Depot at Atbara, and a Transit Supply Depot at Port
Sudan.
Field Supply Depots were also set up at various points to maintain
the troops confronting the Italians.
Supplies began to arrive to build up
reserves to 150 days for 8,000 British and 16,500 Indian troops, and the situ-
ation was difficult until an Indian Base Supply Depot arrived, and took over
the three main
depots,
arrangement
TOTI
which it was not properly
organized
There was a serious shortage of covered accommodation as the
permanent depots were not yet ready.
The reserves were further increased
in December by 75 days for an additional force of 12,000 British and 19,000
Indian troops.
Not all the supply units asked for arrived, and there was to be a shortage
later,
in spite of which the supply service was successfully operated.
only increase in transport, apart from the second line of the two Indian
divisions,
was about 50 locally purchased vehicles for the
Service Com-
pany, until a section of a Cypriot G.T. Company arrived in October, 1940.
At the end of that year, a reserve M.T. company was formed with Sudanese
There were no military P.O.L. units in the Sudan until an India
Petrol Depot came in October,
1940.
About that time,
the local reserves
were increased by the receipt of 2,000 tons of petrol originally intended ter
Aden and British Somaliland.
the Shell Company's plant at Port Sudan.
Half of this was in bulk, and was tinned by
Situation after the Recapture of Kassala
town was taken into
When the Italians evacuated Kassala at the end of January, 1941, this
the railhead for supplies,
petrol.
Keren.
It was from here that the racerves were built up for the attack of
ammunition, and
In consequence of the shortage of transport, 5 Indian Division wa
withdrawn to an area from 20 to 40 miles in front of Kassala,
trom which
it could maintain itself with its own
first line transport.
All second line
178
transport was then pooled under H.Q., Troops, Sudan, and employed in
a third line capacity during the preparatory phase.
The main dumps were
established at and forward of Agordat, a run of about 140 miles from rail.
In addition to the Indian transport companies, there were also four
companies of the South African Cape M.T.
Corps, composed of coloured
These covered the 280-mile turnround in two days,
by leaving early on the first day, going straight through and delivering their
the trip and reloading the second day, and leaving again on the third.
loads, and returning about one-third of the distance that evening, competing
were no doubt excessive, and there was a lack of time for maintenance, but
the tactical urgency had to take precedence over the administrative objection.
The target figure for the dumping programme was 14 days' supplies and
P.O.L., besides over 100,000 rounds of gun ammunition.
all in uncrated 4-gallon tins, and a loss of 25-30 per cent. between railhead
and Agordat was reckoned on.
To supplement M.T. and to try and reduce
leakage, petrol was sent up by camel convoys, hired for the purpose, and
at one time these were working in an almost continuous stream.
It was found essential to centralize the control of all transport under
"Q" Staff, in order to settle conflicting claims of the services.
able transport was allotted every evening, a constant figure for daily main-
tenance, and the balance for reserves as necessary.
A hastily formed M.T. company was sent from Egypt in February, 1941,
with the object of retrieving and operating captured Italian vehicles, the
number of which that could be quickly brought into service having been
optimistically but inexpertly estimated at 100.
In fact, after a fortnight, 14
were on the road, and they were in an appalling condition, the tyres being
Two R.A.S.C. Pack Transport Companies, with Cypriot drivers, arrived
at the end of February, and did valuable work during the battle of Keren.
In this connection, it may be mentioned here that an animal transport com-
pany of the S.D.F., with about 1,000 Cypriot and Abyssinian mules, was
later employed in the Gondar area, lifting stores about 20 miles beyond
railhead to maintain about 15,000 native troops.
By about the time the main attack was launched on Keren, the railway
was brought forward to Tessenei, reducing the road run by
the building up of the reserves was completed from there.
During the campaign, there were no P.O.L. depots, as such, in the forward
areas, the work being done by the D.I.Ds. and F.S.Ds. in accordance with
the Indian Army practice, except for a detachment of the Indian Petrol
Depot, which was located at the Railhead Supply Depot at Kassala, and
dealt with the whole of the maintenance requirements for the two divisions,
difficulty in the supply of P.O.L. during the advance.
At no time was there any real anxiety or major
After the Capture of Keren
Immediately after the capture of Asmara, 50 miles beyond Keren, and of
Massava, supply ep the wepture oed forward to both places, and the main
La, of C. became depots are more Port Sudan to Massava, then ce by
Had Massawa not been available, the shortage of road
wester
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
