Situation at C.O.H.Q.—July 1942
It is of interest to note the situation at C.O.H.Q. during the months of June and July, 1942.
The Planning Staff was fully occupied with the planning for " Sledgehammer," " Rutter"
"Jubilee" and the investigation of minor raids on the French coast.
Some of these were mounted
but were not executed owing to weather and other causes.
Due to the large increase in the intake of naval personnel, training was proceeding at hieh
pressure; in addition, the military forces required for " Sledgehammer
were getting as mucl
training as possible.
In fact all the training establishments and resources were fully extended anc
occupied.
The Administrative Section of C.O.H.Q. was involved, not only in the move of the craft round
the British Isles to the south coast, but also in the fitting out and commissioning of new ships
which were being embodied in the Combined Operations Command.
In addition, the requirement
for new bases in the south was now being felt and these with the organisation for the hards' and
their necessary supplies was an undertaking of the first priority.
All sections of the staff at C.O.H.Q. were working at high pressure to make a descent on the
French coast in the near future a possibility.
Planning for the Re-entry into the Continent
Contained in the report on the Casablanca Conference (" Symbol") by the Combined Chiefs of
Staff as approved by the President and Prime Minister is the following paragraph :—
" We have agreed to establish forthwith a Combined Staff under a British Chief of
Staff until such a time as a Supreme Commander with an American Deputy is appointed.
A directive to govern the planning is in course of preparation.'
The planning referred to was, of course, that necessary for the operation envisaged for the re-entry
into the Continent.
The appointment of such an authority had been foreshadowed in an aide mémoire by the
Secretary of C.O.S. Committee prior to a meeting of the Chiefs of Staff with the
planners which was held on 22nd August, 1942.
The relevant paragraphs read as follows :—
" (6) The next and most important point is how the planning for 1943 is to be organised. No
final decision has been taken by the Chiefs of Staff about this.
One idea is that a
Senior British Army Commander should be made responsible for directing the planning.
He would presumably be the Deputy Supreme Commander.
He would have under
him a Combined Joint Planning Staff, the heads of which would be drawn from the
three British Services and from the appropriate American Services.
The top level for
this Joint Staff would, it is suggested, be of Brigadier or equivalent rank. This syndicate
would have at their disposal the considerable quantity of information and material
which has already been collected for ' Round-up.'
(7) Another suggestion, put forward by General Eisenhower, was that the C.C.O. should
take charge of the planning.
(8) An alternative
proposal is that the Executive Planning Section (E.P.S.) of the Joint
Planning Staff should be augmented to deal with the planning.
co-ordinating director should remain.
The principle for a
whichever method is adopted."
C.C.O.'s Staff would of course be brought ir
With regard to para. 7 of the aide memoire, General Eisenhower, in his book "Crusade in
Europe" referring to his visit to London in 1942, says :—
"With these general ideas in mind but with no detailed studies upon which to make a
firm conclusion, I went to an informal meeting with the British Chiefs of Staff.
Shortly
after the conference began, I was invited to present my general views concerning the nature
of the projected operation.
substance:
Speaking as an American planner assigned to the War Depart-
ment in Washington, and with no idea that I would later be assigned to Britain, I said in
*The first thing to do is to name a commander for the operation. That man must
be given every bit of power that both governments can make available to him.
He must be
directed to plan for an invasion of Europe on the basis that it will certainly be successful,
at least to the extent of establishing on the Continent a solid tront capable of carrying out
effective operations against the Germans.
He must be directed instantly to prepare his
outlined plan and to submit to the Chiefs of Staff his requirements not only in troops at all
kinds but in all types of additional equipment-land, sea and air.
over numerous specially constructed hords where craft could beach and vehicles embark unimpeded by soft
1 Normal south coast port facilities being inadequate,
and training had to be carried out
56
7/17
WO 277/21
7
3Ф
L.C.T. (3)—Bow view.
D.U.K.W.s going aboard landing craft in Salerno harbour
