APPENDIX y
C.A.F.O. 2491-COMBINED OPERATIONS ORGANISATIONS (HOME)
C.A.F.O. 566/42 (M.019292/41.-25.12.1941.)
When acting in an advisory capacity he uses the title
two main headings-
' Adviser on Combined Operations.'
Combined Operations " (short title-C.C.O.).
I.-ADVISORY
2. He acts as Adviser on Combined Operations under the general direction of the Chiefs of Staff.
He also acts in this capacity to all Commanders-in-Chief at home and Force Commanders in connection
with any combined operation which they are carrying out.
It is incumbent on any
playne ange do combined op as tie as of tul result the earliest moment, and to keep him it- Chic
Commander-in-Chief
3. He is assisted in his advisory duties by an inter-Service staff headed by Naval, Military, Royal
Air Force and Royal Marine advisers.
This staff also assists in planning those raids which are carried
out by the forces directly under the command of the Commodore, Combined Operations, and is available
to advise Commanders-in-Chief in the planning of raids to be carried out under their jurisdiction.
I.—EXECUTIVE
COMMAND
4. (a) All combined operational establishments and bases in the British Isles and the Special Service
Troops (Commandos) are under the command of the C.C.O.
(1) Spi ombie peo i commit i hen the the plat ales tre to
of a Force Commander appointed for the execution of a specific operation.
of such ships will in either case be controlled in the normal naval manner.
The movement
(c) Merchant Navy ships which may be allocated by the Admiralty for combined operational
purposes will be attached to the C.C.O.'s command or that of the Force Commander as
ADMINISTRATION
5. The administration of the above commands and attached ships, the naval units of which continue
to remain the C.C.O.'s responsibility unless they are permanently detached from the Home Stations,
is carried out as follows : —
Bases and Establishments
6. The Rear-Admiral Landing Craft and Bases (R.A.L.B.) is responsible to the C.C.O. for the naval
administration of all bases
and establishments under C.C.O.'s command.
The Senior Naval Officer,
Combined Operations (S.N.O.C.O.) at each of these bases and establishments deals with routine questions
of naval administration, in so far as possible, through the normal local channels.
Ships and Craft (other than T.L.C.)
7. Ships allocated for combined operational purposes in the British Isles, and their associated
landing and raiding craft, may be organised into one or more groups.
the usual manner by the Admiralty.
The allocations will be made in
8. All such ships, including R.F.A.s and Merchant Navy ships will be under the command of the
Senior Officer, Assault Ships and Craft (S.O.A.S.C.), who will receive his orders from the C.C.O.
When
my ships or craft are required for an operation they will be ive his under the orders of the Force
Commander concerned.
navalitation of these ships will be carried out througm and noto take charge of, H.M. ships and all
by ste ampointed to the staff of S.O.A.S.C.
direct command of V.A.C.T.C., who will receive his orders from the C.C.O.
9. Any ships which are specifically allocated for training purposes will come automatically under the
be made on representation of the C.C.O. through the Admiralty and D. of S.T.
Allocation of such ships will
210
Tank-Landing Craft
groups of flotillas will be formed into T.L.C. squadrons.
T.L.C. will be formed into flotillas
Classification of Ships and Craft
11. (a) The term " Assault Ships" covers:—
Infantry assault ships, Classes I and II.
Hired transports employed as assault ships.
Tank-landing ships.
M.L.C.-carrying ships, and
T.L.C.-carrying ships
(b) The term " Landing Craft" covers :—
Tank landing craft.
Beach protection craft.
Motor landing craft.
Support landing craft.
Assault landing craft, and
D » bonte
WO 277/21
27
3ф
Commandos
sS. Brigade under the C.C.O.
12. The Commandos are formed into the Special Service Brigade commanded by the Commander
are specially trained for landings on a hostile shore.
Their administration is the responsibility of the War Office.
Commandos
Beyond such tasks as the C.C.O. may allot to them,
they will be available for specific combined operations when they will be placed temporarily under the
Force Commander appointed for that operation.
TRAINING
Air Commodore (A.C.C.T.C.) and their respective staffs.
EXPERIMENTS AND DEVELOPMENT
14. The Commandant of the Combined Operations Development Centre (C.O.D.C.) at Eastney is
responsible to the C.C.O. for examining and experimenting with craft and equipment in connection with
combined operations and also for keeping up to date with current doctrine at home and abroad with a
view to anticipating future developments.
15. The normal responsibility of Admiralty, War Ofice and Air Ministry Technical De combines
applies to all combined operational ships, craft, vehicles, aircraft and equipment.
operational authorities should maintain full co-operation with the departments concerned.
MANNING
Ships and Base Staffs
16. This will be conducted in the usual manner by the Admiralty and depots.
Landing and Raiding Craft
17. The forming of crews for landing and raiding craft will be arranged by R.A.L.B. in conjunction
with the Admiralty and the War Office.
18. All combined operational personnel other than those in the Middle East will continue to be
borne on the books of Quebec and lent to bases and ships as the occasion demands.
MAINTENANCE
19. Repair requirements and the allocation and distribution of spare gear will be co-ordinated by
Requests for facilities
COMBINED OPERATIONS HEADQUARTERS
at 2, Theon bined operations Headquarter. (to one With in to Ta Cannot An the
The Commodore, the
Autor i ho a great, he col, Datin men on titton the Chit of sat this to quarting
staff are all housed in C.O.H.Q.
will control, in conjunction with the Admiralty, the detailing and movements of all assault shipping and
anding craft in the British Isles.
211
