5. Secondly, the most critical period will be that between the lifting of the naval and
air bombardment before the first troops get ashore, and the time when the Army can get
We have not yet evolved a satisfactory solution to this
will depend
experience
and on the rest a hope to achieve in forthcoming practical trains.
'Husky
The answer
may lie in a combination of a number of measures, viz.: a carefully co-ordinated fire plan
from the guns of surface ships and from a variety of weapons mounted in landing craft ;
development of a highly trained force fully equipped with special weapons and machinery
to enable them to overcome the obstacles they are bound to meet on the beach; the landing
of the maximum possible number of airborne troops in the rear of the enemy defences and
the landing of a large number of Commandos, probably under the cloak of darkness,
difficult and therefore undefended landing points.
On the other hand, there is a limit to
the number of mixed groups which the Navy can hope to control off-shore.
There is also a
limit to the number of airborne troops we shall have at our disposal.
The First Corps under
the direction of the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, is engaged on the problem and
the matter will be carried a step further at the practical trials referred to above.
The Com-
manders-in-Chief made it quite clear at the Conference that a solution has got to be found.
6. Thirdly, the Army is at present inclined to the view that it will be necessary to assault
in darkness, or at first light, in order to give the troops the best chance of gaining a footing.
The Commander-in-Chief, Portsmouth, is doubtful whether it will be possible to assemble
a large number of mixed groups of craft at sea in the dark and it may be that, if the Army
cannot evolve a more simple plan, naval considerations will force us to set about the landing
in daylight. In these circumstances it will be all the more necessary to soften the area before
the assault and for airborne troops to tackle the enemy defences from the rear.
7. With regard to training, subject to the proviso that training areas, where live
ammunition can be fired and where there is suitable accommodation for troops and vehicles,
are made available.
which were proposed at the Conference.
d he the Conders in hit express thist tie Nail the aura forme at
Portsmouth will be ready by the time 3 Cdn. Div. has completed basic training.
on the other hand, will complete basic training by the middle of August and will then
carry on battalion assault training at Kilbride until the Rosyth Collective Training Area
is ready in October.
The dates by which the American Naval Assault Forces will be ready
are not available, but it is assumed that this will soon be known.
The American Divisions
are receiving their preliminary basic and assault training in America and will only have to
carry out collective training when they arrive in the United Kingdom towards the end of the
year.
8. A number of more detailed conclusions were reached at the Conference.
Among
these is an important one proposing an organisation for opening up beaches and ports
on the French coast. I have lodged a copy of the full proceedings of the Conference with the
Secretariat for purposes of record but do not propose to circulate them to the Chiefs of Staff
unless they wish me to do so.
on which the Chiefs of Staff may wish to issue instructions.
I do, however, attach an annex containing
certain points
who might be instructed to initiate action on these various items.
I have suggested the authorities
9. Commanders-in-Chief, Commanding General E.T.O.U.S.A. and C.O.S.S.A.C. have
seen this report and are in general agreement with it.
(Signed) LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN,
Chief of Combined Operations."
The Annex to this paper is given as Appendix 13.
Morgan (C.O.S.S.A.C.) records in his book :—
So much for the official report of the Conference and here it is appropriate to quote what General
" The Master Plan
What was wanted was a lodgment area into which we could blast ourselves against
such opposition as we were likely to meet there, and from which our main bodies, having
suitably concentrated themselves within it, could erupt to develop the campaign eastwards;
If one analysed this definition it seemed to contain all the various desiderata.
question of weighing up and assessing the value of each constituent factor.
It was a
The greater the
Opposition or the more difficult the beach conditions than the heavier must be the air
1 Overture to " Overlord."
TAEDTLER
rover.
This consideration drew us towards the Pas de Calais, where our air could give its
maximum and where the shipping ' turn-round'
would be quickest.
Rut the Germans
their defensive preparations were nicely graded along the
coald te accord with their estimate of the situation which inevitably asted pattity th
That being so, where could he find a deciding factor? In all probability this
would turn out to be the matter of major parts to the requisite capacity without which it
would be impossible to contemplate even prolonged occupation of a lodgment area by an
army of some 25 to 30 divisions, let alone its reinforcement up to some 100 divisions to be
maintained in action. Major ports are not plentiful on that section of the coast of North-West
Europe to which other considerations confined our attention.
Between Brest and Antwerp
there exist only Cherbourg and Le Havre that are in the class for consideration as military
base ports.
Did we land on the Pas de Calais beaches, we should have to gain possession
of either Le Havre or Antwerp before we could claim to have done that which was demanded
fus. For the port capacity of the Boulogne, Calais, Dunkirk group of minor ports, even afte
estoration which could take months probably, would be nothing like adequate to our purpose
If we went nap on Cherbourg, the objective of several previous projects, we should have
trouble in debouching from the Cotentin peninsula.
And debouch therefrom we should
have to, since the capacity of Cherbourg alone, even if intact and in thorough working
order, would suffice to maintain only a fraction of our projected Advanced Guard, itself but
a fraction of the whole expedition.*
If we made for Western Normandy we should find Le
Havre unfortunately across the Seine from us and should have to turn back westward
overland to Cherbourg.
And so on.
It was here in the matter of Cherbourg that we ran once more into the obstacle presented
by a misunderstood or partly misunderstood catch phrase.
In all the planning that had
gone on in relation to the re-entry into Europe, a point had naturally been reached when all
lad been found to depend upon ' the early capture of a port.
As I have said, past
lanning had been so handicapped that in any such cases as had been worked in detail
a port
would have sufficed to carry such traffic as was envisaged.
Of necessity also
thought had come to centre on Cherbourg as the port in question.
We ourselves fell
into the trap for a space and it took a week or two to grasp that what was necessary
for us was not a port, but some ports.
Cherbourg might well be the first of these to
be acquired, but our expedition was to be of a magnitude undreamed of before.
taner
it is little exaggeration to say that the sheer size of ' Overlord' was little appreciated
by some of the British high-ups until very late in the day.
Some, I believe, still do
not appreciate how comparatively small a contribution to the whole, from the physical
aspect, was the British portion. I must admit that even I, who had thought and dreamed
of nothing else for years by then, was astonished at the sense of vastness conveyed by the
ubsequent film of the operation, previewed in company with General Eisenhower at
Frankfurt in July, 1945.
To resolve the tangle we decided to institute within the C.O.S.S.A.C. Staff a formal
comparison of the two main alternatives that appeared to exist as the outcome of all
previous planning. It will be remembered that the Staff was not as yet fully integrated, so
that it was fortunately
situated to function simultaneously on the two parallel lines.
Accordingly, the United States Army members of the Army Operations Section were directed
to produce an outline plan for a projected operation against Normandy and their British
counterpart was ordered to do likewise for an operation against the Pas de Calais.
The
Naval and Air Staffs, both still weak on the United States side, were directed to participate
equally in both projects.
Since it was evident from the start that allotted résources in
landing craft were not sufficient to admit of any subsidiary operation or diversion from the
mainst oft, each plains A.C, United States was Boeh, easte oathe meth.
United States and British, was told to assume that it might
The development of the contest was closely watched by a small ' gallery
' consisting
not only of the Chief of Staff and Deputy Chief of Staff, who had been careful to exclude
themselves from this phase of the affair, but also of a few privileged observers from outside,
Sir Bernard Paget, then commanding British Home Forces,
General Jacob Devers, Com-
manding
General of the E.T.O.U.S.A., and, of course, the Chief of Combined Operations,
Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten. It was tough going and feeling ran high. We, the Deputy
Chief of Staff and I, knew that the moment was approaching when we should have to make
up our minds not only as to which of the two alternatives being worked out would prove to
be the less uninviting, but, even worse whether or este the thing out possible ovati.
We should, in fact, have to answer the supplementary question we had to put to ourselves
in the first instance, ' If so, how, and if not, why not'
(C52794)
20294;
WO 277/21
27
30
