hold one or more of these appointments; or, where administrative duties only
were involved, without the command of personnel, one oficer might hold the
appointment of Oficer in charge of R.A.S.C. Duties, and cover all three
The organization of the supplies and transport staff at the headquarters
of field formations followed the same general lines.
General Headquarters, British Expeditionary Force, originally included
He was assisted by a Deputy Director of
a D.S.T., covering both services.
Supplies and a Deputy Director of Transport, whose functions are self-evident,
and whose staff consisted of an A.D.S. and D.A.D.S., and an A.D.T. and
D.A.D.T., respectively.
At the headquarters of the lines of communication, a Deputy Director of
Supplies and Transport was responsible for the maintenance of the supply and
transport services at the base and on the L. of C.
The Base Supply Depots and Base M.T. installations were, however, under
the direct control of G.H.Q.
An A.D.S.T. was responsible for the services in each L. of C. and Base
Sub-area, with Os.C., R.A.S.C. where necessary for the executive command
of groups of R.A.S.C. units, depots, etc.
In the field formations, there was an A.D.S.T. at each corps headquarters,
assisted by a D.A.D.S. and a D.A.D.T.; he also had an adjutant, as, in this
case, he was the commander of the corps troops R.A.S.C. units, and not
only a technical adviser.
In each division, there was a Commander, R.A.S.C., at once the technical
adviser of the Divisional Commander, and the regimental and executive
Commander of the R.A.S.C. companies in the formation.
a senior supply officer, for supply and petrol duties; an R.A. officer was
attached for technical ammunition duties.
G.H.Q. Home Forces
On the outbreak of war, a Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, was appoin-
ted for the purpose of co-ordinating, and if necessary assuming executive
control of, the organization for Home Defence and Internal Security.
It was the intention that he and his staff should be required to undertake
the minimum of administrative work, and that this should be confined to such
administrative details as were inseparable from the operational aspects of
home defence and internal security. All administrative questions, other than
these and matters of general policy affecting the Army quartered in the United
commands.
Kingdom, continued therefore to be dealt with direct between War Office and
The A.D.S.T., who was appointed to G.H.O., Home Forces, had conse-
quently, in common with the representatives of other services, functions of 8
liaison and advisory character, and he had no one sive responsibilities for
supply and transport services.
Although his sta executi have been augmenied
in the event of invasion, it was not the intention to alter the existing arranger
ments in this respect.
The appointment of A.D.S.T. was later unaraded to that of DD ST.
10
Developments during the War
The S. and T. organization in the United Kingdom remained substantially
unchanged throughout the war, except in so far as the pattern was modified
to cover new developments and commitments, following in this respect the
general lines of the changes in organization which took place in the Directorate
of Supplies and Transport at the War Office.
Thus, provision was made on
the staff of D.D.S.Ts. of commands, and of Os.C.,
R.A.S.C., of districts, of
officers to deal with P.O.L., catering, and, where necessary, water transport
duties.
Developments in the S. and T. organization in overseas theatres followed
the same course.
The only remarkable variation, already mentioned, was the
splitting-up of the duties of the original D.S.T.
of the B.E.F., France,
1939, between a Director of Supplies and a Director of Transport.
The cir-
cumstances, involving the build-up of a huge organization from almost negli-
gible beginnings,
were,
of course,
exceptional, and the task was, in many
ways, far more difficult than that of the Directors of Supplies and Transport
of subsequent expeditionary forces, who had the benefit of practical experience,
both in themselves and their staffs and subordinates, and of improved and tried
organization, methods, and materials.
At any rate, the two services were not
again divorced in this way in any case throughout the war.
Cs.,
were introduced to command, and direct the work of, all sorts of
groups of R.A.S.C. units, e.g., supply units,
transport columns, and so on.
The organization in field formations (apart from that of the actual units,
the changes in which are described elsewhere in this volume) underwent little
change in the course of the war in any theatre.
the staff of a C.R.A.S.C., of a division, or a corps troops or other transport
column, was that of a major for transport, which included the supervision of
the R.A.S.C. vehicle maintenance organization.
S.T.—Home Commands
At the outbreak of war, the S.T. staffs at headquarters of home commands,
which in peacetime had consisted only of an A.D.S.T. (colonel) and a
D.A.D.S.T. (in the larger commands), were reinforced. The À.D.S.T. became
a D.D.S.T., (brigadier) with two A.Ds.S.T., for supplies and transport respec-
tively to assist him,
and the necessary junior staff officers.
The latter
consisted of five D.A.Ds.S.T.,
for supplies, petrol, personnel, and transport
(two), respectively.
The two D.A.Ds.S.T. for transport dealt with the admini-
strative and operational aspects of transport respectively.
There were also
four staff captains, for supplies, petrol, and transport (two), and a technical
transport officer (captain), for technical questions connected wth the main-
tenance of R.A.S.C. vehicles, the supervision of workshops, etc.
With the growing importance of the A.T.S. element in the R.A.S.C. services,
it became increasingly evident that A.T.S. representation on the staff of the
D.D.S.T. of a home command was required, to provide the necessary liaison
and advice.
It was decided that a senior A.T.S. officer, with experience of
M.T. company duties, should be selected to watch A.T.S. questions dealt with
by S.T. at command headquarters.
A senior commander was accordingly
appointed D.A.D.S.T.(A.T.S.) in each command.
WO 277/21.
27
W027 7/26
