Preparation and Rehearsal
The provision of the necessary ships and craft for the operation entailed the concentration in
the Solent of the five Belgian L.S.I. (S), the two Dutch L.S.I. (M) and the L.S.I. (L) Glengyle which
was on her way home after taking part in Operation " Ironclad
In addition, twenty-four L.C.T. and twenty L.C.P. (L) were also required to facilitate the
training of the troops, certain of the latter were based at Newhaven where the Coastal Force base
provided facilities for maintenance and
This concentration was in all respects complete by ist June, 1942.
Two full scale rehearsals were carried out using the small harbour of West Bay (Bridport) on
13th June and 23rd June.
The second rehearsal was ordered by the C.C.O. because the Military
Commander represented that the standard of precision of the landing craft was not good enough
for an operation of this complexity.
This second rehearsal, which was attended by the C.C.O.,
proved more successful and he decided to carry out the operation on the first favourable date
after 24th June.
Postponement and Cancellation
During the last week in June and the first week in July, the weather deteriorated and on
5th July, the operation was postponed, but the weather continued to be unfavourable which resulted
in the operation being cancelled on 7th July.
Early on that morning, the Princess Josephine
Charlotte and Princess Astrid had been bombed and both ships were hit, the damage to the former
Consequent upon the cancellation, the military forces returned to their various training areas
in Sussex and Surrey.
General Montgomery, as G.O.C.-in-C., Southern Command, was opposed to
remounting the operation, but the Prime Minister was most insistent that a large scale operation
should take place during the summer of 1942 and the C.I.G.S. was most emphatic that the planning
for the main invasion could not proceed until an operation of that scale had taken place.
A raid on Bayonne had been mounted but, on arrival of the landing craft off the harbour bar,
the swell was found to be too great.
in avell vai rund o be to nott. Operation " latine" ad aist aneley !
" against Alderney had been prepared
This was virtually
defeat, all this work and nothing to show for it ; it was bad for morale.
Although this interval might have led to a loss of security, the extraordinary steps taken to
ensure secrecy were effective and when the operation came off, on 19th August, 1942, the enemy
were taken completely by surprise.
New Directive Operation " Jubilee "
On 27th July, 1942, a new directive for a raid on Dieppe was given by the Chiefs of Staff to
the C.C.O. which ran as follows :—
"The outline plan, for a raid is to be prepared by the Chief of Combined Operations
who will then obtain the agreement or comments of the Commanders-in-Chief concerned or
their representatives and the Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (Home).
with these comments will then be submitted by the Chief of Combined Operations to the
Chiefs of Staff Committee.
If approved, Force Commanders will then be appointed and
made responsible under the Chief of Combined Operations for the detailed planning of the
When the detailed plan and the orders of the Force Commanders are completed they
are to be approved by the Chief of Combined Operations who should obtain the agreement
or comments of the authorities he has already consulted when submitting the outline plan.
The Chief of Combined Operations is to be responsible for launching the operatión in
consultation with those authorities and subject to the approval of the Naval Commander-
known as Operation " Jubilee.'
It was under this directive that the C.C.O. launched the operation against Dieppe which was
Alterations to the Plan
the main changes in the plan for this new operation were that the Commandos were to carry
wit the neutralisation of the flanking batteries instead of the parachute troops and that the
condrawal had to take place on one tide instead of two. The Comparados vere introduced because
Lord and, as far as is known, the Defence Committee were never consuleid.
Even the First
That it was one of the
best guarded secrets of the war is borne out, not only by our own intelligence sources, but by
captured enemy records after the war.
New Naval Force Commander
When the operation was cancelled in July, the Admiralty posted the original Naval Force
Commander and his Chief of Staff to new appointments.
When the decision was taken to remount the operation, C.-in-C., Portsmouth objected to the
si tanto on to Tara and vasorel difre o mercato raio 6e
for such complicated operations because it
operation was to take place, he must have, in his opinion, a Force Commander and staff familiar
with the plan and technique. This meant taking them from C.O.H.Q. and C.C.O., readily agreed.
The Admiralty therefore appointed Captain J. Hughes-Hallett as Naval Force Commander and
Commander (Acting Captain) J. D. Luce as Chief of Staff on 17th July, 1942. The Prime Minister
personally approved the plan.
Planning at C.O.H.Q.
The Outline Plan for " Jubilee" was produced in C.O.H.Q., because C.C.O. was responsible
for preparing the Outline Plan and for mounting raids in N.W. Europe.
Facilities were available
there for the staff of G.H.Q. Home Forces and the Force Commanders, when appointed, to make
their detailed plans. This was a great advantage to the Force Commanders because :-
(1) Usually their own headquarters were situated miles apart.
(2) They had the members of the Combined Staff, who could give them first hand
information on any subject required, readily at hand.
(3) The Intelligence Staff at C.O.H.Q. could provide accurate and up-to-date data on which
the Commanders could base their plans without having to refer to the Service Ministries.
(4) Any unusual equipment required for the operation could be provided at short notice.
SECTION (ii)
LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE OPERATION
From the point of view of the eventual invasion of the Continent the lessons learnt from
Operation " Jubilee" were most valuable.
It is true to say that they formed the basis for the
future organisation, training, technique and research for Combined Operations against a defended
Frontal Assault
The main lesson learned was that a frontal assault on a defended port was not praticable and
none was carried out subsequent to Dieppe.
Naval Support Fire
equiphe opo provide sud icht no standore suppl vessel or craft had the necessary qualities or
The staff at C.O.H.Q. at once set about producing the staff requirements for what was required
and the fact that this staff was a properly integrated body of all three Services ensured that the
question was tackled in the shortest possible time. Designs in blue print form were soon prepared
explained to the Service Ministries where constructive
criticism and co-operation were
Alterations to existing craft were soon adopted but perhaps the most revolutionary idea was
that put forward by Colonel H. Langley, Deputy Director of Experiments and Staff Requirements
(D.D.X. S.R.), who advocated the use of 65-1b. rockets fired from rocket projectors mounted in ships
and craft, and the revolutionary use of a Radar P.P.I. to obtain the exact range.
beach could be drenched with high explosives just prior to the landing craft touching down and the
troops could be ashore and at grips with the defenders before the latter had recovered from the
This system of fire support was used in all subsequent operations and proved most
1 See also Chapter 11, pages 88 and 89.
1977717
WO 277/21
27
30
