Water Transport-Planning and Preparation
Four Motor Boat Companies, under a H.O., C.R.A.S.C., Water Trans-
port Units, were included in the Order of Baitle of 21 Army Group.
pore required as Military Oil Barge Companies, one as a Harbour Launch
Company, and one as a Fast Launch Company for work with Amphibian
Companies.
In addition,
30 fire boats,
their crews,
were required;
20 of these had to be available for D-day.
S.T. I had many difficulties to overcome in the preparation of the wate
transport units for " Overlord" in the limited time available.
Suitable units
had to be designed, not only to fit the operational requirements, but also
with sufficient craft of a suitable type, adequately manned with a limited
manpower ceiling.
In these circumstances, establishments were very diffi-
cult to frame; and in several cases those prepared had to be completely
altered, owing to particular types of craft not being available.
The varied
crew complements were an added complication.
The war equipment lists
also required many amendments before they were completed.
Provision of the heavy operational requirements for the
mounting of
"Overlord" was considerably hampered by enemy action and by the very
slow arrival of essential materials and machinery.
The organization of
civilian overseers proved the necessity for having outside representatives to
progress building and major overhaul programmes.
The building of small vessels which was in progress, and the very limited
supply during this period of craft which would meet operational requirements,
necessitated much study of design, to select the best types.
The peculiar
functions of the waterborne units of the R.A.S.C. necessitated, in many
instances, extensive alteration to the original layout of vessels to provide the
requisite accommodation without detriment to trim.
Organization and Equipment
The two Military Oil Barge Companies were each equipped with 25 barges,
of a capacity of about 80 tons of bulk fuel.
They were organized in five
divisions of five barges each.
They also had a T.I.D. steam tug for salvage
work; seven Division officer' craft; two dumb Minca barges; and two 61g-ft.
M.F.Vs., one for company H.Q., and one for workshops.
The M.O.B. com-
pany workshops were each equipped with a breakdown vehicle, and a work-
shop and store lorry.
The Harbour Launch Company had forty 36-foot harbour launches for
passenger/cargo carrying duties; these were mostly new craft.
The unit also
had two 61f-ft. M.F.Vs., as company WeD. mod workshops respectively; and
a workshop and store lorry.
The Fast Taunch Company was intended to he used for the control of
DUKWs
operating in the
DUKW
companies.
It was organized on a
special War Establishment for a Motor Boat Company,
Type
"E", and
These were
equipped with 30 fast launches of the 40-ft., 45-ft. or 48-ft. type.
with one
organized in four divisions 100 sections of seven launches each,
61z-ft. M.F.V. as division parent ship.
group.
Company headquarters had the other two launches and two 61-ft.
Each division operated with a beach
M.F.Vs., one as company H.Q., and one as workshops.
The unit had an
314
increased workshop establichment, including a Scammell breakdown vehicle
and a 10-ton trailer, in which was carried a milling machine and specialized
equipment.
target-towing duties.
port Companies in the United Kingdom, where they had been emploved on
The launches for this unit were withdrawn from Water Trans-
craft, forty
replacement engines were provided.
In order to ensure adequate running time for each
sipped; a skipa person on trued, and cradles for slipping the craft ere
The vessels had to be
Workshop personnel from all water transport companies were pooled
to den with the work of refitting, and the unit was ready for sea two davs
before the move to the concentration area.
The two Fire Boat Companies, which were Army Fire Service units, con-
sisted of fifteen sections each, a section comprising one vessel with its com-
plement of Army Fire Service fire-fighting personnel and R.A.S.C. ctew.
headquarters included four R.A.S.C. officers.
The
The provision of the personnel
was only made an R.A.S.C. responsibility in April, 1944, and was a severe
strain on R.A.S.C. resources.
M.F.Vs., and 12 converted L.C.Vs.
The programme was for 18 converted 61}-ft.
Conversion proceeded very slowly, and
by the end of May, only three M.F.Vs. had been delivered.
The Admiralty
released ten L.C.Vs.
Owing to the urgent need to find fire boats for 21 Army
Group, it was necessary to equip and send out 75-ft. and 45-ft. M.F.Vs. and
L.C.Vs., and Thames-type fire boats, during the preliminary operations, and
to replace them later with the standard type.
Provision of Craft
The provision of craft to meet the requirements of these units was made
at a time when all the user services in the United Kingdom were short of
small craft to meet even essential needs.
In order that a fair distribution of craft built throughout the world might
be made in accordance with the priority of the user services, committees were
set up.
M.O.W.T. established the Harbour Craft Committee and the Over-
seas Port and Transit Committee, their members representing the major user
services; S.T.1 provided one member for each Committee.
In addition to the allocation of craft by these committees, certain vessels
were provided by building programmes under the control of S.T.l.
availability of essential materials was, at this period, very bad, and the pro-
duction of many craft was retarded for this reason.
Although the 45-ft. and 48ft, launches required for " Overlord" were in
the main drawn from Water Transport companies, the remaining craft were
The first step in the setting un of a catering service for the forces whick
Catering Service-Planning
were to onerate in NW Furone was the appointment of a Chief Catering
Adviser in October, 1943.
required to deal with all formations and laroe units in the force was then
War Establishment of the organization
considered. and it was decided that a pool would prove the best solution
The advantage of a pool of supervisory catering personnel, as against their
inclusion in unit and formation War Catablichments is that. in this way, they
are under the control of the Chief Catering Adviser, and are therefore more
flexible, and can be moved to meet the ever-changing conditions.
315
V02747
717
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
