Following this note were the main recommendations of the Committee which were:
(1) C.O.H.Q. should be maintained as a central organisation for the study and development
of the technique of combined operations.
Its Chief should continue to hold the relative
rank of Vice-Admiral.
(Major-General Royal
Major-General,
vice athal and tiar Admiral the matter being revieWeriate Marer months,
(3) The organisation of C.O.H.Q. should be remodelled, the staff being divided into four
functional groups, each group consisting of a composite staff from all three Services
working under the direction of a member of the Executive.
(4) If the general recommendations were approved, the C.C.O. and his staff should evolve in
detail an establishment based on the principles stated.
(5) Substantial reductions were recommended in the planning and intelligence staffs.
(6) A reorganisation of the Directorate of Combined Training was recommended.
(7) An immediate reduction of the security,
public relations,
records,
chaplains and
medical staffs was recommended, a scale reduction of the Secretariat following.
On 15th October, 1943, the Chiefs of Staff approved these recommendations, and instructed the
C.C.O. to submit, in consultation with the Service Ministries, a detailed establishment based on
the principles set out in Air Marshal Bottomley's report.
Two days before this decision on 13th October, 1943, Admiral Mountbatten left C.O.H.Q.
and took up his appointment as Supreme Allied Commander South-East Asia; the arrival of his
successor was delayed until December when Major-General R. E. Laycock took up his appointment
as the Chief of Combined Operations.
The work of reorganisation continued during the interval
under Major-General Wildman-Lushington as Chief of Staff, Combined Operations Headquarters.
New Directive issued to the Chief of Combined Operations
by the Chiefs of Staff to Major-General R. E. Laycock, the incoming C.C.O.
General Laycock was charged with :—
(1) Study of tactical and technical problems of amphibious operations including small scale
raids and formulations on doctrine and staff requirements.
(2) Offering advice on all aspects of planning and training for amphibious operations.
(3) Co-ordination of basic training policy for amphibious operations for all three Services and
control of Combined Training Centres in the United Kingdom.
(4) Direction and active progress of research and development in all forms of technical
equipment including craft peculiar to combined operations.
(5) Co-ordination of the development of communication material and intercommunication
technique in amphibious warfare.
(6) Control of the Special Service Group, except when the whole or any part of it is handed
over to a Force Commander for operations.
In order to fulfil these responsibilities, General Laycock was to give advice to the Chiefs of Staff
on the foregoing matters and was to be available to attend the Chiefs of Staff Committee when
required. In addition, he had direct access to the Minister of Defence on all matters for which he
was responsible.
In the planning sphere, he was to give technical advice upon all planning for combined opera-
tions at all stages; and Commanders and their staffs were directed to take advantage of the facilities
he provided.
In the case of North-West European operations carried out with and planned by
Special Service Troops with his advice, there was the additional requirement of obtaining the general
concurrence of the Supreme Allied Commander or his Chief of Staff.
In the training aspects, he was responsible for co-ordinating the teaching at Combined Schools
Force Commanders, where his functions were only advisory.
of Instruction or Training Establishments in the United Kingdom excluding those established by
He was responsible also for control of
Combined Training Centres, for technical advice to the staffs of the Centres and advice to the
Tora Comonders subsenient to their anpointment for an oneration. on the toahnical training
It was made equally incumbent on Force Commanders to seek his advice.
1 C.O.S. (43) 737 (0), dated 28th November, 1943.
70
STAEDTLE;
The Special Service Group
was placed under his control, but individual Service Ministries
continued to provide, able gh specific co the necessay an minen ative woulties.
Special Service
Commander appointed for that operation.
Troops were held available for specif combined operations when they would be placed under the
In addition to these responsibilities in the U.K., there was also a responsibility for the
co-ordination of development in combined assault training and technique among British authorities
overseas and for ensuring, so far as possible, the adoption of a common
authorities both in the U.K. and overseas.
doctrine by Allied
The Four Functional Groups
General Laycock's report on the reorganisation of C.O.H.Q. was submitted to the Chiefs of
Staff on 22nd January, 1944.
In this report he commenced by outlining Air Marshal Bottomley's three main proposals:—
(1) The reorganisation of the staff of C.O.H.Q. into functional groups, each group consisting
of a composite staff from all three Services working under the direction of a member of
the Executive of C.O.H.Q.
(2) The drafting of a definite establishment based on the above principles.
(3) Reductions in certain branches of the existing organisation which were to be effected
when the new establishment was drawn up.
Ie then commented on these proposals. The Bottomley Report had noted the existence o
two types of branches in the old "C.O.H.Q. organisation :
he first consisting of Service staff:
working under their Service Heads, and the second of inter-Service branches with a staff drawn
from all three Services.
The report recommended that in future the whole Headquarters should
be organised on the second basis, the work of the branches being allocated on a functional basis.
It was not easy, General Laycock continued, to put this recommendation into practice as he
had to make radical alterations to a machine which, for all its defects, could not be stopped whilst
alterations were being made.
Furthermore, the task was not made easier by the change in policy
in regard to small scale raids which occurred while the investigations were
being
made.
Nevertheless a scheme was drawn up which conformed, broadly, to the recommendations.
The new
organisation brought the whole Headquarters under the following functional groups :—
(1) Experiments, developments and signals.
(2) Training, administration, the control of the Special Service Group and small scale
(3) Combined Operations policy, technique, plans and Intelligence.
(4) Combined Operations Joint Planner.
The Secretariat was provided for under a separate Head.
The Bottomley Report recognised that the allocation of duties among the functional groups
must be a matter for the C.C.O. and his staff to decide, but with few and minor exceptions, the
C.C.O. was able to follow the Bottomley recommendations, the underlying theme of which was
The theme was attractive and in keeping with the basic idea of Combined
Operations and it was proposed to give it a trial, but the express reservation was made that if
experience showed that the new arrangement had practical defects, then such modifications as
were considered necessary could be made.
Reductions in Establishment
The report contained a detailed consideration of the establishment cuts proposed, which would
effect a saving of 17 per cent in officers and leave the Headquarters with 134 officers (25 per cent
female), 233 other ranks (91 per cent female) and 17 civilians; a total of 384.
Two Vice-Admirals,
one Rear-Admiral, three Major-Generals, one Brigadier and one Air Vice-Marshal were replaced by
one Major-General, one Commodore Second Class, two Brigadiers and one Air Commodore.
It was
agreed that a committee representing the establishment branches for all three
Services should
survey the new complement, but not until the new system had been in operation for at least three
The Security, Public Relations, Records and Chaplain Branches of C.O.H.Q., as such, were
disbanded and the duties of the first three transferred to other officers as a part-time duty.
The
7
WO 277/21
27
30
