These Committes supplied a long-felt want in C.O and and continued until after the war.
slightly changed and membership varied, but throughout,
The policy of C.O.H.Q. was clearly laid down through these
committees, and development and experiment was kept in line with tactics and technique by tise
insistence that all major development and experiments must receive the approval of the Assault
Warfare Committee.
Small trials and experiments, however, remained within the powers of
D.X.O.R.
These Committees also emphasised the need for a division within C.O.H.Q, whose primary
task was the study of warfare from a combined operations aspect and the recommendation of
tactics, weapons and equipment which were likely to be of value; this necessarily implied a very
with outside authorities and the initial examination of all reports, particularly
operational reports.
The Naval Staff Duties and Training Section of C.O. H.Q. already covered
this trom the naval point of view, but on the military side there was no section to undertake this
task, except the military Staff Duties Section of D.X.Ö.R. The RA. interests in this matter were
necessarily small at the time.
In D.X.O.R.'s department, the need for a separate section to study
these problems was fully realised and it was largely due to the advice of D.X.O.R. that such a
section was set up.
This was the second important change in the summer of 1943, and in July the
military Staff Duties section of D.X.O.R. split off to form this new warfare section and the whole
of D.X.O.R. was reorganised.
The new section, the original directive for which is at Appendix 26.
eventually became part of the Assault Warfare Committee or, as it was known at the time, the
Amphibious Warfare Committee.
A new directive to D.X.O.R. was also issued to conform to the changes; the relevant
extracts are as follows :-
(1) The Director of Experiments for Operational Requirements is the head of an Inter-
Services Department responsible for arranging experiments and trials (but not user and
tactical trials) for the purpose of defining operational requirements for combined
assault warfare.
(2) He is a member of the Assault Warfare Committee. As such, he is responsible with
them for the study of the technique of combined assault warfare and for making
recommendations to the Executive as to any measures, tactics, weapons or equipment
likely to prove of value.
Appledore.
(4) He is to supervise the C.O.H.Q. Technical Data Section which is to keep a library of
technical statistics and other information on combined operations craft and equipment
for the use of all three Services.
(5) He is to arrange trials and experiments only in connection with material considered by
the Assault Warfare Committee to be of potential value in the combined assault.
Tom the Dile or of scientin earth, Aditatin ar and UiP Min try vod
The results of such trials and experiments are to be submitted in the first
instance to the Assault Warfare Committee for consideration of further action.
It is of interest to compare these extracts with those of the directive issued in 1942.
department's main responsibility was now the arrangement of experiments and trials to define the
operational requirements for Combined Operations; and large scale trials and developments were
not to be arranged without the consent of the Assault Warfare Committee. D.X.O.R. was not now
primarily responsible for formulating qualitative staff requirements, although he and the depart-
ment were naturally consulted in the matter through the Assault Warfare Committee.
Technical Data Section remained administratively under D.X.O.R. but, as before, was available
it was kept very busy by people seeking information on combined operations ships and craft and
to any branch of C.O.H.Q., the Service Ministries and other headquarters.
Until " Overlord,'
all types of army equipment and vehicles, for plannins, expirie oper ot development purposes.
Within the Directorate itself various orranisational changes took place and the Chief Engineer
Combined Operations became D.D.X.O.R. in addition, which was an indication of the importance
now being attached to sapper problems of the assault. Problems of beach and underwater obstacles,
breaching concrete walls, etc.. were of extreme importance and urgency, and the Chief Engineer
and C.O.X.E. were concerned with these problems, often in conjunction with other authorities. In
162
addition, beach roadways came within the R.E. province, as did the many and urgent transporta-
tion problems.
i adition to this work, the set in aste his he ordian a of the miary sri ot Do 12:
experimental work, which was, at this stage, very extensive.
The position of A.D.X.O.R. should also be noted ; the Experimental Section worked under his
direct supervision and he, being in touch with all development and experiment which was in progress,
represented D.X.O.R. on the Assault Warfare Sub-Committee.
The position of a Constructor
Captain on the staff lapsed, but day to day problems on craft could be dealt with in the Technical
Data Section where a qualified Admiralty draughtsman was attached from D.N.C.
Towards the end of 1943, most of the major experimental work for the assault on Europe had
been completed and the equipment, which had been tested, was in production, but there were also
many projects still under investigation which were directly and indirectly related to the operation.
On the naval side, this problem was tackled by a committee which was formed to ensure that the
responsibilities for any technical development in combined operations were clearly defined, that
any necessary action was initiated and that co-ordination was organised and adequate.
committee ensured that, from a naval point of view, the following functions were
(1) Advising from a technical point of view on the best use of existing and future equipment.
(2) Bringing designers of equipment then under development into close contact with the
user (in particular with regard to forthcoming operations).
(3) Searching for new or unfulfilled staff requirements for which research and development
facilities should be given.
WO 277/215
27
3Ф
SECTION (iv)
THE COMBINED OPERATIONS EXPERIMENTAL ESTABLISHIVIENT (C.O.X.E.).
AUGUST, 1942 OCTOBER, 1943.
Formation of Combined Operations Experimental Establishment, August, 1942
In 1942, two shortcomings were apparent in the Experimental and Development Section
of C.O.H.Q.
First, the very small staff at C.O.H.Q. found it difficult to cope with the steadily
increasing work and, at the same time, maintain the very necessary liaison with the Service •
Ministries. In addition, the development centre (C.O.D.C.) took its orders and directions from this
Section. Secondly, the C.O.D.C. was handicapped by lack of personnel to carry out the increasing
COD.C. (tors mod experiots, hito vene bet which had and escortia, the the localit, of the
The magnitude of the
task of preparing for the re-entry into Europe was being realised more clearly and the existing
organisation for development and experimental work was not yet in a position to cope with it.
During the summer 1942, action was taken to overcome these two shortcomings. Reconnaissance
made to find a suitable locality for a Combined Operations Experimental Establishment
(C.O.X.E.) in place of the existing C.O.D.C. ; the amended war establishment was studied and was
finally approved in July, 1942; and the officers of C.O.D.C.,_
most of whom had considerable
experience in combined operations matters, were moved to C.O.H.Q. to reinforce C.X.D.'s section
or sent to help in the start of the new experimental establishment at Westward Ho.
C.O.X.E. was formed on 2nd August, 1942. The site was chosen in the Westward Ho-Appledore-
Instov Bideford area because tidal and beach conditionse were inly ation, mated thosen hacted
in the forthcoming assault on North-West Europe.
both open and sheltered beaches, so that work could continue when severe weather conditions
made use of the open beaches impracticable.
This establishment was under the direct control of the
E perimen an oron of on of the rest of rat due frien in the CO. regret netiation
responsibility of C.O.H.Q. Experimental Section. Although a certain amount of minor development
work was inevitably carried out by C.O.X.E., it must be emphasised that, by its terms of reference, it
was essentially a trials centre.
Development work was carried out by other authorities at C.O.H.Q.'s
request and C.O.X.E, merely carried out the trials of equipment as ordered.
