time, he would have the same departmental link with districts and areas
as was the case with other services, and his responsibility would be real,
instead of the undefined advisory position of the C.B.O.
In consequence of the decision of the Q.M.G., that the barrack services
should be controlled by the D.S.T., and of the resultant formation of S.T.7 at
the War Office, the C.B.O. in each home command ceased to be responsible
to the A.Q.M.G., and was absorbed into the establishment of the D.D.S.T.,
and graded as an Assistant Director of Supplies and Transport (Barracks),
Analogous changes were made in London and Northern Ireland Districts, and
at G.H.Q., Middle East.
District, or Area, barrack officers were redesignated
" Majors, R.A.S.C., (Barracks)".
Area Quartering Committees
In accordance with the procedure laid down in the Regulations for
Mobilization, Area Quartering Committees were set up in each area on
mobilization, to supervise, co-ordinate, and be responsible for, all arrange-
ments in connection with the quartering of troops (other than in barracks and
War Department huts), and with the acquisition of accommodation by hiring
or requisition.
They consisted of a permanent president, and one officer each
of the R.E., R.A.S.C., and R.A.M.C.
The R.A.S.C. officer was normally the
Officer i/c Barracks.
the area committee, were also formed as required.
out on an ate under teal dicions a
In October, 1939, these committees were replaced by sub-area quartering
commandants, with whom Officers i/c Barracks were closely associated. (For
further information, see the History, "Quartering", in this series.)
Q.M.G. 3— Responsibilities-Transport
Q.M.G.3 was, before the outbreak of war in 1939, responsible for the
mobilization, planning, and peace organization of the road transport of the
Army manned by the R.A.S.C.; for hirings of civilian transport to supplement
W.D. transport; and for the administrative duties involved in the employment
of W.D. and hired transport. The branch also carried the responsibility for
impressment of M.T. vehicles for Army, R.N. and R.A.F. purposes on
mobilization.
These duties were carried out by an Assistant Director of Supplies and
Transport, assisted by five officers.
with the following functions:—
The branch was divided into two sections,
Q.M.G.3 (a). —General policy questions.
War Establishments. Impressment of M.T. vehicles.
Mobilization and planning
Hired transport in Commands.
Trade testing questions.
Road Traffic Acts.
Road trafi.
Q.M.G.3 (b). —Provision of R.A.S.C. vehicles and spares.
Technice
questions of operation, maintenance, and repair, of R.A.S.C. vehicks
Spare parts and stores.
vehicles with civil authorities.
Registration and licensing of War Departme
cabulary of M.T. stores.
Inspections by C.I.M.T., R.A.S.C.
Q.M.G. 3 Responsibilities in War
The responsibilities of the branch in war were as follows:
(a) Provision, repair and maintenance of transport vehicles of Q.M.G.
provision, manned by R.A.S.C. drivers and operated by the Army in
the Field, as well as similar transport vehicles within the home and
overseas organizations; the provision and issue of spare parts, tyres,
and stores, for such operated vehicles; the collection, maintenance, and
issue of appropriate reserve vehicles.
(b) In liaison with
General Staff and Personnel branches of the War
Office, the mobilization and preparation for service with Field Forces,
of relevant R.A.S.C. units and other units whose M.T. vehicles were
driven by R.A.S.C. drivers; the compilation of War Establishments for
such units; planning arrangements for R.A.S.C.
transport require-
ments in various projects evolved beyond the initial Field Force.
(c) The impressment of M.T. vehicles from civilian operated sources to
meet all War Department services, whether for R.A.S.C. or other units,
and carrying out similar impressment for Royal Navy and R.A.F.;
the collection of these vehicles into receiving centres (R.A.S.C. Vehicle
Collecting Centres, R.A.O.C. Depots, and other depots) for onward
isslie to units.
(d) Augmenting the available W.D. transport by local hire throughout
stations in commands at home and abroad, of animal and mechanical
transport vehicles from civilian sources to meet all military require-
ments.
At the time of the outbreak of war, and until June, 1942, the responsibility
of the R.A.S.C. and therefore of Q.M.G.3, for the maintenance and repair of
R.A.S.C. vehicles, included not only first line repairs and those carried out in
company workshops, but also the more extensive repairs and complete over-
hauls effected in heavy repair shops, R.A.S.C.
For an account of the system
of vehicle maintenance in the Field, as it was in the B.E.F. 1939-1940, see
Chapter IV, and Appendix VIB. The organization for vehicle repair, and the
holding and issue of vehicles and spare parts and M.T. stores, in the United
Kingdom, is described in Chapter XII, Section 2.
The executive arrangements for the provision of additional vehicles on
mobilization from civilian sources were delegated to a Chief Inspector of
Supplementary Transport, whose organization is described in Section 2 of
this chapter.
Q.M.G. 3—Establishments Increased
On mobilization, the establishment of Q.M.G.3 was increased by two
officers and 13 clerks.
Subsequently, owing to expansion of the transport
services, further increases became necessary, including the appointment of
a D.A.D.S.T. (A.T.S.) on account of the increasing part of the A.T.S. in the
transport services.
In September, 1940, the appointment of A.D.S.T. (Colonel), S.T.3, was
up graded to D.D.S.T. (Brigadier), and the strength of the branch was then at
its peak of 27 officers and 51 clerks.
These were divided between three sections,
as followa. _
S.T.3 (a).-
-General operational policy; organization, planning, and war
establishments.
27
w97747/17
WO 277/2k.
27
WO 277/26
