conditions not meeting the higher and more particular American standards, partly on account of
their inadequacy for prolonged work in tropical conditions, but chiefly because five o1 them hac
been turned over from Red to White Ensign and had sailed without an opportunity of working up
motor transport and 400 tons of immediate operational stores.
were used operationally by the Americans. In the meantime, other L.S.I. (L.) both
Consequently, none of the ships of
C.I.B. and others, had been prepared for Far Eastern service which included improvements in
living conditions.
on a Divisional front and was borne in an L.S.I. (L.).
His duties in " Overlord" had expanded still
statheas necessarily larger and L.S.I.s (L.) fitted as S.O.A.G, ships had to be further modifie his
provide offices and accommodation suitable for prolonged occupation.
Each Assault Group con-
for evacuating military assault casualties and treating them on passage.
This was achieved with a
miniman assault it loss, giving accommodation for nine Medical Officers, eight Nursing Sisters and
hity-two R.A.M.C. personnel, with a preparation room, operating theatre, resuscitation ward and
plaster room all easily accessible on the upper deck with the cot case ward immediately below.
The third L.S.I. (L.) of the group was required to act as parent ship to the crews of the major and
minor landing craft of the Assault Group in the beach area and was fitted accordingly. Between
the three ships the personnel, plant and stores of the Landing Craft Recovery and Clearance Units
were carried, in addition to the Beach Commandos, Beach Signalling Parties, etc.
Five years have thus seen the development of the early Infantry Assault Ship into a highly
specialised L.S.I. (L.). The three L.S.I. (L.) of each Assault Group were together able to land a
complete team, not only to fight but also to control the landing; to clear obstacles; to develop
the beach organisation; to remove and treat casualties and to repair and maintain minor landing
craft. In addition, they included facilities for the preparation of the naval and brigade assault plan,
and accommodation and amenities for the otherwise homeless Combined Operations personnel in
the assault area.
After the end of the war, financial stringency made it impossible to retain any of the existing
L.S.Is, which were all returned to trade.
In order to replace this type of landing ship in the
peace-time Assault Training Force in the most economical way, it was proposed to convert some
of the existing L.S.T. (3) to L.S.T. (Assault) and in November, 1946, the staff requirements for
the L.S.T. (A.) were produced.
These requirements allowed for six L.C.A. and two L.C.P. to be davit-carried and additional
accommodation for 26 officers and 329 other ranks was provided.
Five L.S.T. (A.) are required to
While L.S.T. (A.) may be suitable for
it wet requirental, they it be insati actly as LS. in a major war on account of their
Landing Crait Infantry. (L.C.I.)
Early in the war, with limited resources, raids continued and produced valuable lessons,
but it was realised that raids must be small operations and the danger of allowing L.S. Is to linger
off a hostile coast was fully appreciated. Accordingly Landing Crait Onfantry (Large) were built
to the designs produced by C.O.H.Q. to provide a landing craft capable of transporting some
200 troops in reasonable comfort and landing them dryshod on an enemy shore.
resources in Great Britain were fully occupied, these craft were constructed in the U.S.A.
As the shipbuilding
were not at first satisfactory owing to the design of the ramps which had to be modified.
These craft were of a very novel design and were originally known as " Giant R Boats," They
had accommodation for sleeping and feeding all the troops embarked and, as they had to make the
passage of the Atlantic under their own power, had good endurance and excellent sea-keeping
qualities. It is of interest to note that all those used in the continental operations made the sea
passage without accident and were used in many major operations. The majority of the officers
and men who manned them came from the Combined Operations Command.
presented a good target to the enemy.
The main disadvantage of such a craft was that, unless tactical surprise was achieved, it
178
The Close Support Problem
experience in the use of new equipment.
Preparations for bigger operations continued and the Dieppe raid in August, 1942, provided
Experience here showed that a frontal attack on a well-
defended port was impracticable without the means for providing intimate close support after the
infantry have got ashore and before the artillery were deployed.
Close support has been covered
in Chapter 16, it is sufficient to state here that the need for it was met by the provision of Landing
Craft Rocket and Landing Craft Gun.
The Landing Craft Rocket. (L.C.T. (R.))
It was recommended by C.O.H.Q. in September, 1942 :-
craft, hut it o shock be cored out to re he then it is Petie to mount in a suitable
of smoke. This weapon will enable a crash area shoot to be called down or planned on
any battery interfering with the landing, which cannot be seen from the beaches, and should
go a considerable way towards ensuring the neutralisation of such batteries."
The next step was taken by the Admiralty who, on 27th November, 1942, approved the fitting
of 5-in. rockets in L.C.T. 161.
Nevertheless the Gunnery Division at the Admiralty as late as January,
1943, remarked that they had never been particularly enthusiastic over this project, and the more
they saw of it, the less they liked it. The Gunnery Division's main interest was that these craft,
if successful, would replace, in some measure, vessels carrying guns.
However, in February, 1943,
C.C.O. again pressed for the fitting out of these craft in time to take part in Operation " Husky'
when they were, in fact, used with great success.
The following paragraph from the report of this operation by Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay,
the Commander Naval Assault Forces, is of interest :—
" Both the enemy and our own troops have spoken of the very
effect of such a volume of fire and it is considered that L.C.T. (R.) should be employed in
the assault in future whenever possible."
Lieutenant-General Leese, Commander of 30 Corps, also reported favourably :-
" The Rocket Ships did excellent work; with further opportunity for training, a
greater number of craft and with greater understanding of the use of the Radar instruments
for checking the position, they will be first class in the assault.
They should be used in
large numbers."
The Commander of the 8th Army (General Sir Bernard Montgomery) agreed with the above
remarks.
Brigade Group front.
The Landing Crait Gun. (L.C.G.)
Another type of craft developed as a result of the Dieppe operation was the Landing Craft
These were L.C.T. modified to take two 4•7-in. naval guns.
Their role in the assault
was to proceed close inshore, which was rendered practicable by their shallow draught, and engage
targets which were interfering with the advance of the assaulting troops. In fact they carried out
the role that destroyers would normally perform in combined operations.
Thus, at comparatively small expense, a very efficient form of close support craft was evolved
from the ordinary L.C.T. hull.
By utilising the tank hold in these craft, a considerable stock of
ammunition could be carried.
The only defect of these conversions was their slow speed; but they
could of course keep up with other L.C.T.s on the run in to the beaches.
The Landing Craft Barge. (L.C.B.)
After carefully reviewing the requirements outlined by the Staff for any form of cross-Channel
operation on a large
scale, the C.C.O. foresaw in early 1942, that there would be a far greater
requirement for craft than even the most optimistic estimates could provide.
Further, the time
available was short and, no matter what exertions could be made in construction, the shortage of
craft would always be a bottle-neck.
However, the Port of London was not working to full capacity owing to the action of the
German Air Force, and theretore a very considerable proportion of the dumb barges used in the
Here then was an excellent source of craft suitable for beaching, and the matter
was taken up with the appropriate authorities.
In due course, it was decided to requisition
1,000 of these craft.
q07717
WO 277/21
27
