Flextella roadway.
Manhandling aids.
Destruction of beach minefields.
Destruction of underwater obstacles.
Piers for use on flat beaches.
Extension ramp for L.S.T. (2).
(2) Completed :-
Tractor and trailer.
Jones super crane (for fitting into barges and capable of a 1-ton lift).
Simplex spacing truss (to facilitate rapid erection of 3-in. tubular piers).
Blasting channel through sandbars.
At each meeting of Section IFF, a full review was given of developments, trials and experiments,
including a detailed report by the Commandant of the work being carried
Experimental work for other sections of the R.A.P. Committee was discussed and initiated.
A very important sub-committee of this Section was formed to deal with the subject of petro!
supply, the complexity of which warranted special and detailed study. This Petrol Sub-Committee
dealt with the experimental work necessary for the landing of petrol in combined operations and, of
necessity, brought this Section into, very close touch with the section dealing with petrol, oil and
This Sub-Committee did much useful work, among which can fairly be credited the
development of the idea and the early trials of Operation "Pluto"
(Pipeline under the Ocean).
Another sub-committee organised experiments and developments for the destruction of beach
obstacles, the start of a very important branch of work for opposed landings which continued with
varying urgency up to the time of "
" and later, when Japanese obstacles became the
Other committees were formed, as the sections of the R.A.P. Committee finished work in early
1943, mainly to de. war alive coich had vito many fine es the hast e most comportant
was the Beach Recovery Committee, which was formed in February, 1943. This was an executive
committee, convened and presided over by D.X.S.R. and working in close conjunction with the
War Office, G.H.Q. Home Forces and later with U.S. authorities.
The Committee dealt with the
experimental work of a special R.E.M.E. detachment which was studying the problem of beach
recovery of wheeled and tracked vehicles. This detachment was under the command of the Com-
mandant C.O.X.E. and requests for experimental work to be done were sent through C.O.H.Q. to
the Commandant C.O.X.E. ; and reports were submitted through C.O.H.Q. for the consideration of
the Beach Recovery Committee. The Committee met regularly and considerable progress was made
in problems under the following headings :-
(1) Trials of recovery equipment on all types of beaches.
(2) Investigation of the recovery of vehicles from the water, the beaches and the beach
maintenance area, to ascertain what special equipment was required in addition to
In July, 1943, this Committee issued a report on the progress made in beach recovery
problems which served as a guide for future experimental and development work and assisted
materially in the final experiments for " Overlord."
order to correlate and co-ordinate new projects until early in 1944.
continued to meet in
Change of title, D.X.S.R. becomes D.X.O.R.
duties. It had become clear during the first half of 1943 that, unless some definite conclusions were
reached spedily on which the provision of equipment for the assust on Europe could be based,
experimenters would find it excedingly dificult, if not impossible to assess priorities; and planners
vas a strong link with D.X.S.R. At the same time, it was necessary to clarify the situation and in
160
The " Rattle" Conference was of great importance, but, as was to be expected, not all the
decisions hoped for were reached.
However, a great deal of ground was covered and the air was
cleared of many of the difficulties which attended an assault on North-West Europe.
But at this
conference, details of equipment, craft, ships and so on, which had been designed, developed and
tried by D.X.O.R. or his predecessors,
were put clearly before the naval, military and air Com-
manders. D.X.O.R. himself and D.D.X.O.R. gave lectures to the conference and among the
developments put before the conference, where production decisions were often taken, were :—
Hedgerow.
L.C.G. (M.).
L.C.T. (R.).
Flame-throwing craft.
Bogus bombs.
Rocket projectile weapons.
Construction of artificial harbours.
Waterproofing vehicles.
Load-carrying amphibians.
Supply of P.O.L. by pipeline.
Temporary breakwaters for artificial harbours.
Engineer problems in the assault, including the breaching of beach obstacles above and
Bridging the water-gap by pontoons and vehicle landing ramps, etc.
The above list shows the various problems wit which C.O.H.Q. and, in part, D.X.S.R.
were occupied during 1942-43. Other branches had been concerned with working out tactics and
techniques, but to D.X.S.R. had fallen the task of testing and experimenting with new ideas, most
of which arose in the minds of members of the Directorate. From this, staff requirements eventually
emerged and, after consultation with the planning and training branches, the requirements were
passed to the Service Ministries.
usually found within D.X.S.R.,
where the officers in their day to day work were more in touch with the particular problems involved
and the possible methods of overcoming them. In addition, the appointment of a Chief Engineer to
C.O.H. Q. was of real assistance to D.X.S.R. in advising on R.E. activities at C.O.X.E. and elsewhere.
In later months he became far more closely concerned with D.X.S.R. as Deputy Director of the
Experimental Branch. His work on R.E. matters concerning an opposed landing and his close
liaison with engineer authorities in other headquarters, contributed to the successes achieved in
The "Rattle" Conference made it very clear that there was still a lack of co-ordination of
tactics, technique, equipment and development within C.O.H.Q., the Service Ministries and other
headquarters. The position was obviously better than in the early years of Combined Operations,
but there was still no means whereby all interested parties within C.O.H.Q. could meet together
ra che offer he, solve the woblems of actics, tini thou develope ment so eval
clear that officers concerned with planning, training or experiments had not time to consider, in
addition to their normal tasks, the more general problems of warfare ;
nor had they sufficient time
to assimilate the many lessons which could be learned from reports of Allied operations and exercises
and ensure that these lessons were dealt with either through amended training instructions or new
developments. It was therefore undesirable that D.X.O.R. should be entirely responsible, as laid
down in his directive, for formulating qualitative staff requirements; too many other authorities
and factors had to be taken into consideration. In order to clarify and assist in these difficulties,
two important changes in internal affairs were made within C.O.H.Q.
The Assault Warfare Committee and changes within D.X.O.R.
First, in June, 1943, the Assault Warfare Committee and Assault Sub-Committee were formed.
These Committeest studied the recognised problems of warfare in a combined assault and made
recommendations to the Executive on any measures, tactics, weapons or equipment likely to help
In other words the Committees studied warfare and considered qualitative require-
ments. D.X.O.R. was represented on both committees, which was necessary because the Committees
WO 277/21
27
30
*Directives to the Assault Warfare Committee and Assault Sub-Committee are contained in Appendix 25.
