(9) It is further suggested that suitable military formations (eg. Brigade Groups) should be
detailed to work, each with a corresponding Naval Assault Force, in order that they may get to
in to as other and practice and rehearse together as Rotarity offers, culminating, i posible,
in taking part in an actual raid before carrying out
intended to detail ane own Royal Marine gade Groups ta work with the fist instance, it is
(10) To sum up, the Chiefs of Staff Committee are asked :-
(a) to invite the Admiralty to form Special Assault Forces on the lines of Force " J" as
sufficient resources become available;
(b) to invite the American Chiefs of Staff to send over some American-manned landing craft
of each type to jour up with fort to and, later, to form un American counterpart
(c) to approve the nomination of Brigade Groups to assault forces.
(Signed) LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN
Chief of Combined Operations.
Combined Operations Headquarters,
16th November, 1942.
Planning of Raids
When the Planning Section had been released from their duties on " Torch" with the Staff of
the Supreme Commander, the C.C.O. directed that they should investigate the possibilities of raids
on the French coast which were within the terms of his directive.
It was here that the effect of
the removal of the craft for "Torch" made itself at once apparent.
The greatest difficulty was
over the provision of small landing craft, since those left behind in the United Kingdom were
those which were not operationally fit for " Torch."
Thus we find a considerable refitting programme
being put in hand; the work was mostly carried out by private yards.
As the craft became available for service, they were distributed between the Force " J" and
the training establishments.
This took time and its effect on the Combined Organisation has
been mentioned previously.
Planning Activities
Six weeks before "Torch" sailed, the J.P.S. appreciation, and outline plan for an operation
against Sardinia, was received at C.O.H.O. from the War Cabinet.
This operation was given the
code name of " Brimstone."
The C.C.O. at once formed a planning syndicate to consider and advise on this project.
On 7th November, 1942, the C.C.O. forwarded an appreciation which recommended a very drastic
alteration in the outline plan. During the months of November and December, much of the planners'
work was confined to the study of Operation " Brimstone" because Allied Force H.Q. and C.O.H.Q.
did not see eye to eye over the scope of the proposed undertaking. By Christmas no real decision
one directed against the northern part of Norway which was given the code name
Another aerati the hot em and of cosideration a the Prime Minister's suggestion, eras
It was then considered that if Northern Norway was occupied by us, it would be of great assistance
interruption.
to the Russians, and would enable convoys to be sailed to Murmansk more or less without
For this operation, C.O.H.Q. advocated the supply of special equipment such as
"Weasels," vehicles which could be driven over snow. But beyond certain units being trained in
the Cairn Gorm Hills in the snow, the operation was never proceeded with owing to the claims on
personnel and material made by other theatres.
Plans for raids were also studied continuously but, owing to the lack of craft and personnel
due to "Torch," these operations never came to anything.
Problems aiter the Sailing of " Torch"
Atter the saling ol the convoys for " Torch the main problems facing C.O.H.Q, was to get
Force " J" trained, completed with craft and crews, and welded into a proper Naval Assault Force.
In addition, the training programme had to be stepped up to compete with the greatly increased
intake; and the craft used for this training had to be got ready and brought up to date.
The months of November and December saw this all going ahead at high pressure.
SECTION (ii)
SICILY, OPERATION " HUSKY "
Casablanca Conference
In January, 1943, a conference known as "Symbol" took place at Anfa Camp near Casablanca.
at which the President of the U.S.A. and the Prime Minister were present.
To assist them in their
deliberations were the Combined Chiefs of Staff and certain high ranking officers of their respective
stafts.
The C.C.O. attended in his capacity as a member of the Chiefs of Staff Committee.
The Headquarters Ship H.M.S. Bulolo was used as an accommodation and communications
ship, and certain of the W.R.N.S., A.T.S. and W.A.A.F. personnel from C.O.H.Q. were embarked
for cyphering and secretarial duties.
At this conference, the strategy for 1943 was finally settled.
Operation "Husky"
In his book " Crusade in Europe," General Eisenhower writes as follows :—
"At Casablanca the Sicily operation was decided upon for two reasons, the first of which
was its immediate advantage in opening up the Mediterranean sea routes.
The second
was that because of the relatively small size of the island, its occupation after capture
would not absorb unforeseen amounts of Allied strength in the event that the enemy should
undertake any large scale counter-action.
This reason weighed heavily with General
Marshall-moreover, this decision in January, 1943, avoided a commitment to indefinite
strategic offensives in the area.
Successful attack would advance our bomber bases still
further, but we would not necessarily be drawn into a campaign that would continuously
devour valuable resources."
Planning
In the directive issued to General Eisenhower, it was laid down that the planning for the
operation was to be carried out by the staffs on the spot.
This latter proviso did not absolve the C.C.O. from advising the Commanders on the Combined
Operations aspects of the assault.
He therefore flew straight from Casablanca to General Eisen-
hower's headquarters in Algiers to discuss with him and his Commanders-in-Chief the provision
of the necessary additional landing ships and landing craft.
On his return from Algiers, the C.C.O. directed that the planning on Operation " Brimstone"
(Sardinia) was to cease as far as C.O.H.Q. was concerned; a decision which was confirmed shortly
afterwards by the Chiefs of Staff. As promised to General Eisenhower, C.C.O. now sent certain
of the C.O.H.Q. planners to North Africa to be utilised by the Supreme Commander with the
integrated planning staffs engaged on planning the operation.
Training
The training of the forces to be employed, which were already in the Mediterranean, had of
necessity to be carried out on the spot and here again certain of the C.O.H.Q. training staff were
requested to assist.
But in addition to these forces it was decided to send a Canadian Division from England and
the American 45th Division direct from the U.S.A.
The training of the Canadian Division was
v02947
-7
WO 277/21
27
30
Contained in the minutes of the Chiefs of Staff meetings are recorded statements by
pointing out how the loan of both planning and training staffs was affecting the work at C.O.H.Q.
at this time.
Crait
In the outline plan for " Husky" a requirement arose for a number of L.C.T. This was quite a
problem in itself because the L.C. Is. were originally designed for cross-Channel operations and the
specification stated they would not be required to operate in a sea above Force 4.
Their endurance
This problem was at once tackled and the craft were made ready, mainly at
Troon, for an ocean passage. To add to the difficulty, the L.C.T. (4) developed a structural weakness
1 The overall strategy was eventually laid down in C.C.S. 170/2 dated 23rd January, 1943, relevant contents
of which are contained in Appendix 12.
