At the Training Establishment, which was set up at the Headquarters of Rear-Admiral,
Combined Operations Bases (North) at Largs,
Ayrshire, 1,700 officers of all Services and Allied
Nationalities
were given short courses in the technique of the assault.
These courses greatly
benefited by the presence of neighbouring Combined Training Centres so that theoretical instruction
could be demonstrated practically.
There were constant calls for the services of the planners at C.O.H.Q. A section of the staff
known as Plans Combined Operations Advice came into being and officers
from this were loaned as
and when required.
A complete C.O.H.Q. planning syndicate consisting of Commander Costabadie,
Lieutenant-Colonel Henriques and Wing Commander Tailyour, all of whom had had much previous
experience, were lent to C.O.S.S.A.C. to assist in planning
" Overlord."
In addition,
calls came
from the various commands in the U.K. for advice as to training for "D" Day ;
Lieutenant-
Colonel Trevor and Lieutenant-Colonel Richardson of C.O.H.Q. assisted in the training of the U.S.
Ranger Group, and Corporal Good and Private Blackmore of C.O.X.E.
were attached to the
2nd Ranger Battalion U.S. Army and landed with that Battalion on 6th June at Points du Hoe,
Normandy, and served with distinction in the assault.?
The Combined Operations Joint Planner regularly attended the meetings of the Chiefs of Staff
Joint Planners and helped in any combined operations matters that were discussed.
The requirements in South-East Asia and the Pacific produced new problems and called for
new techniques, and these formed the major part of the work at the reorganised C.O.H.Q.
Fulfilment of the Plan
It is not proposed, in this history, to cover Operation " Overlord" by more than a brief reference
time this stage had been reached, the main contribution of C.Ö.H.Q. had been made.
The position was put concisely in the following signal made to Admiral Mountbatten, then
Supreme Allied Commander South-East Asia, when the Prime Minister, with the U.S. Chiefs of Staff,
the C.I.G.S. and Field Marshal Smuts, visited the beach area in the wake of the invading armies :-
"Today we visited the British and American Armies on the soil of France.
We sailed
through vast fleets of ships with landing craft of many types pouring more and more men,
vehicles, and stores ashore.
We saw clearly the maneouvre in process of rapid development.
We have shared our secrets in common and helped each other all we could. We wish to tell
you at this moment in your arduous campaign that we realise that much of this remarkable
technique and therefore the success of the venture has its origin in developments effected
by you and your staff of Combined Operations.
(Signed)
ARNOLD,
KING,
BROOKE,
MARSHALL,
CHURCHILL,
SMUTS. "
With the permission
of General Eisenhower, the C.C.O. had observers at the following
important points during "D" day and subsequent operations :-3
Naval Officers at:-
A.N.C.X.F.'s Headquarters.
With Admiral Tennant (Mulberry Harbours).
With Beach troops erecting causeway.
2nd Army Headquarters.
Navirational Leader Force "S."
S.N.O.L. Headquarters Ship Force " J."
Air Officers at :-
Headquarters Ship Force "G."
F.D.T. 13.
Two American Headquarters Ships.
Army Officers attached to :—
30 Corps.
Reserve Brigade 30 Corps.
9 Beach Group, 30 Corps.
Assistant Director Transportation 1 Corps.
Beach Sub Area 1 Corps.
Reserve Brigade 1 Corps.
1 C.O.H.Q. " Overlord" Docket Part IVa.
3 C.O.H.Q. Docket C.R. 1667/44.
2 C.O.H.9. Docket C.R. 285/44.
74
Liaison Officers (Army) specially asked for by 2nd Army :—
Two officers between 1 Corps and 2nd Army.
One officer between 30 Corps and 2nd Army.
Two officers between 2nd Army (Tac.) and 2nd Army (Main).
One officer between 2nd Army and C.O.B.U.
Two officers to assist Brigadier Tarleton, liaison officer between 2nd Army
and Admiral Vian.
Fifteen
Army officers from C.T.C.s were attached to units to assist during training and
operations.
Thus the staff of C.O.H.Q. were able to see the operation as it developed.
The C.C.O.
himself accompanied by the Combined Operations Joint Planner, witnessed the opening phases of
"Overlord" from the American Flagship by the invitation of Admiral Kirk.
From the C.O.H.Q. point of view,
erhaps the most important problem was the organisatio
f the beaches and the maintenance of the supplies across then
As soon as the reports on " Overlord" came in, the C.C.O. instructed the staff at C.O.H.Q. to
make an intense study of all the problems involved and promulgate them to any other theatres
in which combined operations were likely to take place.
This study was exhaustive and was
promulgated on 8th January, 1945.1
The adaptation of these lessons to the conditions of the South-East Asia Command and the
war against Japan necessitated sending staff officers from C.O.H.Q. to these areas. It was a C.O.H.O.
dictum that officers with first hand knowledge were far more likely to spread knowledge quickly
than any number of textbooks. Besides, time was pressing and the preparation of manuals is a
lengthy business.
Just before "D day the Directing Staff of the Combined Training Centre at Largs became
available for other duties as the courses there had ceased.
Accordingly the C.C.O. arranged for
these officers to be appointed as observers to the American Forces in the Pacific.
These observers
were present at all the important landings carried out in this area, visiting Pearl Harbour, Johnson
Island, Guam, Leyte, Luzon, Pelau Isles, Hollandia, Finchaven Townsville, Cairns, Atherton, Beac,
Morotai, Palawan, Mindoro and Mindanao, covering some 30,000 miles mostly by air, and on their
return to C.O.H.Q. gave the staff first hand accounts of all operations.
WO 277/21
27
30
1 C.R. 3180/44 and C.O.H.Q. Docket C.R. 484/45
75
