the Eighth Army Order of Battle for Sicily.
These could be nominated,
because that Order of Battle had been calculated on a generous scale, and
a fortnight after the end of the operations in the island, eight transpor
companies, a Petrol Depot, and other units, had not yet reached the island.
Initial maintenance was to be over the beaches.
Directly the beach-head
was sufficiently enlarged,
Divisional Maintenance Areas would be set up
by each division, that of 5 Division being nominated for development as
the first Corps F.M.C.
As soon as the ports on the straits were free of the
enemy, an Army Roadhead was to be set up, from which to replenish the
F.M.C.
The B.S.D. at Roadhead was to be stocked with 25,000 British
and 5.000 Indian Compo rations immediately it was sited.
As soon as the
feeding strength became stabilized; a reserve of two days, plus a working
margin of one day, would be built up and maintained.
In the meantime, in the period between the fall of Messina on 17th August
and the crossing of the straits, R.A.S.C. transport companies in Sicily were
engaged in heavy and continuous ammunition lifts in preparation for the
bombardment of the guns across the straits, over 173,000 rounds being
dumped.
A further life of at least 2,000 miles without repairs was specified as
the standard of vehicle fitness, and exchanges were made between com-
panies in order to bring all units nominated for the operation up to that
pitch.
S.T. Plan for Operation " Avalanche"
Initially, the British Services were not represented at H.O., Fifth (US)
Army, and 10 Corps administrative plans were made independently.
S.T. Order of Battle for this operation is shown in Appendix VK.
Most
of the units required to augme of the its Army Troops were to come from
Middle East.
The supplies programme was as follows: —
D Day to D+1
48-hour
mess-tin rations,
supple-
mented by one tin
of preserved
meat and a packet of biscuits.
D+2 to D+18
D+19 onwards
Compo ration.
At first half Compo and half bulk
rations, gradually going over to
The initial mariad of haach maintenanco under divisional control was
100 per cent. bulk.
expected to last four days, after which H.Q. 10 Corps was to assume re
sponsibility for maintenance of the force.
to fall the first day, and it was arranged that the C.R.A.S.C.. Coros Troops
The port of Salerno was expected
should land first, and organize both transport, and supply and petrol depots
over the former commitment.
in the port, until the C.R.A.S.C. Corps Transport Column arrived to take
10 Cords was to he maintained hu sir convove of ships from Nort
Africa and Middle East, until D +35,
the west would arrive.
Each of the
when the first ocean convoy
1,500-ton cased petrol carrier to build up reserves.
first six convoys was to include a
loadings were
268
scaled on the basis of vehicles travelling 25 miles a day from D Day to
D+6, and 50 miles a day from D +7 onwards.
An allowance of 30 per
cent, was originally made to cover waste, leakage, and losses from enemy
action, but this was reduced to 20 per cent.
The P.O.L. loaded by A.F.H.Q.
in North Africa was packed in returnable 4-gallon cans and in barrels, and
that from Middle East mostly in returnable cans.
Plans for emergency supply by air provided for 1 Airborne Divisional
R.A.S.C. holding rations, P.O.L. (at 50 miles for a vehicle), ammunition,
medical stores, and water (1 gallon for each man) packed and loaded for
a Brigade Group, a Tank Battalion, and a Light A.A. Regiment, and the
equivalent in U.S. troops.
S.T. Plan for Operation " Slapstick"
The Airborne Division force was to land in two main flights of about
4,000 men each, and only about 50 vehicles a flight.
Both flights were to
carry 48-hour rations, and Compo for ten days.
Supplies and P.O.L.
were to follow in a gradual build-up, from Sicily, North Africa, and Middle
East. The first flight of 8 Indian Division was due on 13th September, and
this formation would be maintained by Middle East for at least a month.
The rest of 5 Corps (1 Division, 2 N.Z. Division, and 25 Tank Brigade) were
to follow.
The Order of Battle of S.T. units for this operation is shown in Appen-
dix VL.
It included those required to establish the proposed Base.
adition, the usual Corps and Divisional R.A.S.C. companies would join the
force.
The basis on which G.T. companies were provided was that the
Corps should be able to operate up to 150 miles from railhead or port.
Operation " Baytown"
The first flights of DUKWs began to operate the ferry service, which was
to go on for six days, at noon on D Day, and others discharged ships in
Reggio harbour.
The amphibians were unaffected by the currents running
to the straits.
between the legendary danians Weylla and Charybois at the entrance
The maintenance system operated as planned.
Fresh F.M.Cs. were
opened in rapid sace system operated casion C.R.A.S.C., 13 Corps Troops.
was responsible toresion sted in various stages of opening, operatins and
One F.M.C. began to receive supplies by sea when the Divisiona
R.AS.C. was still 30 miles back.
made the 135-mile journey from Vibo Valentia by sea, carrying 10,000
In the course of effecting this, 70 DUKWs
balanced rations and the personnel and equinment of a Field Bakery
made in a calm sea.
The petrol consumed was at the rate of one mile a gallon, the voyage being
In snite of the assistance received from cenft ferrving supplies up the
coast, the R.AS.C. M.T comnanies were hard put to it to keep
On the west coast toad there was much traffic congestion, and the
rose and fell 3.000 froad theres never straight.
The east coast route
had a very bad surface. which grew worse as the advance progressed
(37452)
269
Mars micro 0.5 mm
7
WO 271/21.
27
WO 277/26
