After much preparatory work, the plans were suddenly changed.
difficulties of the road were so great that it was evident it could not be
used for the advance of large mechanized forces, without a vast amount of
constructional work.
Gondar was to be approached from Adowa.
at Dessie thus became useless, the transport concentration had to be broken
up, and dumps of petrol had to be
established along the road from Addis
to Adowa to enable the large scale troop movements to take place.
distance was 700 miles, and again was over a difficult mountain route.
300 miles from Adowa to Gondar were the same, and in one part rose 3,000
feet in six miles.
There was very little transport available, only about 500 2/3-ton lorries
daily for third line work.
The feeding strength was 15,000 plus thousands
of prisoners of war.
Supplies, petrol, and
ammunition were punctually
delivered, nevertheless, and fresh bread and fresh vegetables were issued daily
to the most forward troops.
The supply of petrol was one of the chief
worries; there were ample stocks at Massawa, but a desperate shortage of
Tanker lorries driven by Italians
brought the petrol to Adowa,
and it was there decanted into drums, thus reducing the turn-round for
Even when Gondar capitulated at the end of November, the transport
was still hard pressed, perhaps more so than that at any stage of the campaign.
Troops, prisoners, captured stores, ammunition, etc., had all to be carried
All ranks of the transport service were feeling the strain of having
been on the move ceaselessly for a full nine months during the operations,
sufficient time for maintenance and overhaul.
vehicle's mileage had reached the 15,000 mile mark, over roads which the
manufacturers could not have even imagined.
The percentage of immobility
of transport at the beginning of the Gondar operations was about 30.
Vehicle Maintenance
The immense problems of the maintenance of thousands of vehicles in
the field throughout this campaign may be recapitulated as the following: a
series of deficiencies in heavy repair
machinery and equip-
ment, vehicle spare parts, workshop sets, and artificers, all exaggerated by
the nature of the campaign, the extreme distances from the Base installa-
tions, and the indifferent lines of communication.
To overcome these difficul-
ties as far as possible, two Light Repair Sections were formed from the
and pushed forward to act as advanced H.R.Ss.
went as far as Dessie, while a second H.R.S. was formed in Addis Ababa
in Italian civilian workshops with Italian artificers, which did excellent work
for many months in spite of difficulties with Fascist elements. In one month
alone, 700 vehicles were put back on the road.
Another expedient was the formation of Mobile Repair Units, whose
task was to follow up the advance, recover and repair abandoned and
captured vehicles, and maintain the
transport of scattered units; but the
shortage of personnel and equipment, together with the rapid end of the
campaign, prevented these units being operated as intended.
The Technical Inspectorate of Mechanical Transport Vehicles was formed
in June, 1940, with the usual functions.
The strength of vehicles for which
was directly responsible, after the merger with the South
African S. and T., was 20,000, and the Inspectorate formed a very useful
link in the chain of vehicle maintenance.
Mention was made above of the use of captured Italian
tanker lorries.
The Italians had used these vehicles to a considerable extent for the main-
tenance of their forces in Ethiopia.
For the supply of Addis Ababa, they
had used 260 1,000/1,500-gallon tankers on the
Many tankers were found abandoned along the roads after
the campaign, and action was taken to recondition them.
But Middle East
was badly in need of tankers, and made an arrangement with Advanced
H.Q., East African Command, unknown to the main H.Q., for all these
vehicles surplus to the needs of Eritrea to be requisitioned and shipped to
This upset the plan for maintaining the British
Ethiopia from Massawa, as it depended entirely on the availability of
of which it required over 300.
The cost of supply in this
way would have
been about 40 per cent. cheaper than by rail.
It was observed that Middle East required the tankers sent to be desert-
worthy, which implied the fitting of over-size balloon tyres.
tankers in Ethiopia were fitted for twin back-wheel tyres,
precluding the
fitting of balloon tyres, which would also affect the lock if fitted in front.
In the circumstances, the proposal to send the tankers to the Middle East.
was abandoned, and the system of supply by road from Massawa was agreed
There were still various difficulties as to ownership of the vehicles, and
the provision of British officers to supervise.
operated by the oil companies.
Petrol, Oil and Lubricant Supply
The system of supply of petrol in Eritrea after the campaign was from
Massawa, whence a fleet of 40 tankers of 1,800/2,000-gallon capacity worked
to Asmara, under military arrangements. This was adequate to provide for
the M.T. spirit requirement of 480,000 gallons a month.
At Asmara, the
spirit was held in bulk tanks, then packed in drums and distributed by
road or rail. Aviation spirit was delivered under contract by the oil com-
pany in drums or road tankers direct to airfields, consumption being only
about 20.000 gallons a month.
A project for the construction of tankage for 20,000 tons of petrol at
a deep-water port other than Mombasa was the first step in more extensive
as new territories were opened up.
It was originally intended
to locate this at Mogadiscio or Kismayu.
But as the campaign developed,
this proposal was dropped, and Berbera became the main base.
was made available there for 2,000,000 gallons, which made it unnecessary
to install tankage elsewhere.
In June, 1941, Middle East began to build up stocks of 5,000 tons each
at Massawa and Aden, on East Africa's behalf.
were in tins, packed locally. A bulk reserve of 3,500 tons of aviation spirit
was also held at Massawa for Air Headquarters, Middle East.
Further Reorganizations of E.A.A.S.C.
As the result of experience gained in the operations, a final reorganization
of the Infantry Brigade Group Company was effected in December, 1941.
Until then, each section had been carrying supplies, ammunition, and petrol,
as an independent unit, to maintain the needs of one infantry battalion. It
