In 1941, the branch was up-graded to a deputy directorate, with consequent
changes in the organization, which was then as follows, under a D.D.S.T.
(Catering) : —
S.T.4 (a) -Training - A.D.S.T., D.A.D.S.T.,
two staff captains (one
A. T.S.), Inspector of C.T.Cs.
S.T.4 (b) Catering- A.D.S.T., five D.A.Ds.S.T., (two A.T.S.), three staff
captains.
In 1943, an Inspector of the Army Catering Corps and a D.A.D.S.T. (Co.
ordination) were added to the staff of the D.D.S.T., and the functions of the
sections were defined anew, S.T.4 (a) dealing with training and inspections,
and S.T.4 (b) with catering, messing by-products, and A.C.C. questions.
The post-war re-organization brought a change of designations the head
of the branch being now called the Deputy Director of the Army Catering
Corps, and the subordinate officers on his staf assistant directors and deputy
assistant directors of the Army Catering Corps. The branch remained part
of the S. and T. Directorate.
Formation of Army Catering Corps
The proposal to form a Corps of Army Cooks was put forward by the
Q.M.G.,
War Office, in 1936-1937, as the only means of attaining unification
of the improvements then being introduced or contemplated in connection
with Army cooking, but it was rejected on the grounds of the difficulties antici-
pated in regard to training, posting, and replacement of casualties, and of the
overhead charges which would arise in the administration of a separate corps,
reasons which it was considered outweighed any advantage which might accrue.
The question was reviewed in the light of war-time conditions and the
formation of the Army Catering Corps was authorized with effect from 22nd
March, 1941.
The objects of the formation of a separate corps were to
provide for more expert advice and instruction in catering and cooking through.
out the Army, and, by incorporating qualified cooks into one corps, to control
their posting in order to ensure their distribution among units to the best
advantage.
The Director of Supplies and Transport was made responsible for the
training of the A.C.C., for laying down the qualifications required, and for
catering policy.
Duties of the A.C.C.
The duties of the A.C.C. are two-fold, advisory and executive.
(a) Advisory. - Officers of the A.C.C. are responsible for giving advice
on catering matters to formation and unit commanders.
The scope
of this advice normally concerns the best use of the rations, equipment.
and personnel available, so as to provide the soldier with appeting.
and varied meals in all conditions, coupled with avoidance of wask
and with conservation of messing by-products.
(b) Executive. _ Officers of the A.C.C. attached to units are responsi
to the commanding officer for the standard of messing in the unit
Other ranks of the A.C.C. are provided to cook for all units, being
other ranks are employed in the training of personnel as cooks.
shown in the establishmente ae attached nersonnel Roth officers 21
20
The responsibilities of the Catering Deputy Directorate as they were at
the end of the war are shown in Appendix XIA.
Catering Organization, Commands and Formations
A Command Catering Adviser was appointed to the staff of the D.D.S.T.
of each command headquarters in the United Kingdom.
There was also in
each command a pool of catering advisers,
proportionate in numbers to the
number of units in the command.
The D.D.S.T. was responsible for the control
and administration of the pool, and for all matters of a technical nature
connected
with
catering.
Os.C.,
R.A.S.C., of Districts exercised similar
functions within their jurisdictions.
A senior adviser was located at the H.Q.,
R.A.S.C., of each district.
Catering advisers were based on C.S.Ds.
A specialist messing officer of the A.C.C. was attached to selected static
units where the War Establishment exceeded 1,000, and a trained regimental
messing officer was posted to each unit whose strength exceeded 400.
Officers,
warrant officers and senior
N.C.Os. were also employed as instructors as
necessary.
Overseas, the organization for control of Army Catering Services followed
the same lines as at home, a Chief Catering Adviser being appointed to the
headquarters of a theatre, etc., where necessary, and catering advisers being
allotted to formation headquarters, down to divisions.
Q.M.G. 17/S.T. 2—P.O.L.
At the outbreak of war, the administration of petroleum products in the
War Office was carried out by Q.M.G.6 (b), which consisted of one D.A.D.S.T.,
one staff captain, and one staff lieutenant. By the end of September, 1939, it
had become clear that petroleum products would require to be administered
by a separate branch of the S.T. Directorate, and this was accordingly estab-
lished with the designation of Q.M.G. 17, to be changed later to S.T.2.
was composed of one A.D.S.T., one D.A.D.S.T., one staff captain (technical),
one staff captain (mobilization and planning), one staff captain (general duties),
and one civilian accounts officer.
The formation of this branch considerably eased many of the administra-
tive difficulties which had confronted Q.M.G. 6 (b).
Its organization and
establishment gradually developed, in order to cope with increasing commit-
ments at home and overseas, until at the end of 1940, the branch consisted of
the following: —
A.D.S.T.
D.A.D.S. T.
S.T. 2(a)
S.T. 2 (b)
S.T. 2 (c)
(Overseas theatres)
Home
(Technical
D.A.D.S.T.
D.A.D.S.T.
Staff captain
Staff captain
Staff captain
The sections remained in principle up to the end of the war, but were
expanded as the responsibilities increased.
In October,
1941, the branch
was up-graded to deputy directorate under a colonel as D.D.S.T. (P.O.L.),
with an A.D.S.T. as deputy, and an A.D.S.T. in charge of each section.
21
WO 277/21.
27
WO277/26
