With the end of hostilities, the Directorate began at once to disband.
General Chater was
recalled in October,
Brigadier C. H. Lyall-Grant was appointed Director, and plans were put in
recaleat once tor the forming of a peace time Combined Operations Establishment in India.
Results of C.C.O.s Visit to India and S.E.A.C.
From the outline of events in India, we return to C.O.H.Q. The C.C.O, on return from his
visit to India and S.F.A.C., in November and December, 1944, made the following points at a
meeting of the Executive of C.O.H.Q. :-
(1) It had been agreed that D.C.O. (India) should come directly under C.-in-C. India in
his capacity of being head of the three Services in India, but should not, however,
come under G.H.Q. India.
(2) It had been agreed that D.C.O. (India) should act as Combined Operations Adviser and
Staff Officer to Commander, Allied Land Forces, S.E.A.
(3) A new directive had now been issued to D.C.O. (India) by C.-in-C. India.
(4) It had been agreed that C.O.H.Q. should deal direct with the Combined Operations
Division of S.A.C.S.E.A. This latter organisation did not in any way come under
D.C.O. (India) though it maintained close liaison.
(5) The technique of an assault up river mouths should be studied as a matter of urgency,
as it appeared likely that most of the assaults carried out in S.E.A.C. would be done
under these conditions.
(6) D.C.O. (India) felt the need for more information from C.O.H.Q. as to what problems
were being studied in the United Kingdom, and on the type of equipment, landing ships
and craft, that were likely to be provided for use in S.E.Á.C.
At present the
majority of information on amphibious warfare reaching D.C.O. (India) was from
the C.C.O. Representative, Washington.
The Executive in their decisions at this meeting :—
(1) Took note of C.C.O.'s statement.
(2) Instructed D.C.O. (Air) to consider the question of the provision of further information
for D.C.O. (India) and to submit recommendations.
3) Took note that the Amphibious Warfare Committee were already examining the question
of the technique for assault up river mouths.
New problems were thus clearly taking shape as new conditions of ground and climate opened
ip under the world-wide allied forward movement across the beaches, rivers, swamps and islands
of a dozen widely separated territories.
Collection of Intelligence Europe and Far East
Amphibious operations planned for European Theatres had an advantage in that there was
a mass of reliable intelligence available on all likely areas of assault
Maps were plentiful and
on a large scale and, although clandestine reconnaissance was frequently employed, it was in an
essential supplementary rather than, as in the East, an essential primary role.
It was at the beginning of 1944 that C.O.H.Q. developed the technique of beach reconnaissance
from Midget submarines. The actual reconnaissance was made by the Combined Operations Pilotage
Parties (C.O..P.) and it was found that the Midget submarines the undertake the role of daylight
reconnaissance of the beaches. They could reconnoitre a beach without surfacing and thus obtain
valuable information for the use of the planner.
This technique was wanted both in the South-
East Asia and the Pacific Commands but, in spite of the constant efforts of C.O.H.Q., it was not
found possible to send these craft overseas. In spite of then stant Midset submarines the Small
Operations Group S.E.A.C. played a primary and vital role in operations in this theatre and an
account of its contribution is given in detail in Appendix 22.
C.O. H.Q. was much concered to maintain the same close contact with realities, and quick
adaptation to new requirements in the Eastern War as in the nearer European Theatres.
C. O's visits in the new theatre at the end of 1944, his Chief of Staff, Burophet (later Major-General
V. D. Thomas carried out a tour commencing 17th April and ending 15th May, 1945.
He conferred
with the D.C.O. (I.) in Delhi and the Head of Combined Operations,
S.A.C.S.E.A., in Kandy.
His
discussions covered a wide variety of subjects, some of which it is of interest to record here.
With the D.C.O. (I.), he discussed :—
Surf training and technique.
Co-ordination of C.O.X.E. (U.K.) and C.O.X.E. (I.).
Development of a flying deck on L.S. T.s for light aircraft.
Requirements for the Beach Pilotage School.
Ships and landing craft for C.T.C.s and C.O.X.E. (I.).
Provision of staff officers and instructors from the U.K. for India and S.E.A.C.
The new Indian Beach Organisation, Force 143.
Training in assault amphibians and support amphibians.
River assault technique.
Command and control of Air Forces.
With the Head of Combined Operations, S.A.C.S.E.A., he discussed : -
Additional accommodations in L.S. T.s for assault troops.
Organisation and training of Beach Brigades.
Carriage of pontoons and estuary trials.
The R.M. Assault Regiment.
Commando requirements in S.E. Asia.
Communications in amphibians.
Availability of H.Q. Ships.
Floating airfields.
Air recognition.
Provision of a Combined Operations Bombardment Unit.
WO 277/21
27
3ф
1 Agenda and full records of these meetings exist in A.W.H.Q. Records Section.
An excelle tri shed what as and personal, picture of the rosses condition e progress of lion
furnished by the liaison letters
trom India by the officer maintained there for that purpose.
79
STAEDTLES
