Responsibilities and Duties
(a) The D.C.O. (1) will be a separate Directorate, and will be responsible to and take instructions
from the Chiefs of Staff through the Director.
(8) The senior officers of the Directorate will become a corporate tady whenever called together
by the Director of Combined Operations in order to give joint advice.
(a) The Director will be responsible for all executive action with regard to the policy affecting all
three Services as decided by the Directorate.
(a) In all matters concerned solely with their own Service, the Senior Officers will take executive
action through their own service headquarters for representing the views of those headquarters
within the Directorate.
(e) The D.C.O. (I) will advise and assist both the F.P.S. and E.P.S. in the preparation of all
appreciations and plans connected with combined operations.
(^ On the appointment of Force Commanders for any combined operation the services of the
D.C.O.) will be placed at their disposal to assist them in planning and in obtaining executive
action which they may require.
(s) The D.C.O. (I) will be responsible for advising the section responsible for Intelligence for
Combined Operations (I.C.O.) of any special type of information required or action to be
taken in connection with combined operations, such action being co-ordinated in person by
the Director with the Joint Intelligence Committee.
(1) The D.C.O. (I) will be responsible through the Staff Officer (Combined Operations) for the
co-ordinating the development and provision by the three services of all specialised equipment
for combined operations and its trial and development at the Combined Training Centres.
(i) The D.C.O.(I) will maintain direct and constant liaison with similar directorates in the United
Kingdom, Middle East and elsewhere on questions within the sphere of their responsibility.
Administration
For purposes of office administration the Directorate will be attached to General Staff.
For purposes
of personal administration the personnel of the Directorate will be attached to their respective
headquarters.
APPENDIX 17
DIRECTIVE FOR THE DIRECTORATE OF COMBINED OPERATIONS (INDIA), OCTOBER, 1943
Title
title D.C. title of the Directorate will be the Directorate of Combined Operations (India) Short
Composition
2. (a) The Director will assume all functions previously exercised by a Joint Body.
(b) The Director will be assisted by a Deputy Director (Brigadier) who will be responsible for
liaison with branches of the Army Staff General Headquarters, and with H.Q., S.E.A.C
and 11 Army Group, the general supervision of all staff duties within the Directorate, and
the organisation and inspection of all combined training establishments.
In these functions
he will be assisted by a small staff.
(c) The naval member will be responsible for the technical advice and supervision of naval training
at the combined training establishments, liaison with H.Q., S.E.A.C., Commander-in-Chief,
(F.O.C.R.I.N.).
Fleet (C.-in-C., E.F.) and the Flag Officer Commanding,
Royal Indian Navy
(a) The Royal Air Force member will be responsible for the technical advice and supervision of
Royal Air Force training at the combined training establishments, liaison with H.Q. Air
Command, South-East Asia (A.C.S.E.A.) and Air H.Q. India.
Responsibilities and Duties
3. The Directorate forms part of the General Staff Branch and the Director is immediately
responsible to the Chief of the General Staff (C.G.S.) for :—
a trainine all forces in Tadia catarad for combined aneratione in the tachnique of
landing on an enemy coast.
(6) Technibil advice to General Headquarters, India (G.H.Q, (I)), on all matters connected with
combined operations.
(o) Tracon development of special equipment for combined operations and the making of
recommendations for its provision.
Responsibilities thor than those enumerated above that are at present held by the Director of
Combined Operations, India (D.C. (I, will be taken that are arapresent heid eral Hicadquarters
establishments.
He will be responsible for executive action oly in by netich with the combined training
228
4. These responsibilities will be discharged as follows :—
(a) Iraining.-
-The main preoccupation of the D.C.O. (I) will be the control and development of
all
combined training establishments, for all
local administration,
will remain the responsibility of the area or subares es exhich toe as taminineation, catich.
ormatons, units due luividuais to ve tramed at these establishments are nominated b
com Comman he training nie and posa i consuit their tịth the
Supreme Allied
Commander.
worked
out by
the D.C.O.(I) in conjunction with the Director of Military Training (D.M.T.).
G.H.Q. (I)
will be responsible for the movement of these troops to training establishments and areas
where the D.C.O.(I) will be responsible for their training, but not their administration.
(b) Information.-
-The D.C.O.(I) will be responsible for co-ordinating all information in respect
of combined operations on behalf of G.H.Q.(I), H.Q., S.E.A.C. and the three
service head
quarters in South-Fast Asia Command
He will do this by collating and distributing, i
the form of monthly bulletins, all available information on combined operations.
(c) Advice.— He will be available to G.H.Q (I) (and H.Q., S.E.A.C.) including its three service
headquarters, for advice on all matters affecting combined operations.
d) Irial and Development.—He will be responsible for carrying out trials and for development
and modification of equipment for combined operations.
He will co-ordinate suggestions
for trial and
development and transmit them to the Combined Operations Development
Centre (C.O.D.C.).
(e) Royal Navy and Royal Indian Navy.-
-The D.C.O.(I) will only be responsible for the training
of personnel who are required for beach development
and communications.
the trainine
of landing craft crews is the responsibility of the C.-in-C., E.F. and F.O.C.R.I.N.
(f) Royal Air Force.— He will only be responsible for the training of such personnel as will be
equired to land over beaches in the initial stages of an operation or who are required fo
each development, in embarkation, disembarkation and the organisation of a beach are:
(g) Bombardment School.—(Final location not yet settled).
This school will be administered by
the local authority concerned.
The directives for the school will come from the Bombardment
Committee through the D.C.O.(1).
(h) Signal School, Bandra.—This school forms part of H.M.S. Salsette for purposes of administration
only.
The directives for the school will come from the Combined Signal Committee
through D.C.O.(I).
Administration
5. For the purpose of office administration the Directorate will form part of General Staff Branch.
For the purposes of personal administration the personnel of the Directorate will be attached to their
respective headquarters.
02745
WO 277/21
27
3ф
APPENDIX 18
G.S.
BRANCH
DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY BETWEEN D.C.O.(I) AND D.M.T. WITH
REGARD TO
COMBINED TRAINING
With effect from 15th October, 1944, the Director of Military Training (D.M.T.) will be responsible
for training in combined operations.
with this subiect will be M.T. 6.
The section of Military Training Directorate (M.T. Dte.) dealing
An outline of the division of responsibility as between D.M.T. and D.C.O.(I) is given below.
Part I.-D.M.T. Responsibilities
1. Acceptance of formations, units and individuals for training at combined training establishments,
and courses.
2. Exercises (including spectators) courses and other combined operations training.
than local administration which is the responsibility of Southern Army.
3. General administration
(including training grant) of combined training establishments, other
Note (i) Local administration includes movement of trops to ran away from Caps contraction
and maintenance of camps and roads;
mock-ups, hards and other works.
(ii) The combined training establishments referred to are :—
No. 1 Combined Training Centre with, under command :—
§Combined Training Staff School.
On reduced establishments ( Dryshod Training Teams " A" and " B."
No. 2 Combined Training Centre (Cadre establishment).
No. 3 Combined Training Centre (Cadre establishment).
229
