Supply Reserves, 1943-1945
In March, 1943, the authorized scale of reserves, then standing e
days' G.S., and 30 days' working margin, was reduced to 60 day' 6.
30 days' working margin. In October, 1943, the policy was again cho
to provide for a G.S. reserve of 45 days and a working margin of 45%
which remained in force until the end of the war.
At this time, Middle East were holding reserves for two theatre,
their own, and a portion of those of A.F.H.Q.
In the circumstances
Office laid down that the locations of these reserves should be as follons!
(a) Reserves at the disposal of Middle East were to be held in No
East, on the basis of M.E. Order of Battle, exclusive of those fin
earmarked for transfer to A.F.H.Q.
(b) Reserves at the disposal of A.F.H.Q., to the extent of 30 d
were the responsibility of Middle East to provide and mainte
They were based on strength figures
produced by A.F.HO
they were required for consumption, A.F.H.Q. called them fore
and War Office made automatic replacement.
Middle East arrang
turnover within the command of stocks not called forward.
From
this time, Middle East rendered normal monthly stock retur
showing the two reserves separately.
The figures of 45 days' G.S. resen
and 45 days' maintenance stocks for Middle East remained in force uni
the end of the war.
Food for Occupied Territories
the commitment became a considerable burden.
Strong representations were accordingly made by Middle East for l
separate
provision of civilian food supplies for Tripolitania and Cyrenan.
The U.K.C.C. were willing to undertake the commitment on the same ters
as they were operating in Eritrea, i.., they would import, store and ists
from warehouses in Tripoli and Benghazi, all essential foods, as indian.
Response
by the British Military Authority, who would fix selling prices.
bility for
D.S.T.,
maintenance of supplies to Tripolitania was transferred thos
ME, to MES.C. from January, 19it aid Tos Cyrenai te
Civil Affairs Bureau and U.K.C.C. from January, 1945.
Civil Supplies war
inted over by D.S.I. at the latter date to cover yo days reserve and 9 days
winter reserve.
Solid Fuel for Turkey and the Balkans
Middle East were instructed during 1943 to build up stocks apis
possible requirements for the Balkans (30,000 tons), and Turkey
A few thousand tone had already heen sent from Middla Fast i
Shortage of supplies, however prevented these stocks being built u
and in May. 1944, it was decided to build un all Middle Eastmilitary and
railway stocks to three months' supply, and
the Balkan and Turkish requirements could be met if necessary.
212
In September,
1944,
A.F.H.Q. became responsible for all future re-
quirements of coal for the Balkans, but the first 30 days' requirements of
38,000 tons were supplied by Middle East, 18,000 from surplus stocks, and
20,000 by diversion of colliers bound for Middle East ports.
Thereafter,
demands for coal for the Balkans, averaging 30,000 tons
vete included by A.F.H.Q. in their normal monthly S.A.C.M.E.D. demands.
which were
met by shipments from South Africa,
extent, the United Kingdom.
U.S.A., and, to a less
None of the Turkish commitment was called forward.
By 1944, the coal
of Middle East had dropped con-
siderably, and the Balkans commitment was taken over by Supreme Allied
Commander, Mediterranean theatre.
Tripoli requirements were down to 200 tons monthly, and as M.O.W.T.
had put in commercial bunkering stocks there, it was decided in November,
1944, that these requirements should be met by local purchase.
The reduced monthly military
were laid down at 2,000
tons for Egypt,
600 tons for Palestine, and 200 tons for Syria, plus three
months' reserve in each case.
Middle East continued to notify stock states to S.T. 7, including both
military and railway stocks; but S.T.7 were concerned only with shipments
from South Africa for Egypt.
Requirements for Palestine and Syria were bought locally from railway
stocks, shipped from South Africa under M.O.W.T. arrangements.
Water Transport
Before the war, the R.A.S.C. in the Middle East had only operated a
As the war progressed these increased in numbers.
various units and formations began to operate their own small craft, without
proper control or supervision, to the detriment of vessel maintenance.
In November, 1943, therefore, G.H.Q. Middle East reviewed the
with resard to the operation of smal cra ind decide reviewed the policy
should be responsible for the operation of all these small craft.
A Motor Boat Company was consequently formed to include the opera-
tional craft.
the Aegean.
Amongst other
vessels, it operated six auxiliary cruisers in
Military personnel had been found to man them, and, with
Greck civilians to assist in navigation, they sailed to Famagusta and Haifa,
and delivered their cargoes at Leros on the day of the German invasion.
The formation of Water Transport Companies to operate non-operational
craft proved difficult, wins to a reluctance to change the established order,
but eventually two Wavin Transport Companies and a Boat Stores Depot
were formed.
andria and Port Said.
One company was located at Suez, and the other at Alex-
The launches taken over by these units were, owing
to age and othe said. The laun in very good condition, and a programme
of overhaul had to be instituted.
ally at Alexandria.
The Boat Stores Depot was located eventu-
Its holding was about 700 tons.
213
WO 277/21
27
WO277726
