Other Transport Units
Besides the divisional, Corps troops, and G.H.O. troops, companies men.
tioned above, and employed in the direct maintenance . those formations,
certain other R.A.S.C. transport units accompanied the B.E.F., or joined it
subsequently.
Some of these were provided primarily for employment at the
base of on the L. of C.; these inchuded reserve M.T. companies, L. of C. M.T.
companies, the L. of C. (railhead) M.T. company (to which reference has
already been made), ambulance car companies, and the transport wing of
motor ambulance convoys (which were R.A.M.C. units).
Specialist companies
were bridge companies, works companies, troop-carrying companies, and bulk
petrol transport companies.
A brief description of the composition and functions of the various types
of company is contained in Appendix IIA.
In addition to operating all these units, the R.A.S.C. provided the vehicles
and drivers for formation headquarters (except armoured formations) and for
all medical units, and maintained these vehicles.
In divisions, the divisional
petrol company was responsible for the maintenance of such vehicles.
Vehicle Maintenance and Repair
At this time, the R.A.S.C. were still responsible not only for vehicle main-
tenance and repair within the resources of the R.A.S.C. M.T. company work.
shop, but also for the heavy repairs to, and overhaul of R.A.S.C. vehicles; for
the R.A.S.C. M.T. stores organization; and for the provision and holding of
replacement vehicles.
This system had been proved in the war of 1914-1918.
An account of the
principles underlying it, of its characteristics, of the difficulties experienced
in France in connection with its operation in 1939-1940, and of suggested
modifications, is contained in Appendix VIB, in the form of a paper on the
subject written in January, 1940.
Briefly, each company had its own self-contained workshop, capable of
carrying out second line repairs normally, and more extensive work if condi-
tions permitted.
Each workshop was in charge of an officer i/c workshops,
and was organized in sections, each of which had a workshop, or technical
machinery, lorry, a stores lorry, and a breakdown lorry.
Vehicles beyond the
capacity of the company workshop were evacuated to the R.A.S.C. heavy
repair shop at the base.
The H.R.S. formed part of the R.A.S.C. base M.I.
depot, which also included the base M.T. stores depot (M.T.S.D.), and the
M.T. vehicle reception depot (V.R.D.).
The H.R.S. carried out major repairs and overhauls, and passed repaired
vehicles to the V.R.D. for reissue.
The V.R.D. held the vehicle reserve,
took in new vehicles from overseas, and reconditioned vehicles from HRS.
and issued replacements to R.A.S.C. units. It included forward and rearvar
parks. The M.T.S.D. held spare parts and stores, and issued both to operatin.
companies and to H.R.S. It included a main depot and an advanced dept,
the stores being divided between them in the proportion of 2/3rds and 1/86
respectively.
General Developments
As the war progressed, the organization described above underwent!
continuous process of modification, in the liaht of experience, or to me
changed conditions.
The main principles governing the changes were flexi-
bility, interchangeability,
and simplicity.
These objects were attained by
making units smaller and self-contained, by standardizing establishments, and
by the
introduction of the standard sub-unit component, from which any
major unit or group could easily be built up for any required purpose without
the necessity for designing a new War Establishment.
This kind of re-
organization affected the transport units to a greater extent than either supply
or petrol units.
The principal development in regard to supplies was in the direction of
the ration pack, while, in respect of P.O.L., development was mainly con-
cerned with the production of a satisfactory returnable container, with bulk
supply, and with standardization of grades.
Transport developments included the recognition of the principle of the
employment of second and third line transport on a pool basis, the introduction
of new forms of transport, especially air supply and amphibians, and of
new types of unit, and the re-organization of the vehicle maintenance system.
The principal of these developments are described below.
Those with a
more limited application, such as water transport, or designed to meet parti-
cular requirements in a theatre, are dealt with more conveniently in other
chapters.
This applies particularly to the units, equipment, etc., evolved for
employment in the campaign in the Far East.
Base Supply Units
As a result of the lessons learnt in the early stages of the maintenance of
the B.E.F., reforms were initiated in the supply organization, in order to
obviate a repetition of the shortcomings which had been so painfully apparent.
D.I.Ds. were re-organized as self-contained units, no longer dependent on
the parent supply personnel company for any part of their administrative
arrangements.
The original base supply depot was designed as a static bulk
installation, and had the disadvantage of being immobile and unwieldy in
an operational theatre, where movement was necessary.
Moreover, the con-
centration of one large bulk supply installation at or round one port had its
obvious dangers and disadvantages.
The type
"B" B.S.D. was therefore
introduced to overcome these objections, and continued in use throughout the
war without material alterations.
It was a much smaller unit, being capable
of feeding, and holding the necessary reserves for 25,000 men.
A group of
three or four type "B" depots operating under a base provision officer, could
provide for the same number of men as the original, or type " A" depot, but
with certain
important advantages,
e.g., a much better dispersal of bulk
supplies and installations was made possible; the B.S.Ds. were rendered more
mobile, resulting in a greater flexibility, which permitted their following up
an advance, and moving with rapidity into newly won ports or bases.
Lines
of communication
were thus prevented from becoming unduly stretched,
with the consequent saving of time, labour, and transport; should a withdrawal
take place, the possibility of all supplies being lost by the loss of one B.S.D.
was obviated.
The Type "B" B.S.D. was organized with such a background in mind,
and with the intention of reducing the difficulties liable to be met, if a change-
over from a static rôle to one more mobile were required.
Further details
of its organization are contained in Appendix IIB.
w0277/2k
27
WO27 7/26
