From this appalling quandary we were rescued by the Chief of Combined Operations
always a leader of progressive thought, and somewhat
of an enfant terrible to his more
elderly confreres.
He presented us with an opportunity to uproot the whole wrangle from
the arena of London,
where surroundings were
inimical both materially and psychologically
to open-minded consideration of any bold departure from
established precedent,
entirely fresh setting.
one of the routine courses in Combined Operations held periodically
atthe Combined Operations Scottish Headquarters at Largs, was unobtrusively altered in
Shape and content so as to include all the principal contestants in out C.O.S.S.A.C. scheming,
included men of all ranks of all Services, both American and British.
The congregation
as well as the chief leaders of thought from outside our organisat The syllabus of the
Course was so shaped as to cover all the main points of difference between the various
schools of thought.
The object of the Course was to give all concerned the opportunity to
discuss openly with each other the whole subject of a cross-Channel operation, its feasibility
in general and the practicability of all the many detailed points of execution.
There were
almost as many thoughts as there were men.
But there was no more time for sulking, each
in his own tent, and juggling with words and figures on paper.
We must hear the conclusion
of the whole matter argued out in comparative public."
We were to discuss principles.
And one principle, we, of C.O.5.S.A.C., would take care to watch was that we were now
charged with responsibility for the whole business.
We did not profess to be experts in
any particular line.
Experts abounded, many of whom were convinced, each in his own
mind, that he had in his little black bag the secret of the infallible system.
The price of
such an article was very often simply control, or a large part of control, of the whole operation.
That belonged, all of it, by definition to our Supreme Commander-to-be, whose interests
C.O.S.S.A.C. must jealously guard.
We must fear all those bearing gifts of any nature.
It is very often the little things that matter, and every little thing was attended to a
' part
of the Mountbatten service.'
The showmanship
could not have
been excelled
Domestic arrangements were perfect.
On guard was a Commando of such magnificent
bearing as to disarm the most carping army critic.
As there were suspected to be savage
breasts among us, the pipe band of the local Home Guard appeared at intervals to rend
the atmosphere with the indigenous substitute for music.
Even the weather was apparently
cajoled into giving us perfect days, and a perfect day on that Scottish coast is almost as
perfect as a day can be.
The only cloud in the atmosphere, favourable to our ambitions
as we had gone all out to create it, was the appearance one evening in the offing of a great
convoy outward-bound from the Clyde, carrying a Canadian Division to the war in Sicily,
away from ' Overlord.' But even here the best was made of a bad job. General McNaughton
who was
one of our number, was enabled to send a valedictory message to his men by the
provision, on the spur of the moment, of a highly efficient little ' Wren' signaller, complete
with lamp, right there on the roof of the hotel which was the main headquarters.
At the end of our first day of discussion and study, the Chief of Combined Operations
and I paced the lawns to compare our impressions.
It looked hopeless from our point of view.
For he and I were together from the start in our determination to see this thing through.
It was, of course, my duty to obey my orders.
He, as distinct from most of his associates,
from the start had no doubts as to the possibility of success; and this quite apart from the
fact that the Chief of Combined Operations could hardly fail to advocate that which, if it
came off, would stand for years, if not for ever, as the apothesis of all Combined Operations,
that is of all future sailors, soldiers and airmen.
now?
carefully throughout that day it looked as if there was no hope.
But from watching ' the opposition
it one more day.
He had lots of other urgent affairs that needed his attention.
Should we give up, here and
of the opposition was seen to smile.
And during that day what we hoped for began to happen.
We decided to give
A member
there was not only unanimity, but enthusiasm.
We redoubled our efforts, and by the end of the course
concerned. was on,
'Overlord,' so far as C.O.S.S.A.C. was
Though naturally the Largs Course had dealt with matters of general principle and
matters of method and organisation, this had been done on an hypothetical basis only.
There remained with us the decision as between our two alternatives.
thinking, by now the decision was easy.
Western Normandy it must be.
alternative if we were to keep our time-table and attack within the year.
To our way
And there was no
I think it is fair tn sav that we had always been disposed to favour the Normandy
tending it on an the at hate at the can rades before nur tim
the Cotentin-Dieppe region rather
no onese with proiects for a variety of landings to the southward, in
outstanding advantages.
that
First, the shape of the coast.
to the south-eastward.
But there were other
The weather records for years past
64
TAEDTLE:
were searched, and it was hard to find a case in which summer had seen heavy weather
from any point of the compass
other than between south and west.
are completely sheltered from this quarter, whereas beaches further east are not.
The Norman beaches
in the
event, of course, we lost that part of the bet completely when that north-easterly gale
blew up just after "D" day in 1944.
But our original bet was still a good one.
Weather on the beaches brings one to the question of length of sea crossing for the
considerable army, for an advanced guard of some thirty Divisions is a very considerable
ammy, and the aste anomical eomay s al aps transport and geer.
Quite simply, the shorter
While afloat the Army is incapable of helping itself and relies upon Navy and
Air for its protection, a task of immense complication and difficulty under conditions such
as existed in the English Channel in this war.
So very few submarines or fast torpedo boats
or bomber aircraft can do such vast damage in such short a time to a slow-moving fleet of
thin-skinned invasion craft.
The shorter the voyage such fleets have to make, therefore,
the bettel.
Other things being equal, the Navy would hope for the Pas de Calais.
But even
for the Navy other things were not equal, and the voyage to Normandy was never considered
to be of prohibitive length.
Then there was the vital question of beach exits, that is, ways of getting off the beaches
into the country back of them.
If the invasion battle takes place on the beach, one is already
defeated.
One hopes and plans for battle, on the other hand, as far inland from the beach
as may be.
There must be as little delay as possible in getting the troops and their multi-
farious goods off the beach and inland.
most other things,
This is mainly a matter of choice of beach and, as in
compromise is necessary.
It may be that the best beach on which to
land troops from the nautical point of view is at the foot of a cliff.
The best beach from
the soldier's aspect may be one approached through shoals and rocks.
On balance here
again, Normandy was the better."*
Planning for " Overlord"
The Conference at Largs (" Rattle") concluded on 2nd July, 1943, and General Morgan in
his capacity as C.O.S.S.A.C. forwarded his plan to the Chiefs of Staff on 15th July. His covering
memorandum reads as follows :—
"I have the honour now to report that, in my opinion, it is possible to undertake the
operation described, on or about the target date named, with the sea, land and air forces
specified, given a certain set of circumstances in existence at that time.
These governing circumstances are partly within our direct control and partly without.
Those within our control relate first to the problem of beach maintenance, and secondly to
the supply of shipping, naval landing craft and transport aircraft. Wherever we may attempt
to land, and however many ports we capture, we cannot escape the fact that we shall be
forced to maintain a high proportion of our forces over the beaches for the first two or three
months while port facilities are being restored; and that, in view of the variability of the
weather this will not be feasible unless we are rapidly to improvise sheltered anchorages off
the beaches.
New methods of overcoming this problem are now being examined.
There is
no reason to suppose that these methods will be ineffective, but I feel it my duty to point
out that this operation is not to be contemplated unless this
problem of prolonged cross-
beach maintenance and the provision of artificial anchorages shall have been solved.
As regards the supply of shipping, naval landing craft and transport aircraft, increased
resources in these would permit the elaboration of alternative plans designed to meet more
than one set of extraneous conditions, whereas the state of provision herein taken into account
dictates the adoption of one course only, or none at all.
In proportion as additional shipping,
landing craft and transport aircraft can be made available, so the chances of success in the
operation will be increased. It seems feasible to contemplate additions as a result either of
stepped-up production, of strategical re-allotment, or, in the last resort, of postponement
of the date of assault.
I have come to the conclusion that, in view of the limitations in resources imposed by
my directives, we may be assured of a reasonable chance of success on 1st May, 1944, only
if we concentrate our efforts on an assault across the Norman beaches about Bayeux.
As regards circumstances that we can control indirectly, it is, in my opinion, necessary
to stipulate that the state of affairs existing at the time, both on land in France and in the
air above it, shall be such as to render the assault as little hazardous as may be, so far as it
is humanly possible to calculate.
The essential discrepancy in value between the enemy's
7
WO 277/21
2:
