162
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
worrying about flanks or anything. The big mass of German
soldiery wants an opportunity to surrender. They must be
given it. This does not apply to the SS troops. Great vistas are
now opening up ahead and we want Generals who will put
their heads down and go like hell.
I also have got to remove the Commander of 30 Corps. It
is no good trying to make him change his character. He is too
slow for this mobile business. Please show this letter to the
CIGS.21
Montgomery replaced Bucknall as XXX Corps commander
with his old friend Lt-Gen Brian Horrocks, who had, as it were,
been waiting in the wings, recovering from a stomach wound
received during an
air raid on Bizerta before
the Sicilian
invasion. The appointment was something
of a risk,
Horrocks was not yet fully recovered, but Montgomery knew
that in him he had a dashing commander who would inspire the
troops and 'put his head down and go like hell' when the
opportunity arose. In a sense, Horrocks was Montgomery's
answer to the charge of over-caution.
Montgomery had told Simpson that he wanted to bring
Horrocks out to France as soon as he was well, and Simpson
sent back briefings about the lieutenant-general's recovery.
After nearly dying in the Cambridge Hospital at Aldershot
Barracks, Horrocks had been trying to get fit - even dressing up
in marching order and going out for long tramps at night
'dressed up like a Christmas tree'. At the end of July Simpson
told Montgomery that Horrocks was 'more or less fit for active
service', and this precipitated Bucknall's dismissal.
Everyone serving in XXX Corps HQ at that time to whom I
have spoken told me that there was a dramatic contrast between
Bucknall
unquestionable
and Horrocks. The former, a dapper figure
courage,
was precise
and conscientious,
if
somewhat uninspiring, while Horrocks had enormous charisma.
On his arrival he immediately gave his Corps HQ staff a pep
talk, and then made a lightning tour of the formations. Morale
improved enormously, although nearly everyone who saw him
thought that he looked ill. (General Roberts told me that his
troops always felt better after Horrocks had visited his division.)
Whether thanks to Horrocks or not, 43rd Division had by 6
August captured the 1,200-foot-high Mont Pinçon, the most
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
important tactical feature in Normandy, and from there XXX
Corps observers could look down on the Germans, making
effective use of artillery concentrations. Meanwhile, Patton's US
Third Army was ranging almost unopposed through Brittany,
while US First Army, turning east, had captured Mortain on 2
'Bluecoat' kept three Panzer divisions and three battalions of
heavy tanks away from the American sector, forces which
would otherwise have been thrown against Bradley; now, with
the advances of VIII and XXX Corps, Montgomery had made
a large contribution to pinching out the Germans in what was
becoming the Mortain salient. The American press, however,
were more interested in Bradley's spectacular advances - the
British and Canadians had scant credit for their efforts.
The following letters from Montgomery to Simpson reveal his
planning and his supreme confidence. General Simpson told me
that Montgomery wrote less inhibitedly to him
CIGS, and added: 'Monty knew that if I thought it would be
useful I would show it to the CIGS, in which case Churchill
probably saw it as well; but if it was at all delicate and
confidential I would keep the information to myself and use it
for Monty's advantage in any discussions with the PM or the
CIGS and the Chiefs of Staff? Certainly these letters are clear
August 1, 1944
My dear Simbo,
About the 6th Airborne*. I must throw everything into the
present battle. The American Armies on the right and the
British Armies in the centre are now in the process of
carrying out the big wheel that will, I hope clear Brittany,
push the Germans back to beyond the Orne and swing the
right flank of the wheel. If the Second Army can progress
steadily now we have the German roping off force cut in two.
Once we get to Vire and Condé it will be awkward for the
* There were by now plans to withdraw 6th Airborne Division from the line
and return it to the
UK for refitting.
The division had been fighting
continuously since D-Day and had suffered heavy casualties as a result;
criticism.
