202
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
When I got near Antwerp none of Monty's liaison officers
could possibly contact me. We were going too fast; Monty
and Dempsey were many, many miles behind.
Horrocks himself wrote: 'If I had ordered Roberts, not to
liberate Antwerp, but to by-pass the town on the east, cross the
Albert Canal and advance only fifteen miles north-west towards
Woensdrecht, we should have blocked the Beveland isthmus?
He was right, for as we shall see the Germans would not have
been able to ferry Fifteenth Army troops over the Scheldt
(which was to have disastrous results), and the port of Antwerp
would have been usable far sooner. Worse still, on 4 September
Montgomery ordered XXX Corps to halt for three days. It is
true that some
supplies were short (though
according to
Horrocks, on 3 September the corps still had 100 miles of petrol
per vehicle) but he missed a marvellous opportunity to advance
rapidly northwards on an enemy in near-rout; undoubtedly
Patton in the same situation would have forged ahead.
The magnitude of the error
summarised by
The halt] was a tragedy because, as we now know, on the
next day, 4th September, the only troops available to bar our
passage northwards consisted of one German division, the
719th, composed mainly of elderly gentlemen who hitherto
had been guarding the north coast of Holland and had never
heard a shot fired in anger, plus one battalion of Dutch SS
and a few Luftwaffe detachments. This meagre force was
strung out on a fifty-mile front along the [Albert] canal.
To my mind 4th September was the key date in the battle
for the Rhine. Had we been able to advance that day we
could have
smashed through
this screen and advanced
northwards with little or nothing to stop us. We might even
have succeeded in bouncing a crossing over the Rhine. But we
halted, and even by that same evening the situation was
worsening. 3
Hitler rushed troops, including Student's élite Parachute
Army, to the Albert Canal, and by the time the attack was
resumed on 7 September German resistance was strong, and
203
Over the Seine
XXX Corps had great difficulty in securing bridgeheads over
the canal.
Horrocks's book generously gives the impression that he was
responsible for the stop at Antwerp, but this is incorrect. The
decision was
Montgomery's,
and
this is made
clear by
paragraph 6 of his Directive MS23 of 3 September, which also
demonstrates his extreme optimism about his proposed drive
into Germany; plainly he anticipated low resistance on his route
to the Rhine.
TOP SECRET
Copy No. 6
M523
3-9-44
21 Army Group
General Operational Situation and Directive
General Situation
1. Second Army is advancing
to
secure
the
BRUSSELS-GHENT-ANTWERP.
Its left Corps (12
Corps) is echelonned back to watch the left flank, until
Canadian Army can get forward to the BRUGES area.
2. Canadian Army is moving forward, across the SOMME
at ABBEVILLE, to its task of clearing the coastal belt.
Intention
3. (a) To advance eastwards and destroy all enemy forces
encountered.
(b) To
occupy
the RUHR, and get
astride the
communications leading from it into Germany and to
the sea ports.
Forward Boundaries
4. All inclusive: 12 Army Group:
WAVRE
TIRLEMONT
HASSELT - SITTARD -
GARZWEILER - LEVERKUSEN (on the RHINE)
All inclusive: 21 Army Group:
