240
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
road, they ran up against German self-propelled guns and tanks.
On Tuesday, 19 September, Frost's battalion was still isolated
and being attacked continuously by German forces, who were
becoming stronger and stronger every hour as they were
continually reinforced from Germany with tanks, including
some of the latest Tiger type. The 2nd Battalion succeeded in
repelling German armoured cars and half-tracks, with their
accompanying SS infantry, and knocked out several tanks. But
on the same day the Germans renewed their attack east of the
bridge, and at midday three tanks got into position near the river
and wrought havoc amongst Frost's men, preventing them from
manning their anti-tank guns.
St Elisabeth's Hospital, to the western end of the town, and
near the pontoon bridge, was in the heart of the fighting. Around
the hospital Fitch and Dobie, now joined by the South Staffords,
suffered appalling casualties as they made one confused assault
after another, trying to break through to Frost. Dobie's Ist
Battalion actually succeeded in capturing several German guns
and taking some prisoners in the early hours of Tuesday
morning, but from then on the battle developed into a massacre.
German artillery
and tanks pounded
the
British infantry
positions. Dobie himself was taken prisoner at 1730 on the 19th
after being badly wounded, but soon after arriving at the
hospital he made off and took refuge in a civilian house. For all
Tuesday and Wednesday the four attacking British battalions*
fought in Arnhem against German armour in desperate efforts
to reach Frost. The town became a blazing mass of rubble.
Early on Wednesday (D-plus-3) German tanks and infantry
broke through the British lines. Battered remains of the Ist, 3rd
and 11th Parachute Battalions and the South Staffords were
ordered by Urquhart to Westerbouwing, west of Oosterbeek.
They straggled back, harried by German tanks, and, with
Hackett's brigade, joined up with the remnants of the Division,
making a total of only 3,000 fighting men. These remnants dug in
and prepared to defend one small area, which became known to
the Germans as 'The Cauldron'.
* 1st, 3rd and 1Ith Parachute Battalions, and 2nd South Staffords. On the
afternoon of the 18th Hicks had sent Lt-Col G.H. Lea's 11th Parachute from
Hackett's Brigade to support the South Staffords. Urquhart was still missing
and did not reappear until the following morning.
241
Arnhem
Frost's battalion fought on through the night and into the
early hours of Thursday, but at 0900 on that day, 21 September
(D-plus-4), they surrendered, with more than half their number
dead or wounded. The route was now open for German tanks to
drive south towards Nijmegen and hold up XXX Corps'
advance.
On the afternoon of Friday, 22 September, Sosabowski's
Polish 1 Independent Parachute Brigade landed south of the
Rhine near Driel, as XXX Corps stood stationary at Bessen.
But by then the ferry over the river at Driel had been lost and all
the crossings were dominated by German guns. The Poles had
lost all their transport (landed by glider on D-plus-2), and enemy
preparedness now meant that there were far heavier casualties
on landing than in the previous two drops. Worst of all, many of
the gliders were attacked by German fighters. For the German
pilots flying time from their aerodromes to the Arnhem landing
grounds was only twenty minutes, and with Dunkirk still in
German hands the Luftwaffe were told the exact numbers and
direction of the Polish transport aircraft. On 23 September,
however the Poles were fortunately able to link up with the 4th
Dorsetshire Regiment from 43rd Division (the latter was now
leading XXX Corps' advance), and one troop of Household
Cavalry armoured cars from the same division also got through
to them.
But now it was only a question of what Montgomery could
save from the wreck. On 22 September a few Poles managed to
cross
the
river
by
boat to
the
British
perimeter
at
Westerbouwing,
but their
presence made
no
significant
difference. The ground left to the besieged British was a long
narrow
corridor, only a few
hundred
yards wide in places,
backing on to the Lower Rhine just to the east of the Driel
ferry. It was under very heavy all-round German assault from
Thursday
onwards, but,
inspired by
Urquhart's outstanding
resolution and courage,
1st Airborne troops withstood attack
after attack by superior forces.
Even so,
XXX Corps had at last reached the Rhine at
Driel - albeit through a wretched, precarious, narrow corridor
of bad roads. Here, however, was a route which could link up
with
Urquhart's
hard-pressed
troops
within
their
small
perimeter;
through
this
corridor
survivors
of British
1st
Airborne Division were
to
escape
to
fight
again.
But
