114
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
he must not refuse my demands unless he first comes over to
see me ... Obviously he is a gutless bugger who refuses to
take a chance and plays for safety on all occasions. I have no
use for him. 25
Another unfortunate occurrence was Montgomery's issue of
over-optimistic accounts of the Caumont battle; he had to eat
humble pie after its failure. What also annoyed him was that his
early optimism produced a spate of VIPs on visits to France.
As soon as it was clear that the Villers Bocage effort had
failed, Eisenhower began to badger Montgomery to begin
another attack on Caen. Montgomery replied that he wanted to
tidy up his administrative tail' and to get all his supplies forward
before he risked another attack. Eisenhower emphasised that the
must keep the Germans 'off balance' and that the Allied drive
should not falter.
On 14 June Montgomery asked Leigh-Mallory to visit him.
At their meeting he convinced Leigh-Mallory that he needed the
strategic bomber force to blast a path for the British Army into
Caen.
Leigh-Mallory
agreed,
but the Americans
were
immediately up in arms. General Carl Spaatz, commanding the
US Strategic Bombing Force in Europe, lost his temper when
Eisenhower asked for this use of the strategic bombers. He told
Eisenhower: 'Leigh-Mallory and Monty have no imagination.
They visualise the best use of our air potential as ploughing up
several square miles for a few miles of advance. All that is
necessary to move forward is sufficient guts on the part of the
ground Commanders?26 (This echoed a similar row between
Patton and Coningham in Tunisia.) Spaatz undoubtedly did not
appreciate how much of Rommel's armour had been thrown
into the battle of Caen to oppose Montgomery's advance, and
Tedder and Cunningham also helped to kill the project. From
this point there was open enmity between Montgomery and
Tedder and Cunningham, but Leigh-Mallory and Montgomery
became friends, despite their earlier differences.
Meanwhile, Eisenhower became impatient with Montgomery
and his refusal to attack. On 18 June he wrote to him to hurry
up, but Montgomery still hesitated over a big offensive against
Caen.
Then, on the 19th, came three days of gales which closed the
ports, and did untold damage to ships and stores. Montgomery
115
Normandy Assault
postponed his attack once
more, in spite of
nagging
by
Eisenhower. The former had impetuously issued a directive to
Dempsey and Bradley (M 502) on
18 June calling for the
capture of Caen and Cherbourg by the 24th; in it he wrote:
'Caen is the key to Cherbourg. Its capture will release forces
now locked up on our left flank.?? When Patton, staying for a
few days with Bradley, read the directive he said derisively:
'Let's ask Monty to send us the key. But on the 19th Ultra
showed that German reinforcements were moving towards the
Caen sector, and Montgomery felt that Dempsey would have a
harder task than anticipated. He decided to delay again so as to
increase his build-up, and wrote to Eisenhower in his own
handwriting:
Bad weather and other things have caused delays in Divisions
arriving here and marrying up with their vehicles, etc and
becoming operative. Operations have begun in a small way on
2nd Army front; they become more intensive on 22 June, and
on 23 June I shall put 8 Corps through in a blitz attack
supported by great air power as at El Hamma.
(On 26 March 1943, at El Hamma in Tunisia, Montgomery had
used air power to good purpose to turn the Mareth Line.)
Obviously Montgomery had hopes of success on the scale of
El Alamein, and was pinning much on the Strategic Air Force
VIII Corps on the 25th. The attack
'Epsom', since 25 June was Derby Day. 28
attacking in the Caen sector with 11th
