Montgomery
comes ashore in
Sicily, 12 July
1943.
224
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
If the gliders had crash-landed close to Nijmegen and
Arnhem bridges las proposed in 'Market-Garden I'l they
would have been successful in capturing the bridges, and there
is no reason why the ground troops should not have linked up
with them in time. It is always a disaster to make the dropping
zone too far from the bridge.
During the week before D-day, Belchem and Richardson
briefed Montgomery about the flaws in the Airborne Army
plans of operations, and Williams repeatedly warned him of the
unexpected armoured strength in the Arnhem area.
The weakness (Williams told mel was that no one could tell
Monty not to go, and it was unfortunate that de Guingand
was away ill. Without him the only operations officer with
much influence on Monty was David Belchem. Belchem was
opposed to Arnhem, but he was acquiescent ...
Monty preferred Arnhem or Wesel to opening Antwerp,
and during their talk in Ike's aeroplane at Brussels
promised him extra supplies and eventual support of US
troops if he did the Arnhem drop. Monty knew if he made the
Rhine crossing at Wesel he would have had to share it with
the Americans.
Both he and Dempsey knew of the reported Panzer
strength at Arnhem on the morning of 10 September.
In the evening of 10 September I briefed Monty about the
ominous German strength at Arnhem. I could not get him to
change his mind. This was out of character as he was usually
so careful to minimise casualties with his 'metal not flesh'
philosophy.
With de Guingand away there was no one to argue the toss
with Monty in that fatal week except myself and Oliver Poole,
a 21 Army Group Colonel Q who was the brain tank of
General Miles Graham, in charge of 21 Army Group adminis-
tration. Unfortunately Graham would never contradict Monty.
I sat up late one night that week arguing with Poole how
we could stop Monty doing Arnhem. My second in command
was Joe Ewart. He lived at Tac HQ with Monty while I
worked at Main. I remember him saying to me one morning:
'He is determined to go to Arnhem. I have told him all I can
Patton (left),
Eisenhower and
Montgomery in
Palermo.
captured by
Patton's US
Seventh Army on
22 July.
On the road to
Catania, sharing
a brew-up with
his staff.
