70
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
lodgement area and by opening a way for the French and US
Divisions now in the Mediterranean to join the decisive effort
against Germany. Hence we must make a maximum effort to
mount Anvil.
Montgomery, Churchill and Brooke continued to oppose
'Anvil'.* They were right, as it proved, for in the event the South
of France landings, some two months after 'Overlord', did not
draw a single German division away from Normandy. But in the
haggling over 'Anvil' Eisenhower realised, not for the first time,
how difficult a colleague Montgomery could be. There followed
a debate at head-of-state level as to whether 'Anvil' should be
mounted or not, but Montgomery was
no longer directly
involved in this controversy.
Quantifying Montgomery's plans for a five-division assault for
'Overlord' produced a demand for an extra 72 LCIs, 47 LSTs and
144 LCTs. By postponing D-Day from 1 May to 1 June it was
just possible to accumulate the necessary amounts of landing-
craft in time. De Guingand claimed that the American planners
overestimated the carrying capacity of landing-craft under
assault conditions, and complained that the major reason for the
shortage was the American hoarding of them in the Far East -
their preferred theatre. The Americans countered this complaint
with one of their own: hundreds of US-built landing-craft lay
unrepaired in the UK because the British Government would not
pay overtime for their repair.
De Guingand called a landing-craft conference at Norfolk
House (HQ SHAEF) on 15 February, and a satisfactory
compromise between the British and American points of view
was reached. The British agreed to try heavier loading for the
assault and to improve the repair position, although de Guingand
warned that extra loading would mean double bunking for
soldiers, with many staying on board for as long as sixty hours
before disembarking on the invasion beaches. The Americans
promised to divert craft from 'Anvil', and to send from the USA
* At Marrakesh on 1 January Montgomery had told Churchill it would be
ninety days before 'Anvil' had any effect on 'Overlord'. The PM accepted
this argument, and stuck to it.
Landing-Craft, Tanks.
+ Respectively, Landing-Craft, Infantry; Landing Ship, Tanks; and
Montgomery and the Invasion
seven more 4,000-ton LSTs, each capable of carrying 2,000 tons
of cargo, including twenty medium tanks on the main deck.
Montgomery's planning for the assault proceeded at the bare
minimum lift of five divisions, and despite all his pleadings,
tactfully and skilfully conducted by de Guingand, there was to
be no spare capacity on D-Day, although in the event the
Americans delivered more extra craft than they had promised.
Eventually there were 168 LSTs (61 British), 245 LCIs (equally
divided), and more than 1,000 LCTs (664 British). Montgomery
had had to fight a tough battle for his extra landing-craft, but
thanks to his determination he won the day.
A revised detailed invasion plan was completed, under
Montgomery's chairmanship,
representing
Twenty-First Army Group,
British Second Army,
Bradley's US First Army, the joint Naval/Air Force HQ.
SHAEF, and all interested commands. It was published on 1
February, under the code-name 'Neptune'; this referred to the
assault only, and was initialled by Montgomery, Ramsay and
Leigh-Mallory. US First Army produced its detailed plan on 25
February, and British Second Army its plan on 20 March.
The dread of the coming battle in
Europe lay like a black
cloud over Britain. The country had been at war for more than
four years, and memories of the blood-bath on the Somme in
the years of trench warfare worried the older
generation. But, once the invasion plans had been decided in
principle at the 21 January conference, Montgomery embarked
on a much-needed morale-raising tour of the Forces and the
armament factories. (So happy was he with his staff and the
atmosphere of mutual confidence that he held only
weekly
conferences and spent most of his time out of London, living in a
special train. This, known as 'Rapier', was based on Addison
Road.
and had sleepers and a restaurant, a saloon for
conferences, and was able to carry staff cars.) Montgomery
understood how public relations could raise morale, and he
enjoyed the limelight. He had a flair for dramatic personal
appearances, and his speeches to the troops, using a loudspeaker
from a jeep, were successful beyond expectation. He had, after
all, spent a lifetime with soldiers, and he loved and understood
them, especially young men; he could mesmerise them by his
speeches, and he revelled in his popularity. Now he found that
the average young soldier expected to die in the coming assault,
