216
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
instead of clearing the banks of the Scheldt to open up
Antwerp. Monty impulsively decided to go for Arnhem, not
Wesel, and I was shocked by the sheer wilfulness of the
decision. At that time Monty had the psychology of pursuit
with the elation of the advance, and I had it too, and found it
difficult to keep my Intelligence reports and judgements
completely free from the heady feeling that we had won the
war.
During these few
days it
was
difficult to
be
dispassionate. If Ike had preferred the Scheldt option he
should have imposed his will on Monty. But you must
remember at that time Ike was in no position to contradict
Monty, because the incredible victory in Normandy and the
swift advance had
established Monty as a brilliantly
successful commander in the field.
So, on the morning of 10 September 1944, Field-Marshal Sir
Bernard Montgomery made the two worst military decisions of
his career - having decided upon an airborne operation to
secure a Rhine bridgehead instead of opening up Antwerp, he
compounded the error by going for Arnhem instead of Wesel.
Eisenhower backed the two wrong decisions.
That afternoon, Montgomery conferred with Eisenhower at
Brussels aerodrome, for the latter was too lame to leave his
aeroplane. The
conference started badly. Eisenhower had
brought with him Lt-Gen Humfrey Gale, head of SHAEF
Administration, in order to discuss Twenty-First Army Group's
supplies, but Montgomery, made arrogant by the prospect of
another world-shaking victory, objected to his being present.
Gale withdrew, although Tedder remained. Montgomery then
took Eisenhower's directive of 4 September out of his pocket
and began to condemn it roundly, for all the world as though he
was addressing his Staff College pupils. As the tirade gathered
fury Eisenhower stayed silent, but as soon as Montgomery
stopped for breath, he leaned forward, put his hand on the
other's knee, and said: 'Steady Monty. You cannot talk to me
like this. I am your boss.' Montgomery mumbled an apology,
but relations between him and Eisenhower had reached new
depths."
Montgomery suggested that he should use his hoped-for
bridgehead over the Rhine to make a single thrust to Berlin,
arguing excitedly that once the Ruhr was encircled from the
The Fatal Wrong Decision
217
north the Nazis would lose its vast output of iron and steel-the
war could not then last long. According to Tedder, Eisenhower
thought that it was 'fantastic for Montgomery to talk of
marching to Berlin with an army still drawing its supplies from
the Normandy beaches. He turned down the proposal out of
hand and, when he got back to Granville, noted in his office
diary: 'Monty's suggestion is simple: give him everything, which
is crazy.'
On the day
before the meeting
at Brussels
airport
Montgomery had signalled Eisenhower: 'Providing we have the
ports of Dieppe, Boulogne, Dunkirk and Calais, and in addition
3,000 tons per day through Le Havre WE CAN ADVANCE
TO BERLIN. In order to reach the Munster Triangle we require
one good Pas de Calais port, 1,000 tons per day air lift, plus
additional allotment of motor transport.' This signal, designed
discourage Eisenhower from supporting the American
southern drive, shows how optimistic Montgomery was at that
moment, and how much he had underestimated Hitler's power
of recovery.
As soon as Montgomery realised that he would get nowhere
with his Berlin argument, he explained to Eisenhower the details
of his Arnhem plan. The latter was keen to use the Airborne
Army to secure a bridgehead over the Rhine, and felt that at last
Montgomery had found a bold plan which suited his own
strategy as Supreme Commander, as well as matching Patton's
and Bradley's ambitions for the southern
drive. He eagerly
endorsed
the
Arnhem drop,
promising
Montgomery extra
supplies, but he firmly refused to order Bradley to carry out a
supporting operation on Dempsey's right flank at the expense of
Patton's drive through the Siegfried Line.
Eisenhower, at that time misinformed by his Intelligence staff
about the speed of arrival of German reinforcements in front of
Twenty-First Group, specifically
authorised Montgomery
to
defer clearing the Scheldt until after Arnhem, and emphasised
that he wanted the airborne attack, now called 'Market Garden',
to
be
launched before
the Germans reinforced Holland.
Montgomery explained that his chief difficulty lay in the need to
bring up the halted British VIII Corps from the Seine to cover
his right
flank,
since
Bradley would
continue
to
operate
eastwards. Eisenhower clearly hoped that the drop at Arnhem
would win a Rhine bridgehead without there being any need to
