402
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
with little experience of the latest developments in warfare -
Montgomery knew that his own planners were much more
competent. The original plan was for Eighth Army to land on
the south-east corner of the island, and for US Seventh Army to
assault the extreme north-east tip. Montgomery demanded that
this plan be torn up, and insisted that instead the British and
American armies should land side by side. Given the uncertainty
about the likely strength of the Italian and German resistance
this was wise, although Captain Sir Basil Liddell Hart argued
that if Patton's US Seventh Army had landed at Palermo in the
north-west all the German forces in Sicily would have been
trapped'.
In a post-war paper on the use of Ultra by the British Army,
Brigadier Williams revealed that just before the landings in Sicily
Ultra had disclosed that the Germans had gone to the wrong
side of the island.? Williams told me that once the invasion
armada had put to sea no alterations to the plan were possible,
but he was horrified at how little information the Allies had
about German troops in Sicily, except that the Hermann
Goering Division was definitely there. There were no spies
amongst the Sicilian population, whereas in Tunisia the Allies
had learnt a great deal about German dispositions from the
French living there. Brigadier Williams also doubts whether it
would have been possible to provide effective air cover for a
landing at Palermo.
It is a tribute to Montgomery's strength of character and to
his clarity of thought that he was able to railroad Alexander and
Eisenhower into accepting his plan to land the two armies side
by side, despite Patton's frenzied opposition. He was, of course,
a winning
general', whereas Patton had yet to prove his
prowess, and this must have weighed in the balance.
Montgomery's Sicily invasion plan worked. More troops put
to sea for the invasion of Sicily than for 'Overlord', and the
seaborne landings were a considerable success; indeed they were
one of the greatest successes of Montgomery's career, and to
him belongs the credit for their planning and execution.
The same cannot be said, however, of the airborne landings in
Sicily, the first joint Allied operation with such forces.
The
outcome was largely disastrous, mainly because of the poor
navigation of the American pilots, and many gliders were
dropped in the sea or scattered over the island. Even after this
Conclusion
403
failure Montgomery was considering the use of airborne troops
for another drop, but Alexander, firm for once, vetoed this,
signalling: 'Not prepared to sanction further use of airborne
troops until training of pilots improved. Do not contemplate
further use.'3
In the end, Montgomery's hopes for a quick victory in Sicily
were thwarted, and when his advance along the eastern coastal
route was halted, he made the mistake of refusing to allow
Patton to attack to the west of Mount Etna. This infuriated the
Americans, and sowed the seeds of the suspicion that was to
flower in North-West Europe. When the whole of Sicily had
been occupied by the Allies, after the Germans had successfully
withdrawn to the mainland, the principal laurels had been won
by Patton, not Montgomery
As soon as Mussolini had been overthrown, on 25 July 1943,
and Italian surrender negotiations had begun, hurried plans were
made in Algiers for an invasion of the mainland of Italy. Eighth
Army was to be reduced to four divisions landing in the south,
with the main invasion being entrusted to Clark's US Fifth
Army landing at Salerno. The scheme enraged Montgomery, for
he felt that he had earned the right to be given full charge of this
first invasion of the continent of Europe.
Unhappily for him, he
had blotted his copybook with the Americans, and as a result
neither Eisenhower nor Alexander were prepared to put him in
command of US divisions; instead, his favourite X Corps was
taken away from him and added to Clark's forces for the
Salerno landings.
Montgomery's behaviour during the Italian invasion was
somewhat cynical. He knew from Ultra that the German armour
was present in dangerous strength on the mainland, and he was
not optimistic about the Italian army fighting effectively for the
Allies if it changed sides. He would probably have been proved
wrong in this last view if the planned American airborne land-
ings on the Rome airfields had taken place, but they
were
unfortunately cancelled at the eleventh hour when one of the
Italian generals involved panicked. After the war both American
and German generals recorded that in their views the operation
(Giant II')
would have succeeded, forcing
the
enemy to
withdraw to north Italy, and this was echoed by Strong, Head of
Eisenhower's Intelligence Staff, * and by the German C-in-C in
Italy, Kesselring, who said some years later: 'An air landing on
