394
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
fluffed the date while signing.
On the following day Bill Williams escorted Jodl to SHAEF
HQ at Rheims, where he remarked to Bedell Smith: 'We have
finished our war. If you want to finish yours, here is Jodl. At
2.41 on 7 May, in a schoolroom in Rheims, General Alfred Jodl
signed the unconditional surrender of all German armed forces
to the Allies, and on the 8th he repeated the signature at
Zhukov's HQ in Berlin.
On 12 May Montgomery wrote the following note for the
Log:
And so the campaign in North West Europe is finished. I am
glad. It has been a tough business. When I review the
campaign as a whole I am amazed at the mistakes we made.
The organization for command was always faulty. The
Supreme Commander [Eisenhower] had no firm ideas as to
how to conduct the war, and 'was blown about by the wind'
all over the place; at that particular business he was quite
Deputy Supreme
Commander [Tedder] was
completely ineffective; none of the Army Commanders would
see him and they growled if ever he appeared on the horizon.
The staff at SHAEF were completely out of their depth all
The point to understand is that if we had run the show
properly the war could have been finished by Xmas 1944.
The blame for this must rest with the Americans.
To balance this it is merely necessary to say one thing, i.e.
if the Americans had not come along and lent a hand we
would never have won the war at all.
Montgomery knew that he would have no more battlefield
triumphs, but he was content. His reputation was at its peak,
and he was immensely popular. He had no intention of relaxing,
wallowing in the glory of the victory he had won, although he
admitted that he broke his teetotal habit on the night. of 4 May
and drank a sip of champagne. But on the next day his
disciplined brain was grappling with the problems following the
surrender - the alleviation of the suffering of the people of the
Eisenhower's Revenge
395
occupied countries, and of displaced persons, and, above all, the
well-being
of
the
Allied
POWs
now
being
released.
Demobilisation and the occupation of Germany followed, and
for the remainder of his
time in that country he
worked
ceaselessly to make the British Army happier and more efficient.
Unfortunately, when later he went up the ladder to be CIGS in
peacetime, the character defects which had, among other things,
wrecked his relations with Eisenhower, reasserted themselves, to
bring sorrow upon himself and upon his masters, the post-war
Labour Government.
