32
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
The next step, the invasion of the toe of Italy, like Sicily, was
planned as a joint British and American operation. This, in
Montgomery's view, required an 'overlord' to co-ordinate the
operations, though the chain of command remained the same:
Eisenhower, Supreme Commander in Algiers with Alexander his
deputy at Fifteenth Army Group,
Admiral Sir
Cunningham, Naval C-in-C, and Tedder, Air C-in-C. But
Eisenhower and Alexander refused an 'overlord' despite the
crying need for one, and the clear evidence from Sicily that
Montgomery would not voluntarily co-operate satisfactorily
with an American commander.
Originally the invasion of Italy was to be carried out only by
the Eighth Army on a two-corps front, with a direct assault
across the Straits of Messina (Operation 'Baytown') and another
landing in the area of Gioia Tiro on the north coast of the toe
(Operation 'Buttress'). This plan appealed to Montgomery, who
would then have been in sole charge of a dramatic invasion of
Europe. But with the fall of Mussolini and the probability of an
Italian surrender the Allies in late July planned another seaborne
landing at Salerno ('Avalanche') and an airborne landing by
US 82nd Airborne on the Rome airfields. This last operation
('Giant 2') was called off because of a last-minute panic by the
Italian General Carboni, in command of the Italian armoured
divisions who should have defended the Rome airfields against
German attacks during the airborne landings. The operation
would have been a success, according, to the American generals
involved, and also in the view of General Siegfried Westphal,
Kesselring's Chief of Staff. 17
To Montgomery's annoyance 'Buttress' was cancelled on 17
August and X Corps, which would have undertaken it, was
taken away from him and put under the command of the US
Fifth Army (General Mark Clark) for 'Avalanche' (US Seventh
Army had been replaced by US Fifth Army). The new plan, for
two armies to invade Italy simultaneously in place of his Eighth
Army
on
its own, annoyed Montgomery, especially
as
'Baytown' was downgraded to a minor four-battalion operation
with a slow build-up. He demanded at least two divisions for
'Baytown'
and
protested so vigorously to Alexander
that
Italy: *90 to 95 per cent of the troops' had been safely evacuated to Messina
and nearly all the trucks and guns.l8
Sicily and After
eventually the Eighth Army assault across the Straits of Messina
was upgraded to two divisions under XIII Corps - Sth Infantry
and Ist Canadian, together with 231 Independent Brigade. The
US Fifth Army force for Salerno was far larger and consisted of
British X Corps and US VI Corps, both under Clark's Fifth
General Patton, commanding the replaced US Seventh Army,
had gone back to America
under a cloud following two
unfortunate incidents with patients in field hospitals who he
suspected of malingering, and Seventh Army's next assignment
was to be the invasion of southern France in August 1944,
codenamed 'Anvil', under General Alexander Patch. US Seventh
Army had been formed in Algiers on 5 January 1944 under Mark
Clark, and had been trained for amphibious operations - for
landing near Gibraltar if Spain entered the war, then for Sardinia
and now for Italy.
No one realised more clearly than Montgomery the crying
need for a master plan and a single commander to co-ordinate
'Avalanche' and 'Baytown', because of the strong German forces
in Italy. General Heinrich von Vietinghoff-Scheel's German Tenth
Army had redeployed to meet a possible Allied landing in central
Italy, General Hans Hube's XIV Panzer Corps with two Panzer
divisions and one Panzer Grenadier division having taken up
positions near Gaeta and Salerno, while Herr's LXXVI Panzer
Corps had been withdrawn to a line Scalea-Taranto-Brindisi,
leaving only a single battalion south of Catanzaro to oppose the
Eighth Army landing. Montgomery disliked playing second fiddle
- instead of planning to go all out to help 'Avalanche' he preferred
to build up his forces in the toe of Italy with a view to mounting a
successful campaign once Eighth Army was firmly established in
strength on the mainland of Europe. He was genuinely worried by
the German strength in Italy, estimated at twenty divisions, and
feared a disaster in the early stages.
On 19 August he signalled Alexander that he would be so
short of landing-craft that any invasion of Europe in face of
opposition would be impossible'19 He complained also that he
had been given no 'object' for the operation, and had no
information about the resistance likely to be encountered. This
last observation was incorrect, since Eighth Army Intelligence
knew that only Herr's Panzer corps was near the toe of Italy,
and a 3 Commando patrol had crossed the Messina Straits to
