436
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
that which existed in Normandy for so long. Our line as late
as D plus 60 was not greatly different than what we hoped to
hold in the first week, but I never looked upon the situation
then existing as a strategic reverse, even though out of the
circumstances of our long confinement in the narrow beach
head have developed some of our greatest later difficulties. If
we had advanced from the beginning as we had hoped, our
maintenance services would have been in a position to supply
us during the critical September days, when we actually
reached the limit of our resources.
Moreover, I do not agree that more strength could have
been thrown to the north than was actually maintained there
during early September. Lines of communication in the north
were so stretched that even delivery of five hundred tons to
you at Brussels cost Bradley three divisions, the possession of
which might have easily placed him on the Rhine in the
Worms area.
We gained a great victory in Normandy, Bradley's brilliant
break through made possible the great exploitation by all
forces, which blasted France and Belgium and almost carried
us across the Rhine. Had we not advanced on a relatively
broad front, we would now have the spectacle of a long
narrow line of communication, constantly threatened on the
right flank and weakened by detachments of large fighting
formations. In addition, we would have had a similar picture
in the south, stretching all the way from Marseilles to Dijon.
As it is, we now have a rear that is cleared of the enemy. We
can look to the front.
I have no intention of stopping Devers
and Patton's
operations as long as they are cleaning up our right flank and
giving us capability of concentration. On the other hand, I do
not intend to push those attacks senselessly.
It is going to be important to us later on to have two strings
to our bow. Don't forget that you were very wise in making a
provision for this at Mareth, and it paid off.
With respect to the Chiefs
of
Staff
attending
the
conference, it makes no difference to me whether your Chief
of Staff attends or whether Bradley's does. Mine will be there
unless some unforseen [sic) circumstance prevents. Bedell is
my Chief of Staff because I trust
him and respect his
judgment. I will not by any means insult him by telling him
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 437
that he should remain mute at any conference he and I both
attend.
I most definitely
appreciate
the
frankness of
your
statements, and usual friendly way in which they are stated,
but I beg of you not to continue to look upon the past
performances of this great fighting force as a failure merely
because we have not achieved all that we could have hoped. I
am quite sure that you, Bradley, and I can remain masters of
the situation
and
the
victory
we want
will
certainly
achieved.
But we must look
at this whole
great
affair
stretching from Marseilles to the lower Rhine as one great
theater. We must plan so when our next attack starts we will
be able to obtain maximum results from all our forces, under
the conditions now existing.
Ike®
Montgomery read the warning signals and replied, humbly
enough, that he had not intended to give the impression that the
performance of the Allied army had been an overall failure, and
that he had been referring only to the November offensive. This
produced a typically tactful reply from Eisenhower:
2 December, 1944
Dear Monty:
You have my prompt and abject apologies for misreading
your letter of 30th November.
In my haste to answer
obviously read your paragraph 8 as a far more pessimistic
statement than was justified. In any event, I am sorry if my
letter gave offence; certainly I do not want to put words or
meaning into your mouth, or ever do anything that upsets our
close relationship.
Along with this message to you I am sending extracts from
Strong's report, made only yesterday. You will find it most
interesting indeed and thoroughly indicative of the great value
we are deriving from present operations.
You will be happy to know that the prospects for U.S.
ammunition are brightening. Apparently we are to get greatly
increased allocations and a step-up in shipments.
Incidentally, I suppose you know that the R.A.F. is going
to take shot at the Schmidt dam. I hope the try is successful,
because otherwise both Hodges and Simpson believe they
