52
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the Gustav Line along the Gargliano to Cassino, and on to the
Sangro on the Adriatic.
At first Montgomery had in front of him only the badly
depleted German Ist Parachute Division. Without much fighting
he took the important Foggia airfields by 27 September, and had
cleared the whole of the Gargano peninsula by 1 October.
He had little enthusiasm, however, for his difficult advance up
the Adriatic coast, and became querulous about the non-arrival
of supplies, for which he now had to rely on AFHQ in Algiers.
He was looking for an excuse for slow progress. On 5 October
he sent a personal signal to Alexander: 'My petrol situation is
now most serious owing to non-delivery of my demands and
unless you can get me some soon my army will not be able to
operate efficiently? He was told 8,000 tons were being unloaded
in the ports in the heel of Italy, and Alexander asked Clark to
give temporary help from US Fifth Army supplies. On the next
day Clark sent this personal wire to Montgomery: 'Send trucks
to Paestum for 100,000 gallons and I shall be able to give you
more?42 In fact Montgomery issued no orders for rigid petrol
economy, and his 'acute petrol shortage' must be taken with a
pinch of salt.
Earlier, Montgomery had lent his BGS, Charles Richardson,
to Clark's HQ as Deputy Chief of Staff, US Fifth Army, where
his chief role was liaison. Alexander had asked him for the best
officer available, for relations between Clark and Montgomery
were delicate, and became strained as the two armies tried to
advance side by side through the difficult Italian country.
Charles Richardson told me:
Monty certainly did not like competition, and Mark Clark
himself had a certain vanity. Monty used to emphasise that
Clark had no battle experience, which was true, and in the
First World War he only reached
the rank of corporal.
Fortunately Clark's lack of knowledge of tactics was more
than compensated by Lt-Gen A.M.] Al Gruenther being his
Chief of Staff after the war he rose to command NATO]. I got
on splendidly with Al Gruenther, who to my mind was a
marvellous chap and a fine soldier. Fortunately, too, he was
always pro Monty. With the Apennines dividing the two
armies there was little we could do in the way of co-operation.
One army had little influence on the other.
Sicily and After
53
Thanks to Richardson and Gruenther,
relations between
Montgomery
and
Clark
remained harmonious outwardly,
although there was no love lost on either side. Montgomery's
signals to Clark are cavalier. On 12 October he wired: 'Will
come tomorrow for short talk and then see Naples and not
bother you any more'; since American generals liked long
conferences this was hardly calculated to please. Then, on 24
October, he invited Clark to Eighth Army and sent Noel
Chavasse, his ADC, to Clark's HQ to make arrangements. Two
days later he signalled Clark: 'Chavasse has told me your plans
therefore no need for you to come?43 (According to Lord
Chalfont, when Clark had visited Eighth Army Tactical HQ
shortly after the Salerno link-up, Montgomery pretended to be
out, although Clark knew he was not. Bill Williams told me he
could not remember this incident, but 'if it is true I find it too
hideously in character'.44 John Henderson too could not recall
it, but said Montgomery intensely disliked unexpected visitors,
and that the story could be true.)
At this time Winston Churchill coined the phrase: 'Whoever
holds Rome holds the title deeds to Italy, although these words
had no meaning in a military context and little in a political sense.
Montgomery was by now conscious that a decision must be made
soon as to who should command the cross-Channel invasion, and
he was desperately anxious to leave Italy for this much more
important command. In an effort to allay any suspicions of
Churchill's that Eighth Army's Italian performance was not as
good as it should have been, Montgomery had signalled the Prime
Minister direct on 4 October:
We have advanced a long way and very quickly. It had to be
done in order to help 5 Army but it has been a great strain on
my administration which had to be switched from the toe to
the heel during operations and which is now stretched to the
limit ... When I have got control of Termoli Campobasso I
will halt for a short period. After the halt I will advance with
my whole strength
and Ancona. I shall look
forward to meeting you in Rome. 45
Since Montgomery had signalled Alexander on 29 September
that he hoped to reach the Rome Line by 30 October, he
obviously still had some hopes of good results. However, the
