170
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
of their beloved Poland and the appalling treatment of their
fellow countrymen after its conquest.
But sadly, the Polish 1st
Armoured Division's performance in battle against the strongest
units of the Nazi army on the road to Falaise was disappointing.
This was no reflection on the valour of the Poles. Their
commanders were elderly, of First World War vintage, and their
experience during that war had been in the Russian, Prussian or
Austrian armies. All of them had taken part in the triumphant
campaign of 1920, when Marshal Josef Pilsudski's newly
formed Polish Army had driven the Bolsheviks back from the
gates of Warsaw to beyond the eighteenth-century Polish
frontier to the east, inflicting a crippling defeat upon Budjenny's
renowned horse army, and securing an enlarged Poland by the
Treaty of Riga. But most of them had been brought up with
horsed cavalry and, apart from exercises in the UK after their
country's fall, they had no experience of the speedy deployment
of armour under battle conditions, and did not appreciate the
need for
split-second decisions at crucial moments.
Nor,
militarily speaking, were they on quite the same wave-length as
their Canadian comrades, with their New World techniques and
attitudes, although they were on terms of great friendship.
The Polish Armoured Division was not up to full battle
strength
when it landed in
Normandy.
The divisional
commander, Maj-Gen Stanislaw Maczek, had written to Mont-
gomery
about his great difficulties in getting
1st Polish
Armoured up to strength:26 'In the national interest we have
made great sacrifices to keep up our numbers', he wrote, but this
had meant recruiting, as infantry privates, middle-aged Poles
used to a sedentary life and without military experience. There
were no reinforcements available in the UK, though the Polish
Government-in-Exile in London had hopes for appreciable
numbers of volunteers from Poles in the USA and Canada.
They were not forthcoming. The second generation of North
American Poles preferred to fight with American units, and calls
for volunteers from London and America went unanswered.*
When the Polish High Command learned of the large
proportion of Polish conscripts in the German divisions in
*In the First World War Polish volunteers for General Haller's Polish
Corps from Canada and the USA found they were not entitled to hospital
treatment and benefits, unlike their fellows in the Canadian and US armies.
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
171
Normandy, they had high hopes of mass desertions,
which
would enable them to make up their losses by recruiting POWs.
Lorry-loads of British uniforms
with
Polish facings
were
brought up to the front lines, and POWs were asked if they
could speak Polish. If they
could do so to their captor's
satisfaction, they were enrolled in the Polish Division; if not they
were sent to a POW cage. 856 POWs were recruited in
Normandy
but their
performance
was
'disappointing", perhaps best summed up in a War Office report:
'They were not as good as anticipated, both from the morale and
the training point of view. They had had enough of war already on
the German side' 26
Because of high casualties, which could not be replaced, the
Polish Armoured Division was so short of officers and men that
it had to be given a six-week rest from 6 October. By then the
division lacked ninety-two officers and 746 ORs and, since no
reinforcements were available, for the rest of the campaign
Montgomery had dificulty in keeping the Polish Division
effective.
On 11 August Patton had told Haislip to push a division of
his XV Corps north through Argentan.
On the next day,
however, Patton was firmly told by Bradley's Chief of Staff that
he was not to cross the inter-Allied army boundary, fixed by
Montgomery on 6 August as 'all inclusive Second
Army
Tinchebray
Argentan
Laigle
Dreux
Mantes-Gassicourt.
Tracings
have
been
issued to Commanders showing
the
boundaries
in
greater detail. In fact,
Bradley
never urged
Montgomery to allow Patton to advance north of Argentan.
Bradley's General Kleber telephoned de Guingand at 0950 on
13 August to seek Montgomery's permission for Patton to go
north. De Guingand refused.*
At 0657
XV Corps had
This became widely known, and adversely affected Polish recruiting in the
Second World War. After the war, however, the American Government gave
full war pensions and benefits to all Polish volunteers.
*Bill Williams confirmed to me that in 1947 he had given Forrest Pogue,
the American historian this recollection of the call from Bradley's HQ on 13
August: 'Monty
said "Tell Bradley they ought to get back." Monty missed
closing the sack. He was fundamentally more interested in full envelopment
than inner envelopment. We fell between two stools. He missed the chance of
closing the Seine by doing the envelopment of Falaise.' This interview has
been quoted by a Canadian historian, but his anti-Montgomery argument
based on it is not sound. 27
