226
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
On 15 September Maj-Gen Kenneth Strong, Eisenhower's
British Chief of Intelligence at SHAEF, received confirmed
reports from the Dutch underground that 9th and 10th SS
Panzer Divisions were refitting in the Arnhem area.
Strong
reported this to Bedell Smith, who was so worried by the reports
that he went straight to the Supreme Commander. Eisenhower
told Strong and Bedell Smith: 'I cannot tell Monty how to
deploy his troops.
You must fly to
21
Army
Group
immediately and argue it out with Monty. I cannot order Monty
to call Market Garden off when I have already given it the green
light? Bedell Smith
flew at
once to
Brussels and saw
Montgomery, who ridiculed the idea that, merely because of
reports about German tank strength at Arnhem, he should
revise the 'Market-Garden'
plan. And he added: 'Market-
Garden will go alright provided you at SHAEF honour your
commitment to me made on 11 September to divert supplies to
me? Smith remarked afterwards: 'I tried to stop him but I got
nowhere.'14
Montgomery had decided on 'Market-Garden' entirely on his
own, but because Allied First Airborne Army was the SHAEF
strategic reserve, and not part of Twenty-First Army Group, he
had little influence on its detailed operation plan. He could,
however, have sent more senior staff officers from Twenty-First
Army Group, Second Army or XXX Corps to take part in the
planning. This he failed to do, and the inexperienced airborne
planners let him down badly.
Belchem felt strongly that it was a major mistake not to send
a senior planner from Twenty-First Group, but even after he and
Richardson, in Brussels, had gone through the detailed plan with
a fine-toothed comb, and found it to
be sadly
wanting,
Montgomery refused to cancel 'Market-Garden', preferring to
go through with his gamble. General Richardson informed me
that 'By the time I saw the plan for Market-Garden it was a fait
accompli? "The Lord God Almighty in Battle', to whom
Montgomery liked to refer so often, had smiled on him from
Alamein to Antwerp - with only a few setbacks - and he could
not believe that, this time, he was pushing his luck too far.
On 10 September Montgomery's state of mind might have
been put, in his own style of language, thus:
I have three alternatives, all equal militarily:
The Fatal Wrong Decision
227
1 to clear the Isle of Walcheren and the South Beveland
isthmus.
2 to use airborne troops to obtain a bridgehead over the
Rhine at Wesel.
3 to do ditto at Arnhem.
If I do 1, I shall be involved in an unrewarding hard slog
not likely to enhance my reputation; once Antwerp is open
the supplies landed there will probably be used to support a
triumphant USA drive to Berlin, and the 21 Army Group
part in the final stages of the war will be unglamorous.
If I do 2, I will have to share the Rhine bridgehead with the
Americans who, because of their greater numbers, will get
most of the glory for the final battles of the war on German
soil.
If I do 3, successfully, it will be hailed as a dazzling and
daring operation and Ike will be forced to give me all the help
in troops and supplies I need for a drive to Berlin. Also 3, if
successful, will mean that British troops will save London by
capturing the V2 launching-sites in Holland. This will put the
seal on my reputation.
From the very moment that his troops reached Antwerp,
Montgomery failed to appreciate the absolute necessity of
capturing the port - from this single error stems a host of others.
He instructed Dawnay to write in the Log:
From a purely British point of view Antwerp had never been
a vital necessity; the Pas de Calais ports provided all that we
required. But to the Americans it had become vital and for the
British armies it would be very convenient and would save a
long haul over bad roads. American maintenance difficulties
were responsible for creating the urgency to open the port of
Antwerp.
At the time he was seeking excuses for his strategic error,
although he was to admit the mistake after the war.
Montgomery's decision to take the Arnhem option, in despite
of warnings from his staff and of evidence of enemy strength,
resulted in resounding defeat. He wasted the Allies'
strategic
reserve, a force which could have brought victory in 1944, and
sacrificed the cream of the British Army - the young airborne
volunteers of whom over 1.000 died and more than 7,000 were
casualties or POWs. After the disastrous Arnhem drop British 1st
Airborne Division could not be re-formed for future operations.
