122
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
a tank break-out to the south, beyond Caen.
But a letter from Montgomery to the CIGS, dated 14 July, is
evidence that instead he had his main hopes for a breakthrough
pinned on the Americans: 'Once 12 Army Group can get a
footing on the road Periers-St Lo it will be able to deliver a real
blitz attack ... I doubt if he [Rommell can collect more troops
to rope off again in the west and it is in the west that I want
territory?
Did Montgomery believe, as some American historians claim,
that 'Goodwood' would be as big a personal triumph for him as
El Alamein had been, and prove that the British were better
troops than the Americans? I cannot agree with that claim.
Maj-Gen Philip (Pip') Roberts,
who
commanded
13th
Armoured Division in Lt-Gen Sir Richard O'Connor's VIII
Corps during 'Goodwood', told me:
I do not believe Monty was going for a real break-out. At
the 10 July Conference Dempsey kept on emphasising to him
that we had plenty of tanks, and said to Monty: 'Why not
let us try for a break-out instead of the Americans?' When
Monty refused, Dempsey tried again and said: 'Why not let
both of us try?' Monty then decided to let Dempsey have a go
and to synchronise the British attack with the main American
attempt to break out in the west. Both Monty and Dempsey
thought there was a good chance of a break-out; Monty
rather less so than Dempsey, but Monty definitely was not
going to commit many resources south of Bourguebus Ridge
until, in his own words, he 'knew the form'. He would not
chance his arm on that.
Field-Marshal Lord Carver told me:
Monty was a realist who wanted a break-out in the east at
Caen to encourage the Americans on the other flank. His
attitude
was that he was not
sure he would win
at
'Goodwood' but 'it will be marvellous if we do; if we do not
win, then it is all part of my process of drawing German
armour to the east and away from the forthcoming American
attack at St Lo?
Thus he had a double aim in mind. If he did not win he
would not pursue a will-o'-the-wisp. Instead he
would
Normandy Assault
immediately seal that front off and try somewhere else.
123
Dempsey was more optimistic than Montgomery, and his
operational instruction of 13 July gave VIII Corps' task as being
to attack 'southwards and establish an armoured division in
each of the following areas: Bretteville-sur-Laize, Vimont-
Argentan, Falaise', which implied break-out; furthermore, he
claimed that he would capture all the crossings of the Orne
from Caen to Argentan'. Montgomery, with his usual caution,
made Dempsey delete Falaise and Argentan from the written
plan.
Montgomery's instructions for 'Goodwood' were dated 15
July; he insisted on
giving
them personally to Dempsey and
O'Connor, and noted that he had done so on his top copy:
TOP SECRET
Notes on Second Army Operations
16 July - 18 July
1. To engage the German Armour in battle and 'write it
down' to such an extent that it is of no further value to the
Germans as a basis of the battle.
To gain a good bridgehead over the ORNE through
CAEN, and thus to improve our positions on the eastern
flank.
Generally to destroy German equipment and personnel, as
a preliminary to a possible wide exploitation of success.
2. Affect |sic| of this operation on the Allied policy
We require the whole of the Cherbourg and
A victory on the eastern flank will help us to gain what we
want on the western flank.
But the eastern flank is a bastion on which the whole
future of the campaign in NW Europe depends; it must
remain a firm bastion; if it became unstable the operations
on the western flank would cease.
Therefore, while taking advantage of every opportunity to
destroy the enemy, we must be very careful to maintain
our own balance and ensure a firm base.
