Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
content for Montgomery to command their troops during the
assault phase, for they admired his battle successes and found
his confidence infectious.
In early 1944 morale was low in the British Army in the UK,
and few troops had done any previous fighting. Montgomery's
technique of addressing personally all the fighting units worked
wonders for the confidence of these troops. Of course, not every
soldier fell for his somewhat bombastic approach, but there is
undeniable evidence of how greatly he improved morale by his
visits. With the Poles and Canadians, however, he was less
successful.
D-Day vindicated Montgomery's judgements and planning,
although early enemy opposition was weaker than had been
anticipated. He proved to have been right about the need for the
Hobart tank gadgets to avoid the disasters of the Dieppe raid,
and floating DD tanks and flail attachments
for clearing
minefields undoubtedly made a considerable contribution to the
success of the landings. Afterwards the Americans bitterly
regretted that they had not taken up his generous offer of a
much larger share of these adapted tanks.
From the start of the planning Montgomery had formulated
his plan for the British to attract Rommel's armour to the east
and for
the
Americans to break
through in
the
west.
Unfortunately, he gave perhaps too many hostages to fortune by
promising the British air marshals that he would capture the
airfields south of Caen, although he knew that this would be
difficult, and was himself perfectly happy to have the RAF
operating from England. The failure to take these airfields led to
quarrels with the RAF chiefs.
The
Deputy
Supreme
Commander, Air Chief Marshal
Tedder, became hostile. He never forgave Montgomery for
stating that he was prepared to go on with the invasion on the
orginal planned date in atrocious weather when the other leaders
were voting for postponement. In his memoirs, Tedder recorded
that he took this to mean that Montgomery despised the support
of the RAF, which could not operate in the forecast cloud
cover
that
ntgomery never explained his vote, but it is probable
very conscious
already embar
d, and also
of the fact that his troops had
have
sen lost.
Tedder
it, as with the
the vital surprise could so easily
ould bring him problems
mericans, his alienation of
Conclusion
407
Montgomery definitely underestimated the difficulties of the
Normandy bocage in the American sector, while the Americans
were very conscious that the British armour at Caen faced
perfect tank
country
whereas, until the adoption of the
Rhinoceros tank attachment, US tanks could only move on the
roads. Montgomery's dilemma was that, although he had plenty
of tanks, he was constantly being reminded by the War Office
that the British Army was so short of reinforcements that he
must not risk really heavy manpower casualties. In consequence
he had to be careful not to risk too many British lives in an all-
out attack to the south of Caen.
The Americans, on the other
hand, had many fresh divisions on the other side of the Atlantic,
and Montgomery knew that in the Allied interest the US Army
ought to bear the brunt of the fighting in the crucial break-out.
Yet it was almost impossible to explain this to an ally, and in
any case Montgomery was not temperamentally suited to so
delicate a task.
Not surprisingly, there were quarrels and
tensions during the twelve weeks of stalemate.
At the outset, Eisenhower accepted Montgomery's master
plan for the British to hold Rommel's tanks in the east while
Bradley's US First Army broke out in the west. The Supreme
Commander soon became
restive,
however, as the British
attacks
around Caen failed, and he disapproved
of the
Americans having to make the main attack with the handicap of
the
bocage
country. His letters to Montgomery,
whom he
seldom saw, became progressively more hectoring in their tone.
In addition, Eisenhower's HQ held four Montgomery opponents
Tedder, the Depty Supreme Commander,
and the
British
generals Gale, Morgan and Whiteley; Strong, a late arrival, also
turned anti-Montgomery. These senior officers owed their chief
allegiance to Eisenhower, who possessed a charm which threw a
"spell' over those who worked with him. It was fortunate for
Montgomery that the CIGS, Brooke, and the Secretary of State
for War, Grigg, were his devoted admirers. These two were well
aware of Montgomery's capacity for rubbing the Americans the
wrong way, but they were so sure that his strategy was right that
they backed him to the hilt, and the two were nearly always in
agreement themselves. Brooke wrote of Grigg in his diary: 'P.J.
is a wonderful help. The more I saw of him the more I liked him,
respected him and admired him.
He had one of the quickest
brains that I had ever met and a character based on the highest
