398
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
well with others. I was intrigued by their accounts of the
pleasant atmosphere at Twenty-First Army Group Tac HQ, and
by their
nostalgia for happy
days spent
working
with
Montgomery. The Field-Marshal was a good chooser of men,
and had, after all, a whole army from which to pick his young
officers; naturally, anyone at all abrasive or petty-minded was
quickly weeded out of the inner circle. Those who were close to
him have emphasised to me his charm, good humour and
kindliness - in short, they did not find him a difficult "Master', as
they affectionately called him.
Above all, Montgomery
aroused
devotion
and loyalty
amongst those working for him, and generated efficiency. He
was, too, fortunate in Dempsey,* that most unselfish of generals,
forever prepared to accept Montgomery's views, even when they
overrode his own. General Sir Charles Richardson underlined to
me that: 'Montgomery's own staff work was so good that he
made
our own job easy. No-one could pull the wool over
Monty's eyes and
his orders were scrupulously obeyed.
Retribution would undoubtedly follow for anyone who bungled
or who failed to comply. But in return, his officers knew that
they could count upon his support, and his sympathy, as just
one example illustrates. On 23 April 1945, tragically near the
German surrender, Montgomery's favourite liaison officer, John
Poston, was killed in one of the pockets of resistance already by-
passed by
Twenty-First Army Group's advance.
Poston,
twenty-five years old, had been with Montgomery
since
Alamein, and the Field-Marshal valued his friendship and his
work highly. German youths in uniform had ambushed the
young officer's jeep while he was taking, as usual, a short cut
back to Tac HQ to report to his chief; Montgomery, learning the
news, immediately asked Simpson to get in touch with Poston's
father in England. Simpson found the latter to be greatly
distressed, the more so, rather illogically, because his other son
* An interesting sidelight on Montgomery's character is that he gave so
little credit to Dempsey for his part in the victories of 1944 and 1945. As
GOC, British Second Army, Dempsey played a vital part in the defeat of
Germany, but Montgomery invariably sought to give the impression, both at
the time and in his post-war writing, that he had 'done it all himself. I found a
number of friends and former colleagues of General Sir Miles Dempsey who
resented Montgomery's failure to pay adequate tribute to his principal army
commander.
Conclusion
399
had been conscripted to the coal mines. Churchill himself had
been so impressed by Montgomery's liaison officers during his
visit to the Rhine that he had asked to be informed personally
about any casualties, and as a result the King wrote to Poston's
father, expressing regret at his loss. Montgomery himself paid a
tribute to his friend in The Times, as he was to do for Charles
Sweeney, another valued liaison officer killed soon afterwards.
At
Tac
HQ, Montgomery's personal accommodation
consisted of three large caravans, one serving as his bedroom,
another his office, and a third his map room. As accommodation
the
set-up
was
not
luxurious (German
and
American
commanders tended to prefer well-appointed châteaux) but it
was convenient and fairly comfortable, and it also had a great
practical advantage in that it could be moved quickly, and was
easily camouflaged in woods or orchards or olive groves so as to
be virtually invisible to hostile aircraft. But though Montgomery
was ascetic,
preferring simplicity in his surroundings
disliking alcohol and tobacco, he could enjoy luxury. In 1943
John Henderson had difficulty in persuading him to live in the
beautiful villa at Taormina, on the east coast of Sicily, but once
he had moved in the Field-Marshal enjoyed the surroundings.
Again, Henderson booked him a suite at Claridges when he
returned to London in January 1944, and he much appreciated
both the comfort and the opportunity to entertain his friends. He
himself, however, would never have chosen Claridges, nor the
villa at Taormina.
Life at Tac
HO was happy
and
light-hearted, and both
Henderson and Dawnay emphasised to me the
"jollity' in
Montgomery's tiny mess, which echoed every evening to jokes
and
roars
of laughter.
Montgomery
liked to
throw out
provocative remarks and then to mock his younger companions
for their replies, resembling, perhaps, an unmarried Edwardian
schoolmaster in his treatment of his close staff. All of them,
Montgomery included, greatly enjoyed the atmosphere at Tac
HQ, and the Warrant Officers, NCOs and ORs appreciated the
close relationships
with their commander.
And,
whatever
rumours have been given currency, John Henderson emphasised
to me that in all the time he was Montgomery's aide,
from
Alamein until after the end of the war, he never perceived a trace
of homosexuality.
Montgomery invariably went to bed at 2130 - even when the
