264
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Eisenhower were euphoric about an early end to the war. On 15
September, for instance, Eisenhower wrote a circular letter to
army, naval and air commanders stating that, as the Allied
armies were about to close up on the Rhine, it was 'time to plan
the final offensive."? This, too, was unrealistic. In the south,
Patton had been checked at Metz, the Germans were counter-
attacking strongly at Nancy, and Bradley was halted in the
narrow Aachen corridor
- all SHAEF hopes were therefore
pinned on Montgomery, for only if 'Market-Garden' succeeded
could there be a rapid victory. Unfortunately, and unknown to
the Allies, Hitler had staged a lightning recovery among his
forces.
At the beginning of September, Student's parachute regiments
were training and re-equipping in Germany.
of that month Hitler ordered Student to establish a new
army - First Parachute Army - along the Albert Canal in
Belgium, with its western flank held by those elements of
Fifteenth Army already emerging from the north Scheldt
peninsula; it was this hastily assembled force that robbed
Montgomery of success at Arnhem. To the south, along the
Siegfried Line, Hitler had also concentrated a new Panzer army
(Fifth) under von Manteuffel, and already the Führer hoped to
launch a massive counter-attack early in November through the
Ardennes. On 26 September Hitler ordered the Nazi Party to
raise a people's militia, the Volkssturm, to defend German soil, a
force made up chiefly of men up to the age of sixty, and boys of
sixteen and sometimes younger, together with a number of men
classed as unfit for service in the armed forces proper. At the
same time, over a million workers set about erecting tank
obstacles, bunkers and fortifications to defend Germany's
western borders, under the direction of Martin Bormann,
Hitler's deputy. The remaining fifty-five German divisions in the
west were quickly reinforced by conscripts, mostly ardent young
supporters of Hitler, dedicated Nazis ready to fight frenziedly in
defence of their homeland. Meanwhile, aircraft, tanks, guns,
bazookas and arms of every description were pouring out of the
factories to equip the swelling numbers of new Nazi soldiers.
Germany's power of recovery had been badly underestimated
by the Allies.
On 14 September Eisenhower had written to Marshall
explaining why he had rejected Montgomery's proposal (10
After Arnhem
265
September) for a single thrust to Berlin, and stating that: 'We
will have to fight one more battle for Germany to break through
the defences on the border.' Unhappily, this view, even by then,
was wishful thinking, so quick had been Hitler's reaction. But on
the 15th Eisenhower wrote in a directive that 'Berlin is the main
prize', and emphasised that he would give Montgomery priority
in supplies, and that Bradley would support Twenty-First Army
Group on the right.* He did, however, make it clear that he still
intended to push a double-thrust advance into Germany - one in
the north, the other in the centre towards Leipzig - but he was
assuming that Antwerp would
soon be open to supply this
'double-front strategy', and, like Montgomery, he fell into the
error of believing that the numerically small Canadian First
Army could clear the Scheldt estuary while Second Army was
putting all its resources into the crossing of the Rhine.
On 18 September Montgomery wrote Eisenhower a long
letter, emphasising that a concerted operation in which all the
available land armies move into Germany is not possible ... it is
my personal opinion that we shall not achieve what we want by
going for Nuremberg, Augsburg, Munich etc. and establishing
our forces in Central Germany ... the best objective is the Ruhr
and then on to Berlin by the northern route? He continued by
writing that, if Eisenhower agreed, 'the northern route should be
used 21 Army Group plus 9 Divisions of Ist US Army would be
enough provided they had everything needed in the maintenance
line .... If the proper axis is by Frankfurt and Central Germany
then I suggest that 12 Army Group should be used and have all
the maintenance.' Twenty-First Army Group would do the best
it could with what was left over, though it was possible that
British Second Army would be wanted in a secondary role on
the left flank. Bradley, meanwhile, had told Eisenhower that he
wanted drives from both the north and south, with the main
southern attack towards the Ruhr from Frankfurt.
Faced with these contradictory proposals from his Army
Group commanders,
Eisenhower wrote to Montgomery on 20
September declaring himself against 'a narrow front policy', and
firmly rejecting Montgomery's suggestion 'that all troops except
21 Army Group should stop in place where they are, and that
we can strip all these additional divisions from their transport
and everything else into one single knife like drive towards
Berlin. This, Eisenhower said, did not mean that he intended an
