324
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
I am absolutely convinced that the key to success lies in:
(a) all available offensive power being assigned to the
northern line of advance to the Ruhr;
(b) a sound set-up for command, and this implies one man
directing and controlling the whole tactical battle on
the northern thrust.
I am certain that if we do not comply with these two basic
conditions, then we will fail again ..
Yours always, and your very
devoted friend
At this stage of the campaign Bradley and Patton would
rather have resigned than accept Montgomery's overlordship,
and this outrageous letter, coming as it did in the wake of
Eisenhower's anger at the failure to attack as promised on 1
January, came close to bringing about the Field-Marshal's
downfall. Like Henry II in 1170, the Supreme Commander
impulsively decided that the time had come to be rid of his
'turbulent priest', and with Tedder's help he drafted a signal to
Washington which, in effect, asked for Montgomery to be
De Guingand, soon informed, became
alarmed by the course events were taking, and succeeded in
persuading Eisenhower to hold up the signal to Washington,
that Montgomery did not
understand the real
and promising to straighten it out with him.
Eisenhower and Tedder were reluctant to delay,
Smith urged reconciliation. It says a great deal for Eisenhower's
estimation of de Guingand that he agreed to defer sending the
Guingand a letter to
Montgomery. This read:
You know how greatly I have appreciated you and
depended upon your frank and friendly counsel but in your
latest letter you disturb me by predictions of 'failure' unless
your exact opinions in the matter of giving you command
over Bradley are met in détail. I assure you in this matter I
can go no further ...
For my part I would deplore the development of such an
unbridgeable gulf of convictions between us that we would
have to present our difficulties to the Combined Chiefs of
Ardennes
325
Staff. The confusion and debate that would follow would
certainly damage the good will and devotion to a common
cause that have made this Allied Force unique in history."
Eisenhower also sent a copy of the new SHAEF plan for
resuming the
offensive.
Meanwhile,
de
Guingand signalled
Montgomery from Versailles that he needed to talk to him
urgently, and immediately set off for the latter's HQ, arriving in
the afternoon of 31 December. He found Montgomery happy
and relaxed, taking tea with his ADC having just written that
characteristic letter to his friend Grigg, quoted above, which
demonstrated his usual contempt for the Americans.
De Guingand told Montgomery that he must have a serious
talk with him at once, and after tea they went to the latter's
office. Years later, in a BBC interview, de Guingand described
their talk.
which he had placed himself, but the other man brutally told him
that if he did not climb down pretty fast he would be sacked and
replaced by Alexander. De Guingand had already drafted a
letter of apology, and he argued that it was essential that it
should be sent immediately if the Field-Marshal was to keep his
command. Montgomery was at first amazed, but swiftly saw the
light. His letter read:
31 December 1944
Dear Ike,
I have seen Freddie [de Guingand] and understand you are
greatly worried by many considerations in these very difficult
days. I have given you my frank views because I have felt you
like this.
I am
sure there are many factors which have a
bearing quite beyond
anything I realise.
Whatever your
decision may be you can rely on me one hundred per cent to
make it work and I know Bradley will do the same. Very
distressed that my letter may have upset you and I would ask
you to tear it up.
Your very devoted subordinate,
Monty18
This was despatched by signal, and later, at 2135, Montgomery
signalled Eisenhower again, this time to say that Collins would
attack at first light in three days' time.
This consoled the
