140
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
comparatively insignificant.* How flustered Churchill was is
demonstrated by one remarkable minute, which shows clearly
that he was prepared to use poison gas in retaliation against the
Germans, and to consider germ warfare in the form of Anthrax.'
Desperately anxious to see the Allied armies advance quickly
from Normandy to the V1 launching sites on the northern coast
of France, Churchill began to take seriously all criticism of
Montgomery for being too slow. Brooke wrote that 'He was not
always too fond of Monty', and recorded in his diary on 6 July:
A frightful meeting with Winston after he had too much to
drink. He was maudlin, bad tempered, drunken and highly
vindictive against USA because he was annoyed by being told
by Eisenhower that Monty was over-cautious.
Winston
started abusing Monty because operations were not going
faster.
The CIGS flared up, and asked Churchill if he could not trust
his generals for five minutes, adding that he, Brooke, was furious
because Churchill had never uttered a single word of approval
or gratitude for the excellent work which Montgomery had
done. Exasperated with the Prime Minister, Brooke confided to
his diary on 10 July: 'Winston is a complete amateur of strategy
who swamps himself in detail which he should never look at.
Brooke informed Montgomery of the lie of the land at 10
Downing Street but the latter, by now under the strain of
fighting
'Goodwood', had severely blotted his copybook in
Churchill's eyes. On 18 July, the Prime Minister sent a message
to Montgomery
that he wished to visit him; the latter
immediately signalled Eisenhower that he did not want the
Prime Minister to come. 'Goodwood' had begun to falter, and
the last thing Montgomery wanted at that particular moment
was Churchill breathing down his neck.
At once Eisenhower let it be known that Montgomery had
asked him to keep the PM away, and fobbed Churchill off,
suggesting that instead he went to Cherbourg and to Omaha
*Professor F.A. Lindemann, who became Lord Cherwell in 1941, was a
noted physicist. He was a close friend of Churchill's, as well as being his
scientific adviser during the war years.
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
141
Beach, and then sailed
along
the
British beaches without,
however, visiting Montgomery. Churchill was livid, and for
twenty-four hours Montgomery was in grave danger of losing
his command.
On the same day, 18 July, Churchill informed Eisenhower
that he would fly over on the 21st to drive around the Cherbourg
peninsula and visit several of 'the alleged rocket strips'; he added
ominously,
'I have
no
intention
of
visiting
General
in any way.' And he told Brooke, with venom:
With hundreds of war correspondents moving about freely
this cannot be considered an unreasonable request from the
Minister
of Defence.
If however
myself with the facts on the spot.
Montgomery's fat was in the fire.
On the 19th, according to Brooke's diary, Churchill, still in
bed at 0930, was raging against Montgomery for stopping his
visit to him in France: 'Haig had always allowed him in the last
war as Minister of Munitions. He would not stand it. He would
make it a matter of confidence, etc. etc.' (At this stage Brooke
was very annoyed with Churchill, noting in his diary on 20 July:
'Winston goes off skylarking instead of giving decisions months
overdue.)
Brooke, who had scheduled a visit to Montgomery for that
day, realised that the moment of crisis had come for his friend.
As soon as he landed
at the
airstrip
at Tac HQ, Brooke
informed Montgomery that Eisenhower
Has been expressing
displeasure and accusing Monty
of being sticky and of not
pushing sufficiently on the Caen front with the British while he
made the Americans do the attacking on the right, and that
Churchill had taken these complaints very seriously. He firmly
told Montgomery to go into his caravan and write to the Prime
Minister, inviting him to Tac HQ. Montgomery wrote in his own
handwriting:
