288
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
was not ashamed. With grave lack of tact, he had chosen to
raise again the question of command, and in a letter to Bedell
Smith on 10 October (the day of "heated words' between the
two) had stated that one of the troubles with 'Market-Garden'
had been "lack of co-ordination' between his
forces and
Bradley's; he had suggested that therefore he should have
command
of US
Twelfth Army Group. This letter had
confirmed Eisenhower in his decision to assert his authority as
Supreme Commander over Montgomery. 20
For if Montgomery would not accept that authority,
then
Eisenhower would try and get him sacked. In a surprisingly
strong reply, dated 13 October, the American wrote:
The Antwerp operation does not involve the question of
command ... If you as Senior Commander in this theatre of
one of the great Allies feel that my conceptions and directives
are such as to endanger the success of operations it is your
duty to refer the matter to higher authority for any action
they may choose to take however drastic.21
He added that Twenty-First Army Group's current com-
mitments would leave it with such depleted forces facing east-
wards that Montgomery could not be expected to carry out
anything more than supporting movements in the attack on the
Ruhr. Originally, in September, Eisenhower had written that he
hoped Montgomery could take Antwerp and clear the west
coast of Holland rapidly, and therefore be in a position to make
a major attack on the Ruhr, an operation for which US units
would have been made available to Twenty-First Army Group.
He had, however, gathered from the Versailles conference that
Montgomery agreed that 'the British Army Group could not
produce the bulk of the forces required for the direct Ruhr
attack?'
Montgomery knew that the American armies, and not his,
must now take on the push to the Rhine. He decided therefore to
play down his more extravagant demands and to talk sensibly,
replying to Eisenhower:
You will hear no more from me on the question of command.
I have given you my views and you have given your answer.
I, and all of us, will weigh in 100% to do what you want, and
After Arnhem
289
we will pull it through without a doubt. I have given Antwerp
top priority in all operations in 21 Army Group and all
energies and efforts will now be devoted towards opening up
the place.22
The letter was signed 'Your very devoted loyal subordinate.
Sadly Montgomery, aided and abetted by Brooke and Grigg
(and at times even by Churchill), was to raise again,
and
repeatedly (though always unsuccessfully), not only the question
of command, but also that of priority for a northern thrust. But
Eisenhower now knew that he had the support of Marshall,
Roosevelt and the US Chiefs of Staff, and was determined never
again to give in to Montgomery. For the time being, however,
Montgomery had to concentrate on the long battle of attrition to
clear the Scheldt estuary and free Antwerp.
