260
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
surrendered, and on the 8th all resistance in the Walcheren
Islands ceased - at last it was possible for the Royal Navy to
start clearing the Scheldt. It took 100 minesweepers three weeks
to clear the mines, and the first Allied merchant ship convoy did
not reach Antwerp until 28 November. When Walcheren was
captured it was found to be bristling with heavy calibre coastal
batteries encased in impregnable thicknesses of concrete; if the
Allies had sought to use Antwerp before the Scheldt was cleared
the results would have been catastrophic.
Both Montgomery and the Canadians wanted to use airborne
troops in the Scheldt battle. As we have seen, Montgomery's
first request to the Airborne Army for a drop on Walcheren -
Operation 'Infatuate' - was turned down by Brereton, but would
an airborne operation have made much difference? Simonds
certainly thought so, and in a letter to Crerar,
dated 13
September, Montgomery wrote: 'The whole energies of the
Army will be directed towards operations designed to enable full
use to be made of the port of Antwerp. Airborne troops are
available to co-operate? In his diary for 11 September, however,
Brereton listed ten possible airborne operations which had been
under consideration, and added: 'I refused Operation Infatuate
because of intense flak on Walcheren; difficult terrain which
would prevent glider landings; excessive losses because of
drowning.
On 17 September General Cutler, a senior staff officer from
Allied First Airborne Army, discussed
a possible
airborne
operation on Walcheren and South Beveland with Crerar.
The
former's view was that, since such an operation was now
planned to
assist a ground
assault, it had become more
attractive, and he added that two parachute regiments of US
17th Airborne Division
were
available.
Three days later
Montgomery asked Eisenhower for a decision about employing
these airborne troops.
The Supreme Commander telephoned
Brereton, and then, with Leigh-Mallory opposing it, turned the
proposition down because of 'terrain factors and types of
targets'.
Nevertheless,
at his conference
on
22 September
Eisenhower told de Guingand that he would ask Allied First
Airborne Army to reconsider the operation. The answer was
again a refusal, to Simonds's disappointment. On 21 October
Crerar once more requested an air drop, this time to be at the
west end of South Beveland on the 29th in order to seize the
The Canadians on the Coast
261
Walcheren causeway. But on the day after his request Crerar
was firmly told that the Airborne Army was no longer at
Twenty-First Army Group's disposal.
Any air drop on Walcheren or South Beveland must have
been highly expensive in casualties, given the German troop
concentrations, and not even Montgomery seriously argued that
employing airborne forces would have significantly altered either
the casualties suffered in, or the time taken up by, the Scheldt
campaign.
In the general euphoria that followed the capture of Brussels
and the planning for 'Market-Garden', with its attendant chance
of securing a Rhine crossing, Montgomery
failed
either to
appreciate or to heed the intelligence reports about German
Fifteenth Army's strength on both banks of the Scheldt - in this
lies his chief error. As soon as the Allies took Antwerp land
telephone lines between Hitler and Fifteenth Army HQ were cut
- as a result there was a sudden increase in the number of
German radio signals deciphered by Ultra at Bletchley. These
disclosed not only the enemy's strength, but also his plans.
Within twenty-four hours of the fall of Antwerp, Twenty-First
Army Group knew from Ultra that Hitler had sent two signals
ordering his troops to hold both banks of the Scheldt, and each
day more signals gave news of the substantial ferryings of troops
across the estuary to Walcheren and South Beveland. For the
first three days these movements could have signified a German
evacuation of the southern shore of the Scheldt, but Hitler's
signal to Army Group B on 7 September gave the firmest
possible evidence that the Breskens pocket on the south bank
would be 'obstinately defended'. An Army Group B order of 4
September had ordered Fifteenth Army units which could not
fight their way through by Louvain to go back via Flushing and
Breda, and further series of signals revealed to Twenty-First
Army Group the enemy's corps and divisional locations; these
indicated considerable strength in front of the Canadians both
on the mainland and on South Beveland. Montgomery ought to
have known that, once the initial opportunity had been lost on 4
September, the clearing of the Scheldt must be a massive, long
and costly operation.
During
the
seven
days before 'Market-Garden', Ultra
revealed the daily performance of the Breskens ferries from
Terneuzen to Flushing and inland; it was reliably estimated that
