268
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
on 21 September, he sent the following signal to Eisenhower:
If we are to take quick advantage of our favourable situation
in the NIJMEGEN area it is essential that the right Corps of
Second Army should develop at once a strong thrust on the
axis GENNEP - CLEVE - EMMERICH. In order to do this
the inter-Army Group boundary would have to be adjusted to
read all incl 12 Army Group HASSELT - WEERT
ASTEN - DEURNE - VENRAY - MAASHEES. I
recommend this adjustment to be made at once so that
Second Army can develop a strong left hook against the
RUHR. FREDDIE [de Guingand] will explain full details at
conference tomorrow and will show you some notes on the
problem which I have sent him.®
The signal, in cipher,
was
marked "Top
Secret', 'Most
Immediate', and 'Personal for Eisenhower from Montgomery.
Its main purpose was to get Bradley to turn left to cover
Montgomery's exposed right flank, and the 'notes' to be shown
to Eisenhower reveal that the British commander, against all
odds, still expected to win the battle for Arnhem. De Guingand's
instructions for the Versailles Conference read:
Notes for Chief of Staff
1. If we are to take quick advantage of the good situation we
have achieved in the general area GRAVE-NIJMEGEN-
ARNHEM, it will be necessary for the right Corps of
Second Army to develop a strong thrust on the axis
GENNEP-CLEVE-EMMERICH.
2. Having established itself in the CLEVE area, this Corps
would operate in a S.E. direction between the RHINE and
the MEUSE, directed on the N.W. corner of the RUHR.
3. The remainder of Second Army would move on HAMM.
4. But the right Corps of Second Army is at present holding a
front facing east through DEURNE and WEERT, so as to
protect the right flank of the Army. It cannot take on the
task outlined in para 1 unless it is relieved from this
protective role.
5. The task is to isolate and capture the RUHR. The best
way to do this is to take quick advantage of our favourable
After Arnhem
269
situation and deliver a strong left hook with Second Army.
First US Army should use its left wing in holding role, so
that Second Army can develop its fuli potential.
6. I consider that the inter-Army Group boundary should be
adjusted at once as follows:
All incl 12 Army Group:
HASSELT - WEERT - ASTEN - DEURNE - VENRAY -
MAASHEES
Exact and detailed boundary to be settled between Second
British and First US Armies.
7. If I were in full command and control of the operations to
capture the RUHR, I would at once order the above
adjustment of boundary.
8. As things stand at present, the command set-up is such
that I can only recommend it.
But I have been directed to co-ordinate the action on the
Therefore I definitely recommend this new boundary.
9. I have
cabled my
recommendation to the Supreme
Commander.
Bring the matter up at the conference tomorrow.
Signed B.L. Montgomery®
This was
more than optimistic: Cleve is south-west of the
Rhine,
Emmerich is on the Rhine, and Hamm is well inside
Germany, to the east of the Rhine and beyond the Dortmund-
Ems Canal. Plainly, achieving these objectives was a pipedream
unless Arnhem Bridge was taken and held. But, even as the
Versailles conference was taking place, Twenty-First Army
Group was bogged down between Nijmegen and Arnhem and
had lost any chance of mounting an immediate offensive beyond
the Rhine.
Montgomery's notes for
de Guingand
operations which could
not possible be carried out without
victory at Arnhem.
Before he left his office for the conference room, Eisenhower
had written to Montgomery confirming his decision to make the
main drive in the north, with Twelfth Army Group in support of
Twenty-First.
American generals at the conference, under the
mistaken impression that Montgomery was about to obtain a
bridgehead over the Rhine at Arnhem, were in no position to
