330
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
9. And now I come to the last point.
It is team-work that pulls you through dangerous times; it
is team-work that wins battles; it is victories in battle that
win wars. I want to put in a strong plea for Allied
solidarity at this vital stage of the war; and you can all
help in this greatly. Nothing must be done by anyone that
tends to break down the team spirit of our Allied team; if
you try and 'get at' the captain of the team you are liable
to induce a loss of confidence, and this may spread and
have disastrous results. I would say that anyone who tries
to break up the team spirit of the Allies is definitely helping
the enemy.
10. Let me tell you that the captain of our team is Eisenhower.
I am absolutely devoted to Ike; we are the greatest of
friends. It grieves me when I see uncomplimentary articles
about him in the British Press; he bears a great burden, he
needs our fullest support, he has a right to expect it, and it
is up to all of us to see that he gets it.
And so I would ask all of you to lend a hand to stop that
sort of thing; let us all rally round the captain of the team
and so help to win the match.
Nobody objects to healthy and constructive criticism; it is
good for us.
But let us have done with destructive criticism that aims a
blow at Allied solidarity, that tends to break up our team
spirit, and that therefore helps the enemy. 19
Although kind about US troops and about Eisenhower,
the
tone is patronising and self-congratulatory. And in off-the-cuff
remarks, made after he had read out the press statement,
Montgomery was equally rash, giving the impression that he had
saved the Americans from disaster. The result was inevitable -
Eisenhower and Bradley were livid, and all the American
generals were up in arms at this tactless and not altogether
truthful view of the battle. Certainly Montgomery had greatly
helped to restore a dangerous situation, but the victory had not
been achieved by his efforts alone. The Americans were perhaps
being over-sensitive, but they had suffered heavily in the battles,
and the Field-Marshal should have realised this.
Brigadier Williams commented to me:
Ardennes
331
I begged him not to hold the press conference. He came in
wearing a purple airborne beret and was like a cock on a
dunghill ... [he] loved his press conferences. The journalists
liked him
because he was
crystal clear and they could
understand
exactly
what had
happened,
or rather what
Monty wanted them to understand, because he was capable
of telling whopping lies. At the 7 January
conference it was
not so much the press release, but Monty's attitude in the
discussions which did so much harm to
Anglo-American
relations. It was crazy of him to say that a battle which had
cost so many American lives and produced the crisis of the
campaign was 'one of the most interesting ... battles I have
ever handled.' This was absurdly patronising.
I came
away
from
the
press
conference
with Alan
Moorehead. We both agreed it was disastrous, and I said to
Alan: 'For God's
sake do
something to
pour oil over the
waters, which are going to be very troubled?
Chester Wilmot's radio signal to the BBC giving the gist of
the conference was picked up by the Germans, who immediately
rewrote his copy with an anti-American bias and then broadcast
it in English from their Arnhem radio on 8 January. Picked up
by an American monitoring service, the broadcast was mistaken
at Bradley's HQ for a BBC transmission and 'this twisted text'
started an uproar, fuelled by the fact that the Daily Telegraph
carried the corrupt German version in full on 11 January:
Field-Marshal Montgomery came into the fight at
strategic moment.
He scored a major success across the
Laroche road, which American tanks cut on Saturday.
Many tanks, as well as British and American infantry, are
coming up. Gains of from 1,000 to 3,000 yards were made
yesterday. Our forces are not more than 12 miles apart on
opposite sides of the salient. The American Third Army from
the south made two and a half miles at one point.
To the south of the line at a point
two miles north of
transformed it into a headache for Rundstedt. It is the most
brilliant and difficult task he has yet managed. He found no
