Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
we have lost flexibility
throughout the battle area as a whole. From my talk with
Gale it seems to me he is greatly to blame for not keeping in
touch with the situation and ensuring things were in hand. My
own admin situation is not in blooming health but I can quite
well continue the battle and am doing so.
In fact, Simpson had read this outspoken signal on the day
before at Montgomery's Tac HQ, though he did not tell Gale
and Morgan this. He did, however, tell them that Montgomery
felt very strongly that the senior British staff at SHAEF were
not representing fully and accurately to Eisenhower the position
regarding Twenty-First Army Group's supplies. At that moment,
word came that Bedell Smith was free, and Morgan took
Simpson along to his room. Bradley was also there, but as soon
as Simpson pointed out that he had a personal message from
Montgomery for Bedell Smith, the latter at once asked Bradley
to excuse him. Simpson went with Bedell Smith to his private
room, and there told the American that Montgomery hoped that
he would not be asked to any more conferences like the one on
that day at Versailles, since he was too busy running the battle
'up forward'. He had no intention of attending the conference -
Paris was a long way from the actual battle, and the weather at
that time of the year was unreliable, and might prevent him from
getting back quickly to his own HQ after a conference. In reply,
Bedell Smith said: 'I am glad to have this message because we
were feeling it very much that the Field-Marshal could not
manage to come. Now we know the reasons, and I will tell Ike at
once what you have said?
If, as seems to be the case, this explanation of Montgomery's
refusal to attend the Versailles conference mollified Eisenhower
and Bedell Smith, then it says a great deal for Simpson's tact
and charm, for on paper his excuse appears very thin. But the
spoken word and the speaker's personality can sometimes make
a considerable difference, and the likeable Simpson was always
persona grata with Bedell Smith and Eisenhower, although both
knew that he frequently disagreed with
Montgomery utterly
at all times and in all
continued by
explaining to
Montgomery's belief that he had an unlimited opportunity to
After Arnhem
advance to the east, where the Germans were weak (although
German Fifteenth Army had up to 150,000 men on its west
flank), but that he would not be able to take full advantage of
this magnificent opportunity unless all the Allied resources were
The American general assured Simpson that
both he and Eisenhower understood this, and that they fully
intended all resources to go to Montgomery. All that worried
Eisenhower, said Bedell Smith, was that Montgomery must not
try to go straight off to Berlin on a narrow front, to which
Simpson replied: 'An advance to
Monty's present intention is to capture the Ruhr. This is what
Eisenhower has ordered him to do and SHAEF ought to give him
logistic resources for it.'
Simpson, Bedell
emphatically that Montgomery could rest assured that SHAEF
would do everything possible to support Twenty-First Army
Group in the capture of the Ruhr.
He told Simpson, very
frankly, that Eisenhower had given orders to Bradley and Patton
to 'conserve their administrative resources, but that they had
not obeyed. 'Our trouble,' he continued, 'is that Ike, instead of
giving direct and clear orders, dresses them up in polite language
American commanders
advantage. However, Ike has given me full authority to make it
clear to them today that they must obey orders.
Bedell Smith went on to say that he had considered asking
Simpson to the top-level conference that afternoon, but had
decided not to because so much dirty linen is going to be
washed that it would be better if an outsider was not present';
Simpson got the impression that Eisenhower intended to savage
Then, for a second time,
promised Simpson
that Eisenhower fully intended to support
Montgomery's major thrust to the Ruhr, and that he, Bedell
Smith, would advise the Supreme Commander at the conference
to put US First Army under Montgomery's command, although
he realised that this decision would not be well received in the
United States. He added, in confidence, that when the American
command set-up a
categorically that all the American troops must be kept under
Bradley's command. But, he continued,
T think Ike is quite
prepared now to disobey this instruction and to put Hodges's 1st
