300
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the northern advance, but he wanted to make two thrusts to
exploit the Germans' great weakness - immobility. Montgomery
interrupted, declaring emphatically that a thrust from Frankfurt
had no chance of success and would only mean that his drive
north of the Ruhr would not be strong enough. But Eisenhower
brought the argument to an end by categorically refusing to
stop Patton. Nettled by this, Montgomery rashly jumped again
into the old argument about command. In vain he said that he
"would willingly serve under Bradley', after reiterating his view
that he must have command of all operations north of the
Ardennes. Testily Eisenhower once more refused to give up the
land command.
Tedder, Bradley and Bedell Smith said little, but Montgomery
was only too aware they sided with the Supreme Commander,
and this added to his frustration. An artificially cheery lunch
followed
the meeting and, with a wry face,
Montgomery
watched the other four drive off together. At the lunch he had
emphasised to Eisenhower that although, as commander of the
armies of one of the principal allies, he disagreed with the
existing
strategy he would stand by Eisenhower's decisions.
According to Montgomery 'We parted good friends', but this
was untrue. The two men were no longer friends, although
neither was prepared to force their quarrel to breaking point.
Moreover, Montgomery now knew that Marshall and Roosevelt
would never agree to Eisenhower's replacement, and that he,
Montgomery, must lose if the dispute ever went to government
level. Eisenhower, true to his temperament, was prepared to
paper over the cracks.
Montgomery vented his frustration during the afternoon of 7
December, writing letters of complaint both to Brooke and to
Grigg. To the CIGS he wrote:
I played a lone hand against the three of them ….. any points I
made which caused Eisenhower to wobble would have been
put right by Bradley and Tedder on the three hour drive back
to Luxemburg
If you want the war to end within a
reasonable period you have to get Eisenhower's hand off the
tiller. I regret to say he just does not know what he is doing.
And you will have to see Bradley's influence is curbed.
And to Grigg:
The Dreary Autumn
301
I have returned from my conference with Ike at Maastricht.
The result was complete failure, and he went back on all the
points he had agreed to when alone with me. Bradley and
Tedder were there too; I played a lone hand against the whole
three. That Tedder should take their side is too dreadful.
I have written the whole thing
in a long letter to the
C.I.G.S, and he will doubtless show it to you.
The American plan for winning the war is quite dreadful; it
will not succeed, and the war will go on. If you want to end
the war in any reasonable time you will have to remove Ike's
hand from the control of the land battle; and Bradley's hand
also. How you will do this I do not know; but unless you do
so, the war will go on. I hope the American public will realise
that, owing to the handling of the campaign in western
Europe from 1 Sept. onwards, the German war will now go
on during 1945. And they should realise very clearly that the
handling of the campaign is entirely in American hands.
We did quite reasonably well when it was in British hands.
One must just keep on plugging away at it; possibly some
miracle will happen. But the experience of war is that you pay
dearly for mistakes; no one knows that better than we British.
We must keep on fighting all through the winter, and one
would not mind if success came at the end of it. But success
will not come.
Come and see me sometime. I will send my aeroplane for
you at any time.
Yrs ever,
Monty®
In both letters Montgomery enclosed a long memorandum of
complaint against Eisenhower, which is reproduced in the
Appendix to this book.
During this period of wrangling, Roosevelt had informed
Washington, Churchill, at Brooke's request, asked Eisenhower to
London to discuss the front.
The two men met at 1800 on 10 December in Churchill's
all
the British
Chief
of
Staff
map
