86
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the rear echelon in London. Montgomery had his office and
mess in a charming small house, where he and de Guingand had
bedrooms while the rest of his generals lived in tents and
caravans, though they messed with their commander.
D-Day was now set for 5 June, but on the 2nd the weather
experts became pessimistic about prospects for the invasion.
The decision whether or not to postpone because of bad weather
was
not,
however,
Montgomery's
responsibility,
but
Eisenhower's, as Supreme Commander. At 0430 on 4 June
Eisenhower held a conference at Southwick Park, and asked the
assembled commanders for their views now that they had heard
gloomy reports from the meterologists. Tedder, Leigh-Mallory
and Ramsay all advised a postponement. Only Montgomery
wanted to go, despite Leigh-Mallory's especially pessimistic view
that his crews would have to bomb on instruments without seeing
their targets. Eisenhower decided to postpone for twenty-four
hours.
Tedder was furious, and asserted later that Montgomery had
been ready to risk his armies knowing full well that, because of
the weather, the air forces could give only very reduced support.
From this point Tedder became one of Montgomery's severest
critics, egged on by the disappointed Morgan, Eisenhower's
Deputy Chief of Staff. (Morgan became such a thorn in
Montgomery's flesh that the latter accused him of automatically
supporting Eisenhower's ideas at the expense of his own.)
Tedder had lost 2,000 aircraft and 12,000 men killed in the two
months before D-Day, and Montgomery's implied assumption
that the air forces were of little value to the invasion force was
like a red rag to a bull to him in the tense hours before the
invasion.
By now, 4 June, some submarines were already in position on
the invasion routes to act as markers. As each craft surfaced, it
had immediately to dive again in response to urgent signals
about
the
postponement.
The submarines spent
another
uncomfortable twenty-four hours, eleven fathoms under the
surface.
Bradley and the other US generals had already embarked on
ships with their troops, and in the afternoon they sent a message
to Eisenhower recommending that at all costs the invasion
should go ahead
on 6 June.
Eisenhower
reconvened the
conference at 0430 on the 5th. Tedder and Leigh-Mallory were
Montgomery and the Invasion
87
still against going, and Ramsay
added that a decision was
needed within half an hour if 'Overlord' was to take place on
Tuesday, 6 June. The meteorologist said: 'There is a glimmer of
hope. A clear spell is possible for 24 hours from late on 5 June.'
Montgomery was as keen as ever, and with many misgivings
Eisenhower told the conference
that the invasion would
go
ahead as planned on 6 June. According to his ADC, Eisenhower
was so worried that he immediately drafted the bulletin which he
would have to issue if the invasion was a failure.
The troops landed on the invasion beaches at 0430 on 6 June.
Montgomery
spent the
whole
day
quietly
at his HQ in
Portsmouth
reading the signals
as they
came
in; he was
especially delighted when Leigh-Mallory reported that aircraft
casualties had been low in the airborne landings. Then, at 2230,
after recording a message for the BBC, General Sir Bernard
Montgomery embarked on the destroyer HMS Faulkner for
Normandy.
