Over the Seine
Now let us see how Montgomery's troops fared after the battle
of the Falaise Gap. On 26 August Montgomery issued his final
directive (MS20) as commander (or, perhaps better put at this
stage, 'co-ordinator') of Twenty-First Army Group and Twelfth
Army Group. His intention was for Twenty-First Army Group
to destroy all enemy forces in the Pas de Calais and Flanders
and to capture Antwerp
... to advance eastwards on to the
Ruhr? Allied First Airborne Army would be dropped in the Pas
de Calais, while British Second Army was to cross the Seine
with all speed and, irrespective of the progress of other armies
on the flank, secure the area Amiens-St Pol-Arras, with a strong
force of armour making a dash for Amiens.
In consultation
with Bradley, Montgomery fixed the
boundary
between the
two Army Groups
as
Mantes-
Gassicourt - Beauvais - Albert - Douai - Antwerp, the Ameri-
can force having been ordered by Eisenhower to thrust for-
ward on its left, with its principal offensive mission, for the
moment,
to
support [Twenty-First Army Groupl in the
attainment of its objectives
...' Montgomery expanded on this:
*21 Army Group is employing First US Army for this task. It is
to advance north-east on the general axis Paris-Brussels and
establish itself in the area Brussels-Maastricht-Liege-Namur-
Charleroi.' Wisely, he issued no directive for Patton's Third
Army, which was in any case now over the Somme and quite
beyond his control - indeed, Patton had been authorised by
Bradley on the day before to prepare to drive for the Rhine.
As we have seen, Bradley was not interested in looping US
First Army to the north to aid Twenty-First Army Group's
197
Over the Seine
drive to Germany; consequently he ignored Directive M520. His
sights were firmly fixed on the Siegfried Line and a triumphant
advance with Patton to the Rhine, well to the south and out of
Montgomery's way. Ominously,
Bradley asked Montgomery
three days later (29 August) to include Brussels in the British
boundary, and the latter had to agree; this meant that US First
Army would stay further to the east.
On 25 August the Germans had surrendered Paris, not to the
Americans, but to General Charles de Gaulle's provisional
French Government. Patton's US Third Army and Hodges's US
First Army had been approaching Paris as early as 19 August,
but Eisenhower had not wanted to take the city because of the
threat of its destruction, and because of the problems in feeding
two million civilians. Instead, he wanted the American armies to
encircle Paris and drive on for the German frontier.
With the Allied armies so close, Paris had risen in revolt
against the Germans on 19 August, and on the next day the
German Military Governor, Lt-Gen Dietrich von Choltitz, had
asked the résistants for a truce until the 23rd. On 21 August de
Gaulle had called on Eisenhower and asked him to send
Leclerc's
2ème Division Blindée
urgently into Paris. The
Supreme Commander, after a day's agonised indecision, and
without consulting Montgomery, ordered Leclerc, together with
US 4th Division and a British contingent, to make for Paris.
Leclere, still 120 miles from the city on 22 August, urged his
division forward throughout the next day, and entered Paris on
the 24th. On 25 August von Choltitz surrendered formally to
Leclere. Hitler had ordered von Choltitz to reduce Paris to a
'field of ruins', like Warsaw, if the Resistance took to the streets.
Fortunately
von
Choltitz,
a cultured
and
civilised man,
refused - though he would become a POW and be safe from
Hitler's vengeance,
his
wife
and
family
were
Germany - and thanks to him Paris was spared.
Neither Montgomery nor
Churchill had urged the Supreme
Commander to send any British troops into Paris; Eisenhower
afterwards agreed that he would have been much better advised
to have left Paris to the Free French army alone, for de Gaulle
flatly refused to hand over the city to the Americans, and in
other ways caused difficulties. On 26 August de Gaulle ordered
Leclerc to hold a victory parade in the Champs Elysées. Gerow,
commanding US V Corps, told Leclerc to ignore this order and
