The Breakout to the Seine
English
channel
(1 SEPT)
Le Havre e
TWAVISI NVIOVNES
Elbeuf S
1 26 AUG\
Held by Allies
on July 25
BRITISH
PERATION
Cherbourg
BRITISH
2nd ARMY
PARIS
24/25 AUG
• Chartres FREE FRENCH
5.J837331 N39
US FIRST ARMY
• Argentan
• Alençon
• Avranches
31 JULY • Mortain
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
161
every tank you have but you must capture Aunay by midnight.'
Next morning, Aunay was still not taken. Montgomery told
Dempsey that Erskine must go,
and Bucknall agreed with
Dempsey that Erskine should be relieved of the command of 7th
Armoured because that division had been 'most dilatory'. In the
evening of the same day Dempsey told Bucknall that he too was
sacked. The latter took his ill fortune like a gentleman, and later
wrote: 'When I got to 21 Army Group HQ Monty delivered the
coup de grâce gracefully and told me to carry on until my
replacement arrived.'20 But he considered that Dempsey was
'nervous and jumpy', and as he could not risk a fourth reverse he
'needed a scapegoat'.
In fact, it was Montgomery who had
insisted on the dismissals, and he made a clean sweep in 7th
Armoured, replacing also the Armoured Brigade Commander,
Brigadier Hinde, and the CRA. The division resented these
sackings, which
failed to bring
about
any "rejuvenation',
according to Chester Wilmot and others who were in a position
to judge.
Neither did Erskine's replacement live up to
Montgomery's hopes.
Montgomery had always had great faith in 7th Armoured, his
'Desert Rats'. General Roberts, however, thinks that in this he
was mistaken. He told me:
7th Armoured Division had been in battle too much and done
too much fighting. At the time of 'Bluecoat' their tanks would
reach a corner and then not go round it. Monty should have
disbanded 7th Armoured and kept 9th Armoured [which was
split up] who were fresh. I used to find when I was given an
Armoured Brigade who had little battle experience it was like
getting a fresh second horse.
On 2 August Montgomery had written to Simpson:
I fear I shall have to remove Erskine from 7th Armoured
Division. He will not fight his Division and take risks. It was
very easy in the desert to get a 'bloody nose', and a good
many people did get one.
The old desert divisions are apt to
look over their shoulder and wonder if it is OK behind or if
the flanks are secure and so on. The 7th Division is like that.
They want a new General who will drive them headlong
towards and through gaps torn in the enemy defence not
