The Dreary Autumn
For Montgomery, the autumn of 1944 became increasingly
dreary. Twenty-First Army Group attacks from the Nijmegen
bridgehead achieved nothing, and the main bulk of his forces
was bogged down in the long and costly battle to open the port
of Antwerp. The contrast between this and the euphoria of early
September was sharp, and Montgomery felt intensely that the
chance to obtain a quick victory over Hitler had been wantonly
thrown away by
Eisenhower's refusal to concentrate all
resources on a single drive.
Whether a southern drive by the American armies would have
had a better chance of success than Montgomery's pencil-like
northern thrust is debatable. What is indisputable, however, is
that Eisenhower, by dissipating his supplies between the two
army groups, achieved the worst of both worlds, and literally
threw away his chance of ending the war in 1944.
By the middle of October there was no short-cut to victory,
and in matters of strategy Montgomery and Eisenhower were as
far apart as ever; worse, Eisenhower had now set his face
against Montgomery, although the latter did not realise this.
This setback, this blow to the Allies' hopes, was even worse for
the people of Britain than for the Americans. In the United
States there were fresh divisions and reserves of trained men; in
Britain, on the other hand, after five years of austerity and
complete mobilisation, the people were sick and tired of war,
and it was a bitter blow to their morale that the high hopes
raised after the liberation of France could not now be realised.
There was, moreover, a drastic shortage of manpower both for
the British factories and for trained reinforcements in North-
West Europe, Italy and the Far East, and losses were high. The
The Dreary Autumn
291
wastage of infantrymen in Twenty-First Army Group
was
higher than estimated by the War Office; some divisions were up
to 2,000 men under strength, and the reinforcements pool was
nearly dry. Only by breaking up existing divisions and other
units could reinforcements be found.
Hitler, on the other hand, had found extra manpower for the
war and for the manufacture of arms by an intensive combing-
out of all able-bodied Germans, and by an unscrupulous use of
slave labour from occupied countries. Even twelve- to fourteen-
year-olds were taken out of school to dig fortifications, and his
new battalions contained an almost sacrilegious proportion of
schoolboys. By mid-October twelve new German divisions had
been formed. Morale was surprisingly high, even in the newly
raised Volkssturm and Volksgrenadier divisions of factory
workers,
shopkeepers
and
petty
officials.
Schoolboys,
transformed overnight into fighting soldiers, had known no
government or faith other than Nazism, and fighting for Hitler
was considered romantic by many of these fresh youths. And,
moreover, the efforts of Hitler and the Nazi Party received a
considerable boost at this time by the publication of details of
the ill-conceived American Morgenthau Plan.
In September 1944 the US Treasury Department under its
Secretary, Henry Morgenthau, prepared an economic plan for
Germany after her defeat.
The plan called for a policy
"pastoralisation', that is, to deprive Germany for ever of her
power to build armaments by stripping the industrial regions of
the Ruhr and the Saar of their factories, either by destruction or
by
removing
their machinery
as
war
reparations.
in which
rearmament
would
be
impossible.
Conference ('Octagon', 12-16 September); impulsively,
adviser
and his personal
link
with the
death.
