356
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
thought there was the slightest chance of my getting in your
way or making inroads on your time and thought. I will come
on D minus one with only the C.I.G.S., Tommy* and my
valet, four in all.
However it would be necessary for me to have somewhere
20 or 30 miles farther back a train, or perhaps a railway coach,
where I can keep a Private Secretary and Mr. Rinna, who deals
with facilities for scrambling messages. Probably one or two
detectives will be there; I do not need them at the front. You
must remember I have to keep in touch with events, which
sometimes move very quickly indeed. A motor-cyclist or two
would keep me in contact with this 'base', which I would drop
wherever you say on my way out and pick up on my way back.
The nearer to an airfield the better. I shall most certainly come
in a Dakota as my Skymaster is taking Clemmie on her mission
to Russia.
I may add that General Eisenhower suggested to me when I
talked my wishes over with him that a tank would be the best
way of seeing things, and would give protection in the forward
areas from stray airplane attacks. Perhaps this has already
occurred to you.
Any details about my visit which you may like to give can be
sent to Ismay† by your staff.
Yours very sincerely,
Winston S. Churchill*
Montgomery wrote to Grigg on 16 March: 'The following
weekend the P.M. will be here; I did not want him so I invited
him to keep the peace? And in another letter to Grigg four days
later, he wrote:
I am expecting the P.M. here on 23. He seems to be getting
restless and querulous. Why he wants to go about in
dangerous
places I cannot
imagine.
He
may
quite
likely get shot up. However it is his own affair. I shall make it
quite clear to him that he goes to these dangerous places
Defence.
* Commander C.R. Thompson, RN, Personal Assistant to the Minister of
+ General Sir Hastings Ismay, Chief of Staff to the Minister of Defence.
Churchill held this last post as well as that of Prime Minister throughout his
wartime period in office.
Eisenhower's Revenge
357
against my definite advice, and then leave it to him. I shall be
far too busy to attend him.'
The preparations for the Rhine crossing were ponderous and
deliberate, and received much publicity from the BBC, while the
British press billed 'Plunder' as a spectacular assault over the
widest river in Europe.
severely dented by US First Army's capture of the Remagen
bridge, intact, a fortnight earlier; then, on 22 March, one day
before Montgomery's attack was due to start,
US Third Army
captured the Rhine bridge at Oppenheim, south of Mainz, 'on
the run'. Patton's press statement, issued on the 23rd, pointedly
emphasised that Without benefit of aerial bombing artillery
preparation and airborne assistance the Third Army at 2200
Thursday evening March 22 crossed the Rhine. Bradley told
journalists that 'American troops are capable of crossing the
Rhine without aerial bombardent or airborne assistance, and on
March 22 had done it, his implication clearly
Montgomery
was incapable of achieving the same results
without a massive build-up.
On 17 March Montgomery had written to Simpson, saying
that 'conditions are excellent for Plunder; the banks quite easy
and the approaches in good order? He emphasised that the
roads on the Allied side were in good condition and had carried
no heavy traffic, and continued:
Operation Plunder as planned is a very good operation I'very
good' was underlined twicel, and has every chance of being a
great success.
I have therefore decided to wait for
good
weather; the decision will be taken at 1700 on 23 March as to
whether I launch Plunder on 24 March. If the weather is bad
it will be postponed 24 hours. The decision will be taken again
at 1700 on 24 March and so on. The operation is so good
that I shall wait if necessary four or five days.
There is still the possibility that I decide to launch the
operation and the troops of assaulting divisions start off at
2100. The weather then plays tricks on us and the operation
of launching the airborne force has to be cancelled. If the
airborne troops can be dropped at all on D Day the drop will
be in the planned area. If this is not possible they will be
dropped on D plus 1 in some other area.
This other area will
