302
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
also
present, together with Tedder. Eisenhower reiterated
his plan for a double advance into Germany, and Brooke
immediately took up
Montgomery's argument, telling the
American that he was violating the most sacred principle of
warfare - the need to concentrate forces - and that this had
caused the present failure. Later, at dinner at 10 Downing Street
that night, Brooke kept returning to Montgomery's theme. The
Prime Minister kept Eisenhower up until 0135, but to Brooke's
disappointment failed to support the arguments about the need
concentration.
During
these
meetings
Eisenhower, to
everyone's horror, gave the impression that he did not expect to
cross the Rhine until May, although later he corrected this view,
declaring that all he had meant was that his staff feared a major
crossing might not be possible until May because of the threat of
floods.
On the next day Churchill told Brooke,
somewhat
disingenuously, that he had been unable
to
argue
with
Eisenhower because the American general was his guest at
Downing Street. Instead, the CIGS was asked to prepare a
Chiefs of Staff paper for the War Cabinet to be presented at a
Cabinet meeting on 18 December. When finished, the paper
pursued the same old Montgomery line that victory was being
frittered away because of failure to concentrate 'on one major
thrust in the north'. Brooke hoped that,
after the Cabinet
meeting, the paper would go before a special Joint Chiefs of
Staff meeting in Washington, and that its effect would be to
'bulldoze' Eisenhower into changing his plan. However, after the
Downing Street
meeting, the Supreme Commander
complacently to Marshall that Brooke had been disturbed but,
after hearing Eisenhower's explanation, had 'understood the
situation better'.
He added that despite the pressure from
Montgomery and Brooke he still felt that it was important when
the time comes that we should be on the Rhine at Frankfurt."
Brooke would have been both annoyed and disturbed by this
letter, so at variance with his own views, but in fact he never saw
it.
Marshall
and Eisenhower
were
Americans should play the dominating
determined that the
part in the final
victorious campaign. Roosevelt too insisted upon this, and thus
any change of command or strategy which gave Montgomery
and Twenty-First Army Group the major role was politically
The Dreary Autumn
303
impossible. As soldiers, both Brooke and Montgomery can be
excused for their failure to realise this fact of life, but it is strange
that Churchill, with his far greater political acumen, never
understood it. The simple truth was that the badgering of
Eisenhower, and the British appeal to the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
could not be successful; all that such ploys could produce was a
further deterioration in Anglo-American relations.
Two days before Brooke's paper could be discussed by the
Cabinet, the stalemate on the front ended. On 16 December,
Hitler
unexpectedly
launched
two
giant
Panzer
armies,
comprising over half a million men, at the weakest point in the
Allied line in the Ardennes.
