150
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
short, killing twenty-five and wounding 130 Americans. On the
25th, D-day for 'Cobra', the same thing happened when the red
smoke marking the American front became obscured by dust
and smoke. This time 111 US soldiers were killed and over 500
wounded; among the dead was Lt-Gen Lesley McNair, head of
the US
Army Ground Forces, who had gone forward to
observe.
This second bomb attack by their own aircraft was so
detrimental to morale that 'Cobra' got off to a slow start. In fact
a good number of German infantry were shell-shocked by the
bombardment and unable to fight, but Panzer Lehr and 5th
Parachute Division were only slightly damaged, with the result
that their by-now dreaded Panthers held up the Americans in
the crucial early hours of the attack. By nightfall, however, US
troops were making headway, although, as Lt-Gen Courtney
Hodges, GOC US First Army, noted in his diary: 'It is not the
breakthrough we had hoped for ….. two successive days of
bombing took the ginger out of our front line troops."16
Eisenhower had crossed to Normandy to watch the start of
the twice-postponed 'Cobra' attack. When he heard of the short
bombing and of the casualties it had caused among his own
troops, he told Bradley firmly that this was the last time he
would allow the use of heavy bombers as a substitute for
artillery in paving the way for a ground attack.
Back in London that evening, Eisenhower was depressed, and
not even Bradley, who had accompanied him to the airstrip
before his flight back to England, had been able to cheer him up.
Although Bradley was very confident that he would make
spectacular gains on the next day, Eisenhower had heard the
same over-optimistic tale too often from Montgomery to allow
his hopes to rise.
Happily for Bradley there were only two Panzer divisions
facing him - Panzer Lehr, now reduced to forty-five tanks by
battles with the British, and 2nd SS Panzer. Both had to hold the
line, for there were no Panzer divisions in reserve for counter-
attacks and, unlike the
British
during "Goodwood', the
Americans met no defensive positions in depth. On the second
day of 'Cobra' German resistance weakened. Although their
artillery had mostly survived the bombing, their armour,
fortunately for the Americans, was chiefly deployed in pockets
and could be outflanked by Rhinoceros tanks advancing through
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
151
the meadows and hedges.
By the evening of the 26th Collins's VII Corps was on the
brink of a breakthrough. With two armoured and four infantry
divisions he was much stronger than the Germans facing him
and, gambling with two of his mobile columns, he started to
overrun enemy positions. Gerow's V Corps, on Collins's left,
and Lt-Gen Troy Middleton's VIII Corps, on his right, made
slower progress, however. But by 27 July the Americans were
reaping a harvest denied to British Second Army,
and were
pushing their tanks and armoured cars into areas where there
was no
German armour. Many German soldiers simply ran
away, and large numbers were made prisoner. On the third day
Coutances fell, and Bradley told Eisenhower: 'Things on our
front look good. Quesada [Maj-Gen E.R. (Pete) Quesada,
commanding 9th Tactical Air Command, USAAF] has kept air
formations over advancing columns continuously?"?
The Germans could not put in an armoured counter-attack to
prevent disaster in the western sector because six of their Panzer
divisions still faced the British; the American generals in the field
were sincere in their gratitude to Montgomery for diverting so
much German armour to the east. His plan to hold the enemy in
the British sector now paid huge dividends. As the key road
junction at Avranches fell on 1 August, Patton's Third Army
HQ came into operation and his divisions, freed of the risk of
heavy German counter-attacks, streamed into Brittany. US First
Army turned
east towards
Vire and Mortain;
Third Army
secured Fougères and Rennes and then turned west towards the
almost empty of Germans.
Meanwhile,
Eisenhower kept on nagging
Eisenhower's, policy of attacking all the time, all along the line.
initiative, Montgomery
gave a
great
boost
with
his Canadian
First
Army towards
Falaise,
