154
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
PRIVATE AND PERSONAL
1st August, 1944
My dear Monty,
I have had your two messages about the Press and their
alarmist stuff. The trouble for me is to know whether it comes
from your side or from SHAEF. The particular item which
infuriated you was from SHAEF and the Prime Minister has
himself taken it up with Eisenhower and Bedell Smith (Brooke
being present). I also spoke to Bracken Brendan Bracken,
Minister of Information) about it. The worst of it is, however,
that both Bracken and Eisenhower seem to exist to give the
journalists what they think they want and to support them
against the soldiers at all costs. So nobody but the P.M. can
do much there. However you can rely on C.I.G.S. and me
beavering away at the old man, and I will certainly speak to
the more reputable London editors and proprietors - but
individually, I think, and not in a formal conference.
What happens on your side I don't know. They are a pretty
scurvy lot anyhow but perhaps now that you have got Neville
over there you may be able to induce them to be no more
than a minor misfortune.
But none of this in my view goes to the root of the matter.
The Americans at the best of times would do their damnedest
to write down our effort and write up their own, to laud others
and diminish you. But an election year isn't the best of times
anyhow. And further I am convinced that Conyngham (sic is
continuing to badnamlel you and the Army and that what he
says in this kind is easily circulated in SHAEF via Tedder
and again that Bedell - who seems to have become very
conceited and very sour - listens too readily to the poison. If
I am right then you will have no comfort until you have
demanded and obtained the removal of Conyngham from any
connection with OVERLORD whatever. He is a bad and
treacherous man and will never be other than a plague to you.
If I may presume further I should force Eisenhower to
come out into the open the next time you see him and refuse
to put up with dark and fearful hints. Indeed I should make
headquarters.
accusation that the rumours are started in his own
However
giving advice is easy. You want me to do
something. I will. I will try to get the SHAEF
news
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
155
arrangements right mechanically. At present the American
No. 1 is sick and the British No. 2 is a bogus airman who is, I
think, a relation
of Archie Sinclair's. And I will
also
disseminate some wheat among the tares.
God bless and may your enemies be scattered - as well as
your false friends.
By writing in this vein Grigg was deliberately fanning the
quarrel between
encouraging his friend to adopt an anti-American outlook. It
was
possible kind
temperamental commander at this tense moment in the battle for
the break-out, while the remarks about Bedell Smith and the
demand for the sacking of Coningham, coupled with the advice
to Montgomery to have a showdown
inexcusable. Furthermore, it was, or should have been, Grigg's
task as Secretary of State for War to pour oil on the troubled
waters; by now,
however, he
was a devoted supporter of
Montgomery. Grigg himself was a strange character - though
extremely
bad-tempered and
daylight at last. For the first time he addressed the Secretary of
obvious enthusiasm for him.
PRIVATE, TOP SECRET & PERSONAL
TAC HEADQUARTERS:
21 ARMY GROUP
My dear P.J.
May I address you thus in my more personal letters. I will
be very correct and official on other occasions!! I have your
letter of 1 August. It is quite 1st Class and I had a real good
