254
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
contrast
to his opinion of Crerar, Montgomery thought
Simonds's performance in battle was exceptional, describing him
after the war as 'the best product of the Allied side'. But just
after Dieppe was taken by the Canadians on 1 September there
occurred a bizarre incident between Crerar and Montgomery,
involving Simonds, which revealed the British commander at his
arrogant worst, although in the end he showed his resilience by
rescuing himself from a dangerous quicksand. On 2 September,
Montgomery took exception to an order issued by Simonds, as
Canadian II Corps commander, which allowed a period of rest to
his Canadian 2nd and 3rd Divisions in the Dieppe and Abbeville
areas respectively.
Simonds had obviously agreed this with
Crerar, but his order produced from Montgomery, late on the
same day, this testy signal to Crerar:
Personal for Army Commander from C-in-C
Second Army are now positioned on the Belgian frontier and
will go through towards
Brussels tomorrow. It is very
necessary that your two Armoured Divisions should push
forward with all speed towards St Omer and beyond. Not
repeat
not consider this
time for any div to halt for
maintenance. Push on quickly.
Crerar, nettled by this signal, and also by the failure of Second
Army troops to support his flank at Abbeville, where the
Germans were resisting on the Seine, replied:
Personal for C-in-C from CDN Army Commander
... 2 Cdn Inf Div ns down to average of streneth 525 and in
my opinion a 48 hour halt essential in order it can absorb
approx one thousand reinforcements arriving today. You can
be assured there is no lack of push or rational speed Cdn Army.
St Omer and beyond will be reached without anv avoidable
delay.
Montgomery's attitude, and Crerar's response, now started a
flaming row, almost without reason. On 3 September a moving
and politically charged religious service was to be held in the
cemetery at Dieppe, where over 800 Canadians killed in the
1942 raid lay buried. There was to be a formal march-past of
Canadian 2nd Infantry Division units, and
Crerar had an
The Canadians on the Coast
255
obvious duty both to his government and to his men to be
present and take the salute. But on 2 September Montgomery
ordered Crerar to meet him at Second Army Tac HQ at 1300
on the 3rd, the day of the parade. Crerar replied:
Unless operational situation requires me request meeting at
1700 not 1300. At noon have arranged to be present formal
religious service and parade and from Canadian point of view
desirable I should be there. Will conform to your wishes.
Advice required.
At 1440, just before the Dieppe march-past started, a dispatch
rider brought Crerar a signal from Montgomery saying that it
was essential that he should be at the meeting. As soon as he
could decently depart, therefore, Crerar flew to Second Army
HQ, where Dempsey told him that it was quite unimportant
whether he had been present at the meeting or not, since no
urgent operations had been discussed. Montgomery's Tac HQ
was two miles away, so Crerar drove there. He described the
On reaching the caravan, the Field-Marshal addressed me
abruptly, asking me why I had not turned up at the meeting,
in accordance
with his instructions. I kept myself under
control and briefly, with occasional interruptions, gave him
the explanation ...
The C-in-C intimated that he was not
interested in my explanation - that the Canadian aspect of
the Dieppe ceremonial was of no importance compared to
getting on with the war, that he had checked through his
signals
and determined that
my
Tac HQ had received a
message from him at 0615 hrs that morning, instructing me to
keep the appointment and that, even if I had not received it,
then in default of other agreed arrangements, I should have
made it my business to be present.
I replied to the C-in-C that I could not accept this ... I had
carried out my responsibilities ... as the Cdn Army Comd in
what I considered to be a reasonable and intelligent way ... I
had found him, in the past, reasonable in his treatment of me
and I had assumed that
this situation would continue to
prevail. The request in my message, for the postponement of
the hour of our meeting, had been fully explanatory and, I
