34
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
reconnoitre. 20 Intensive air reconnaissance over Reggio and the
surrounding countryside had confirmed that there were few
German soldiers, while the Italian troops were unlikely to fight.*
Alexander replied on 20 August:
Your task is to secure a bridgehead on the toe of Italy ... in
the event of the enemy withdrawing from the toe you will
follow him up with such force as you can make available
bearing in mind the extent to which you can engage the
enemy in the southern toe of Italy, the more assistance you
will be giving to Avalanche. 21
Montgomery, however, ignored this instruction about helping
'Avalanche'
at his Eighth Army staff conference held on 26
August, where he said: 'The limit of operations will be the
capture of the toe as far as the neck at Catanzaro. 22 The
Catanzaro neck is the isthmus between the Gulfs of San
Euphemia and Squillace, eighty miles north of Reggio, and this
was an incorrect interpretation of Alexander's instructions.
However, all Montgomery's administration and build-up was
based on this limited objective, with plainly a minimum intention
of rendering immediate help to 'Avalanche'. It is quite clear
that Montgomery planned his own campaign in Italy as
something separate from 'Avalanche', but blame for allowing
this falls also upon Alexander and Eisenhower who, with a sad
lack of foresight, invaded Italy without proper co-ordination of
the operations of their two armies. It was left to Alexander at
Fifteenth Army Group HQ in Africa to do his best in the
situation, and he was too weak with his Eighth Army
commander.
August Eisenhower called a conference with
Montgomery and Mark Clark, the two army commanders, in
Algiers. Montgomery asserted that the earliest he could carry out
'Baytown' was the night of 4/5 September, not 30/31 August as
ordered by Eisenhower. Eventually, however, he agreed to cross
the Straits on the night of 2/3
September after Admiral
* Major (now Brigadier) Peter Young, the well known author, took a
patrol of Durnford-Slater's 3 Commando over the straits to Bova Marina on
26 August. They radioed messages to XIII Corps, and sent an officer back
with Italian prisoners to Sicily. Their reports made it clear the coast of the toe
was not garrisoned by Germans, and there were few Italian soldiers.
Sicily and After
35
Cunningham had promised to fly to Italy to hurry on the naval
preparations. Eisenhower told the army commanders that the
Allies were on the brink of an armistice with the Italians, after
which it was hoped that the Italians would immediately join the
fighting on the Allied side. On his return to Sicily Montgomery
moved forward from his luxurious villa at Taormina to a tent
and caravan encampment hastily set up for his Tactical HQ on
the Messina coast.
A few commandos who crossed the Straits and landed at
Bova Marina on the night of 27/28 August reported no enemy
anywhere near, and the German artillery fire was almost non-
existent - only a few shells arrived at Messina, probably from
mobile 88-mm guns, on the evening of 2 September.23 All the
signs were that the landing would be unopposed.
Montgomery's orders to
5th Division were: 'Establish a
bridgehead
... be prepared to move north-east to enable
beachheads to be developed for maintenance,
capture San
Giovanni and Cannitello to open the Straits for the Royal
Navy?24 There was no mention of advancing along the road to
Salerno.
Montgomery's intelligence officers considered that there was
not more than one German brigade group in southern Calabria
and that the Germans were unlikely to resist invading forces
until the latter reached the Gioia Plain, thirty miles north of
Reggio. All this notwithstanding, Montgomery insisted on a
creeping artillery barrage on the undefended north shore of the
Straits of an intensity recalling the Battle of the Somme. An
elaborate fire plan was drawn up by the CCRA, XXX Corps,
although no enemy positions had been identified. A considerable
portion of the fire was directed on forts shown on the maps, but
when British troops landed they found there had been no guns in
most of these forts since 1915; most were either abandoned or
used as magazines. 25 Senior officers went to the artillery HQ in a
villa overlooking the Straits and selected targets. Then the CCRA
would call down fire on them to demonstrate his preparedness.
600 Eighth Army guns fired from the mainland at 0345 on 3
September, as did the big guns of Nelson, Warspite, Rodney and
Valiant, with destroyers and gun-boats joining in at short range
- American field guns joined in as well. Over 400 tons of shells
were fired by Eighth Army alone, though Montgomery never
explained why he indulged in this useless and prodigal barrage.
