250
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
intelligence rests with First Airborne Army. In a letter to the
official historian in 1966, Williams wrote that 'You should be
tougher about the Intelligence failure re Arnhem; of the many
errors that, together, ensured the disaster, this was one of the
greatest.'
Montgomery was reluctant to admit to the CIGS and the
Prime Minister that his Arnhem adventure had failed. Even on
the last day, 24 September, he sent this signal to the CIGS:
If we suffer heavy casualties tonight in trying to get across
(tricky business because we have not got a wide front or
sufficient troops) I shall probably give it up and withdraw
LAB. Decision will be taken tomorrow morning. It may well
be that we can attain our object equally if not better by
developing thrust from lines eastwards. And we shall have
greater resources for these if we abandon attempt to cross the
Neder Riin west of Arnhem.
For once Montgomery was wide of the mark. The airborne
troops were the Allies' only strategical reserve, and they had
been largely wasted; his own troops had shot their bolt; and his
intelligence had told him that new German armies were forming
to the east, while the unbeaten Fifteenth Army was pouring back
from South Beveland to strengthen the enemy forces on the
Lower Rhine.
Did the Field-Marshal try to find a scapegoat for the disaster?
He refused to
criticise
his favourite corps commander,
Horrocks, although I have found a strong feeling amongst
some of the more senior survivors of XXX Corps that the latter
was not well during those fateful days, and that this detracted
from the dash of his corps' advance from the Dutch frontier to
Arnhem. Not long afterwards Montgomery sent Horrocks home
on compulsory sick leave, and on 27 December he wrote to
Brooke:
'Am sending Horrocks home on leave tomorrow.
During the past ten days he has been very nervy and difficult
with his staff and has attempted to act foolishly with his Corps.
He is definitely in need of rest, and I want him to have 3 to 4
weeks quietly in UK?
Montgomery was not so kind about the Poles, however, nor
about Brigadier Hicks, the 1 Airlanding Brigade commander
who had taken over Ist Airborne during Urquhart's enforced
Arnhem
251
absence. He wrote to the CIGS that Hicks was not fit for further
promotion: 'Too old….. not now fit to fight again in battle in this
war in his present rank. No doubt that he did extremely well at
Arnhem, but no doubt that it has been too much for him.'
Of the Poles, Montgomery wrote to Brooke on 17 October:
'Polish Para Bde fought very badly here, and the men showed no
keenness to fight if it meant risking their own lives. I do not want
this Bde here again, and possibly you may like to send it to join
other Poles in Italy. This was a harsh judgement, taking into
account the appallingly difficult landings, the language problem,
and the XXX Corps failure to link up with Sosabowski's force
satisfactorily.
Certainly both in its conception and in its execution 'Market-
Garden' was the greatest military mistake of Montgomery's
career, a defeat that prolonged the war. Montgomery's strategy
was risky and, when put into effect on the ground as a joint
Anglo-American operation, showed terrible flaws in planning
execution. It was
unreasonable
to expect British 1st
Airborne Division to hold out until XXX Corps could reach it,
but when, early in the operation, it was known that Ist Airborne
was in extremis, Montgomery was unable to speed up its relief.
Many people, including both Belchem and Chester Wilmot, have
commented on how different might have been the result if Maj-
Gen Matthew Ridgway of US XVIII Airborne Corps had
commanded at Nijmegen in place of Boy Browning.
In his memoirs Montgomery wrote: 'I remain an unrepentant
advocate of "Market-Garden" ›15 The verdict of history must be
that he was wrong.
