82
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
The best way to interfere with the enemy concentrations and
countermeasures lon D-Day] will be to push forward fairly
powerful armoured force thrusts on the afternoon of D-Day.
If two such forces consisting of an Armoured Brigade Group
were pushed forward on each army front to carefully chosen
areas it would be very difficult for the enemy to interfere with
our build-up
... to be successful such tactics must be
adopted on D-Day: to wait until D plus 1 would be to lose the
opportunity and also to lose the initiative... I am prepared to
accept any risk in order to carry out such tactics.
Unfortunately, on D-Day itself the traffic congestion on the
beaches was far greater than anticipated, and his armoured
thrusts could not be made in strength. A small detachment of
Canadian tanks did, however, reach the outskirts of Caen by the
evening, but they had to withdraw as they had no support.
The final top-level conference was held on 15 May at St
Paul's with the same senior officers and their staffs present;
King George VI
also attended. Montgomery was again
supremely confident, his comments and speeches lucid. The only
copy of his address is in the Dawnay archives, written in pencil
with almost no corrections. In it he emphasised that Rommel*
would try to defeat the invasion on the beaches, and that he had
sixty divisions in France including ten Panzers, of which four
were in or close to the invasion area - 21st Panzer, 12th and
17th SS Panzers, and Panzer Lehr; he added that five German
divisions would oppose the assault initially. He forecast that by
dusk on D-Day the Allies would be fighting hard against six
divisions, with another Panzer division approaching from
Rennes to be effective on D-plus-1. By D-plus-2 Montgomery
expected the Germans to have nine divisions opposing the
invaders, of which five would be Panzers, and that thirteen more
divisions might be approaching.
He expected a 'full-blooded counter-attack' at any time after
D-plus-5, with a total of twenty-four enemy divisions engaged
against eighteen Allied.
* Von Rundstedt, as C-in-C, West, had under his command Field-Marshal
Erwin Rommel's Army Group 'B', which comprised nearly two-thirds of the
operational German troops in France, and General Blaskowitz's Army
Group 'G', stationed on the Biscay coast and on the Riviera.
Montgomery and the Invasion
Rommel, Montgomery said, had made a world of difference
to German defences and morale since he took over, and was
best 'at spoiling attacks as he is too impulsive for a set-piece
must penetrate deep inland and quickly on
D-Day; 'this will
up strength.'
Montgomery predicted that Rommel would
try
Caen, Bayeux and Carentan, and he emphasised the menace of
the minefields and hidden obstacles,
which
meant that the
invaders must touch down on the beaches thirty minutes before
the incoming tide reached the obstacles, while the latter were still
exposed and thus ineffective.
He concluded: 'We shall have to send the soldiers in to this
party "seeing red". We must get them completely on their toes,
having absolute faith in the plan, and imbued with infectious
optimism and offensive eagerness.'
Air
Chief Marshal Sir
Arthur Harris, C-in-C,
Bomber
Command, even at this late hour told the conference that the
strategic bombing of Germany was an adequate substitute for
invasion, and the King embarrassingly stammered out a few
words. This time Churchill did not speak. He arrived in time for
lunch, and afterwards
became
cheerful and genial. In
the
afternoon Montgomery lifted his smoking ban in deference to
the Prime Minister. This relieved the tension and the conference
broke up with the smell of victory in the air.
Brooke commented in his diary about the 15 May St Paul's
conference:
The main impression I formed was that Eisenhower was a
swinger
and
no
real director of thought plans energy or
distinction - just a good mixer and international co-operator.
Monty made excellent speech. Ramsay overwhelmed by his
own difficulties. Leigh-Mallory very clear description. Spaatz
read out whole of poor statement. Monty was in very good
form.
At this stage Brooke
had
already made up
his mind
that
Montgomery was head and shoulders above everyone else, and
he never altered his poor opinion of Eisenhower.
