192
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
and Belgium including those divisions 12th Army Group
which [word omitted? | taking part in this movement.
You will see that instead of moving combined might of two
army groups northwards into Belgium and then eastwards
into Germany via the Ruhr Ike proposes to split the force and
to move American portion eastwards from Paris and into
Germany via the Saar. I do not (repeat not) myself agree
what he proposes to do and have said so quite plainly. I
consider that directive which is being issued by Ike is the best
that I can do myself in matter and I do not (repeat not)
propose to continue argument with Ike. The great point is
that I have been given power to co-ordinate and control
movement of left wing northward towards Antwerp and
Belgium.
Montgomery's hopes were to be disappointed, however, for
the six to eight US divisions were to prove to be only a pipe
dream. He would not, in any case, have interpreted Eisenhower's
letter so favourably as he did if he could have seen what the
Supreme Commander wrote on the same day to Marshall in
Washington: 'I have TEMPORARILY changed my basic plan
of attacking both to the north and east in order to help
Montgomery seize tremendously important objectives in the
north east? He added that he considered the changes to be
necessary, even though they interfered with his desire to push
east through Metz, because Twenty-First Army Group had
insufficient strength for its task: 'I do not doubt (he continued)
12 Army Group's ability to reach the Franco German border
but see no point in doing so until we are in a position to do
something about it.'*
There had been nothing about the plan being 'temporary' in
Eisenhower's letter to Montgomery. But now SHAEF planners
immediately began to study ways of transferring a corps from
First Army to help Patton towards the Saar and the Rhine. The
Supreme Commander was running both with the hounds and the
hare; in supporting Bradley he was deceiving Montgomery, for
his logistical situation did not permit of two major advances
* This message from Eisenhower to Marshall is quoted in Pogue, The
Supreme Command, page 251, and Ellis, Victory in the West, but is omitted
from the printed Eisenhower Papers.
Eisenhower Takes Command
193
into Germany simultaneously. Unable to satisfy both his Army
Group commanders he refused to come down firmly on one side
or the other. In the end, this lack of definition was to be a major
cause of the prolongation of the war into 1945. Montgomery,
however, by coupling his demands for a single thrust with a
request that he himself should be put in full charge, had spoilt his
own case.
On 28
August the British Chiefs of Staff
met to discuss
Eisenhower's
proposed
strategy, and decided
that it was
unsound. Brooke commented that 'This plan is likely to add
three to six months on to the war', although he admitted that if
Montgomery
were to have operational control of US First
Army, as seemed to have been agreed, then all might still be
well.
Eisenhower did not issue his all important directive until 29
August. In the four days since his letter to Montgomery he had
partially changed his mind after discussions with Bradley, who
objected to giving control of US First Army to Montgomery, as
did the SHAEF
planners including the British Lt-Gen Sir
Frederick Morgan, Maj-Gen Kenneth Strong, and Maj-Gen John
Whiteley. The best that Montgomery would now have was
'authority to effect any necessary co-ordination with First Army.
Meanwhile, Patton and Bradley had taken the law into their
own hands, sabotaging the plan Eisenhower had agreed with
Montgomery on 23 August. On the 26th, the day after his order
from Bradley to advance to Rheims and prepare
to seize
crossings of the Rhine from Mannheim to Koblenz', Patton
raced forward to the Meuse, which he crossed on 30 August. He
was thus already 100 miles east of Paris and the same distance
from the Rhine. But his sudden dash had used up all his petrol,
for Eisenhower had given priority in American petrol deliveries
to US First Army, which was to support Montgomery. Bradley
and Patton were deliberately wrecking the Eisenhower plan,
placing their divisions in positions where, to avoid disaster,
Eisenhower would have to divert petrol earmarked for the
priority northern thrust.
One of the chief problems at this time was that nearly all the
senior commanders thought that the war was won; they all
wanted to obtain the greatest possible glamour out of the final
defeat of the Nazi
armies.
In
the
prevailing
euphoria
Montgomery was perhaps the most realistic, but neither British
