366
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the other hand, Bedell Smith had told Simpson that he saw
nothing undesirable in this, for he knew that Patton and Bradley
continually wrote to Washington. To Simpson, however, the
complaints had indicated more trouble for Montgomery.
Simpson had realised that Eisenhower
was
considering
removing US Ninth Army from Montgomery's command as
soon as the Rhine was crossed, and that not only Bedell Smith
but also the British at SHAEF - Tedder, Whiteley and Morgan
- were involved in writing a detailed plan for a main thrust into
Germany by Bradley's
army
group, which
might
leave
Montgomery with the minor role in the north of liberating
Holland
and sealing off Denmark from the approaching
Russians. 15
As has been said, both Roosevelt and Churchill were seeking
as glamorous a role as possible for their respective nations
armies in the final victory, since those roles would be of great
importance to them in gaining votes in the post-war elections.
During 1945 Churchill had become anxious to hold a General
Election as soon as possible once peace was declared; his
government was doing badly in by-elections and he hoped to
capitalise on his reputation as the architect of victory in a snap
election. This, he felt, could repeat Lloyd George's steamroller
victory in the 'Khaki Election' of December 1918, achieved in
the after-glow of the defeat of the Kaiser.
Marshall, however, was encouraging Eisenhower to give the
more important part to the Americans, and Simpson had been
shocked to find out at Rheims that the senior British service
chiefs at SHAEF were conniving in the American plans to
deprive the British Army of its full share of glory. This anti-
Montgomery attitude may be seen in Whiteley's remark to
Cornelius Ryan: 'Monty wants to ride into Berlin on a white
charger wearing
two hats' 16
and
according
to Professor
Ambrose the feeling at SHAEF in March 1945 was that the
principal British concern was not to finish the war, but to make
a hero out of Montgomery." On 24 March Eisenhower had
written to Marshall: 'When operations carried out under his
(Montgomery's) direction are of considerably less magnitude
than those in other parts of the front and even though large
American forces cooperate there is some influence at work that
insists on giving Montgomery credit that belongs to other
commanders. I will continue to give attention to this matter.' 18
Eisenhower's Revenge
367
Simpson had finally obtained confirmation from Whiteley and
Morgan that the SHAEF plan was to put US Ninth Army under
Bradley on or around 15 April, as soon as US First and Ninth
Armies had encircled the Ruhr. Simpson had decided not to tell
Montgomery, since he did not want to give him distracting news
on the eve of 'Plunder'; he had, however, told Brooke as soon as
he got back to the War Office on 19 March. The CIGS, now
almost euphoric about an early end to the war, had said in
answer that he was strongly opposed to the suggested SHAEF
shift in command, but as the battle situation was so fluid he was
not going to worry about anything as far away as 15 April. In
his turn, however, Brooke had decided not to warn Churchill of
the likely volte-face at SHAEF. 1 On 21 March, two days before
"Plunder started, Montgomery had told Whitely: In the north
21 Army Group must secure a bridgehead over the Rhine and
then impose mobile warfare on the Germans in the plains of
north Germany, and it seems reasonable to assume that he felt
that he would still have US Ninth Army under command for
these operations. According
to Montgomery, Whiteley had
agreed, after some discussion, to put up this plan to Eisenhower,
together with the recommendations of the operations section at
SHAEF, even though he knew by then of the SHAEF plan and
of the intention to hand the American army back to Bradley.20
On 18 March Eisenhower had sent Montgomery a further
ominous warning that a change in the command structure might
occur, and that US Ninth Army might revert to
Bradley's
command:
Dear Monty,
In considering future situations which might involve some
changes in
present command relationships,
the one
that
looms most importantly is the possibility that we may be able,
and may desire, to employ at least two Army Groups in a
deep thrust eastward from the lower RHINE.
So long as the requirements of the North can be fully met
by the 21st Army Group, plus the Divisions it is getting from
the Mediterranean, reinforced by not more than one
Ninth Armies north of the RUHR, each Group
