364
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
reached all their objectives on D-day. (Like Horrocks, Ritchie
had served with Montgomery in the desert - indeed, he had for a
time commanded Eighth Army there until the reverses of May
and June 1942 caused Auchinleck to relieve him.) The Second
Army War Diary says of the action: 'Speaking generally early
opposition was not particularly severe, and the enemy appeared
overwhelmed by the weight of the assault. POWs said our attack
came out of the middle of the barrage. Any stubborn resistance
was due to determination by particular groups rather than a
concerted effort.14 By evening Wesel was cleared, but it was
several days before nearby Rees was subdued. Unlike Wesel,
Rees had not been bombed, and this was later to have a
profound effect. In the closing stages of the war Dempsey, with
Montgomery's approval and with the lesson of Rees still clear in
his mind, insisted on heavy bombing before he would attack
Bremen and Hamburg. The result, for German civilians, was
tragic.
Despite some setbacks, Montgomery's meticulous planning,
coupled with the skilful use of his immense resources in artillery
and bomber aircraft, secured a bridgehead over the Rhine with a
bare minimum of casualties, excepting the airborne operation. In
'Plunder', his philosophy of 'wasting metal, not flesh' paid
dividends, and the low casualty figures of the ground-assaulting
troops are an answer to critics who complain of his over-caution
and slowness. By the evening of 28 March his Rhine bridgehead
was twenty-five miles wide and had an average depth of twenty-
eight miles; Twenty-First Army Group's front line ran from
Emmerich through Ralstern and south-west to Duisberg. Total
Allied casualties, killed, wounded and made prisoner, amounted
to 5,800 men. It was an exciting victory.
On 16 and 17 March, Frank Simpson had gone to stay at the
SHAEF headquarters in Rheims.*
He was told nothing
important by Eisenhower while he was there, but in talks with
Bedell Smith, Tedder, and the British generals Morgan and
Whiteley, he had become alarmed, since they had made
apparent that the Supreme Commander had decided to clip
Montgomery's wings, giving to Bradley the lion's share of the last
* At Rheims, Simpson found Marlene Dietrich entertaining American
troops. Seeing her with another good-looking girl he asked 'Is that Myrna
Loy as well?' He was immediately told to be quiet, for the other beauty was
Kay Summersby, Eisenhower's confidante and former chauffeuse.
Eisenhower's Revenge
365
battle.
Simpson
was
asked by
Smith what
Montgomery's
reaction would be if US Ninth Army was removed from his
command, to which he had
given a non-committal reply,
although he knew well that Montgomery would be furious.
Simpson had, however, made it as plain to Smith as he could
that the CIGS would consider any change in command as
'unfortunate, and had added that his own strongly-held view was
that one man ought to be in command of all operations north of
the Ruhr.
The British general had found, in fact, that the SHAEF
planners had clearly decided that ten divisions of US First Army
would move north of the Ruhr after 'Plunder' to link up with US
Ninth Army. This would mean a force of twenty-two American
divisio Army the s wore of the Allied front, and plainly there
would have to be an American army group commander in
charge of them.
Simpson emphasised to the senior SHAEF
officers that he quite agreed with this, and said that it would be
acceptable to the British if Bradley was put in overall charge of
all post-Rhine-crossing operations, including those conducted by
Montgomery's Twenty-First Army Group.
Bedell Smith had replied: 'That would never do. The Supreme
Commander could never face the howl there would be in the
British press if Bradley
was put over Monty. Simpson
countered by remarking that this was nonsense, and that if the
British press had the facts put to them properly there would be
no howl, except perhaps from one or two of the 'gutter press'
'Anyhow', he had added, 'if that is your trouble, why not put
Monty in command?' to
which the
American had answered:
'Then we could not face the American press.' Simpson had
finished by saying, reasonably, that 'The Supreme Commander
ought to
leave
the press out of all this.'
In spite of the
disagreement the two men remained friendly, but there were to
be other, more worrying, developments.
According to Simpson, Tedder carried no weight at SHAEF
except
in
air
matters,
despite
being
Deputy
Supreme
Commander.
During
this
visit
Tedder
had complained to
Simpson that the Chiefs of Staff in London did not keep him
informed of their views,
and, with Morgan and Whiteley, had
grumbled that Montgomery continually communicated directly
with Brooke, and through him with the Prime Minister, with no
one at SHAEF having any idea of what he might be saying. On•
