176
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
But on the 18th 4th Canadian Armoured Division took Trun,
and recce elements advanced to the edge of St Lambert while, on
their flank, the Poles secured Hordozeaux and Hills 258 and
137, and their reinforced recce troops got to within half a mile of
Chambois. The pocket was almost closed.
A young Canadian pilot, Flight Officer (now Maj-Gen)
Richard Rohmer, flew on a reconaissance mission over the
narrowing gap at 1300 on 19 August. Crossing the main road to
Falaise three miles north of Argentan, he was astonished to see
a column of every imaginable type of vehicle - a mixed bag of
trucks, horse-drawn artillery, tanks, ambulances, anything
that could move. They were two abreast on a road leading
towards Pommainville. The head of the column was stopped
at a fork in the road about 100 yards east of the paved
Falaise-Argentan road. Around it the enemy had been
gathering in the fields and under trees for 24 hours. At the
head of the fork there were two staff cars. I could plainly see
their occupants standing beside them apparently deciding
which road to take. There was before me in the long double
line stretching westward the largest, most valuable 'target of
opportunity' I had or ever would see... The order prohibiting
air attacks in the Falaise Gap was in force ... two days later
in a jeep I went down the four miles of road ... there was not
a single destroyed or damaged vehicle. 35
Montgomery had prohibited bombing in the area because of
the heavy casualties suffered by Twenty-First Army Group from
Allied bombers. 51st Highland Division
complained of forty
incidents on 18 August, with twenty-five vehicle casualties and
fifty-one personnel. The Division's report stated: 'Continual
bombing by
own forces. Half the petrol being sent to 2nd
Armoured destroyed. During a three day period
72 Polish
soldiers were killed and 191 wounded: the Canadians lost 77
killed and 209 wounded from own bombing? 36
tiny Trun-Chambois
On the night of 19 August the Germans poured through the
gap. There was little cover for
their
columns, however, and artillery fire saturated the roads which,
in daylight, were in full view of the Allied OPs. The casualties
were prodigious. Ist Polish Armoured Division reached Mont
Ormel during the night, but the Germans soon cut the roads to
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
177
their rear, leaving them isolated. As soon as it became light the
Poles saw every road on the plain to the west covered with
German formations moving back. Polish artillery took a terrible
toll but, on the 20th, German tanks attacked Mont Ormel all
day, and succeeded in reopening the road to Champosoult. By
now,
the Poles had been without
supplies for three days;
enclosed in a pocket, they could neither receive supplies nor
evacuate their 300 wounded and 800 prisoners-of-war. Finally,
on 22 August, the Americans linked up with other Polish units
at Chambois, and Canadian troops relieved the Poles on Mont
Ormel, despite heavy German counter-attacks. The neck of the
pocket was closed.
On 21 August the Allied artillery had wrought havoc among
the Germans trying to escape through the encircling ring. The
guns left in their wake a scene of utter carnage: the Germans
lost at least 10,000 men killed, and the slaughter of horses was
appalling. 50,000 prisoners were taken when the gap was finally
closed, but a surprising number (estimates vary from 20,000 to
40,000) had escaped to fight again beyond the Seine, if they
could get across. If the Argentan-Falaise gap had been closed
when the opportunity presented itself on 13 August, very little of
von Kluge's army would have survived, and if he himself had
been made prisoner then a German surrender in the west might
easily have become a reality.
For Montgomery, the campaign in Normandy had been at
times intensely frustrating, although it had ended in triumph. In
spite of overwhelming
Allied air superiority, his three main
Second Army offensives were conspicuous
and publicised
failures, while the fourth, 'Bluecoat', was only a partial success
due to the poor early progress of XXX Corps. Both of the
Canadian frontal attacks on the main German armour in front
of Falaise were repulsed with heavy losses, and his biggest error
of generalship was undoubtedly his failure to send fresh British
divisions to reinforce the Canadian and Polish forces during the
battle for Falaise.
In contrast, Bradley had enjoyed the glory both of the capture
of Cherbourg, and of the spectacular break-out beyond St Lô
and Avranches, so brilliantly exploited by Patton's Third Army.
Yet Montgomery still had the satisfaction of knowing that his
master
plan to attract the German armour from the western
sector and keep it in front of the British and Canadians had been
