102
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
anti-tank guns were not up to the mark. The best German tank,
the 50-ton Panther, could travel at 30 miles-an-hour on the road
for 100 miles, and carried a special long-barrelled 75-mm high-
velocity gun, together with two heavy machine-guns. Its main
armour was 120mm thick and well sloped, which made the tank
immune to most A/T guns and could only be pierced frontally
by the British 17-pounder. Nearly as feared was the Tiger, with
breast armour 180mm thick and a long-barrelled 88-mm gun as
main armament in its heavy round turret.
Montgomery knew from his desert experience that he must
rely on the 17-pounder anti-tank gun if he was to destroy the
Panthers and Tigers, and he insisted that as many as possible of
his British-operated lend-lease Shermans should be fitted with
this weapon; when so equipped they were known as Fireflies.
The Americans had brought to Europe Shermans equipped with
only a 75-mm gun, short-barrelled and of low muzzle velocity,
which was ineffective against the heavy frontal plate of the
Tigers and Panthers. Only by flank shots could the US tanks
knock out either a Panther or a Tiger, and American generals
used to say that it cost them two tanks to destroy one German
tank. Too late the Americans imported a 76-mm gun, but this
also had too low a muzzle velocity to be really effective. On 5
August the American High Command asked the War Office to
convert 700 of their Shermans to 17-pounder armament for
Normandy. The work was to be carried out in Royal Ordnance
factories at the rate of 100 tanks per month, but the request was
refused on technical grounds.12
Montgomery, however, was in favour of giving limited help to
the Americans over anti-tank guns, and on 6 July he had written
to Lt-Gen Sir Archibald Nye, Vice-CIGS, saying:
It is important to get USA armoured units equipped with the
best tank gun as soon as possible. Some help from British
sources may be required and if so I suggest it be given.
Possibly when we have equipped our British units with two
17 pdrs per tank troop we might then concentrate USA units
with one 17 pdr tank per platoon, and then proceed with third
17 pdr per tank troop for British units and so on. Such
action would contribute towards more effective employment
in battle of USA Armoured Divisions. 13
Normandy Assault
ally.
D-Day the 17-pounder
Group that the Panthers,
counter to this decline in morale. In addition, he had
captured Panther and one captured Tiger tank towed to his Tac
HQ, as proof that the monsters could be overcome.
Eisenhower visited Montgomery for the first time the latter
claimed bombastically that he had destroyed 300 enemy tanks -
probably an over-estimate, but one likely to encourage Allied
troops facing German armour.
Eisenhower wanted an investigation into the failure of the
American anti-tank guns, though of course nothing could be
done immediately, and Bradley later admitted that his army only
coped with German tanks because of its
numbers,
and not because
of its
quality. But thanks to
Montgomery's insistence on 17-pounders mounted on Shermans
the British and Canadian troops could - and did - destroy
heavy tanks. Montgomery
was always incensed at tales of
German superiority, for he considered it vital to the morale of
his troops that they should consider themselves to have as good
weapons as the enemy. (He was also concerned about tank
numbers, and on 13 June sent a long memorandum in his own
handwriting to Grigg listing the numbers of tanks in each British
and US division - 1,540 British and 750 American in all.) On 14
June he wrote to de Guingand:
I am very disturbed at some of the reports which compare
British
armour
unfavourably with
German
...
full
