Montgomery and the Invasion
On 31 December 1943 Montgomery flew from the improvised
airstrip near the Sangro river on the Adriatic coast of Italy to
Marrakesh in Morocco, where Churchill was convalescing after
an attack of pneumonia. Eisenhower, just chosen as Supreme
Commander for the invasion, was a fellow guest, and
immediately told Montgomery that basic changes were needed
in the existing plan for invading Normandy across the Channel,
now code-named 'Overlord'.
Arriving on New Year's Day 1944, Montgomery saw
Churchill, who was lying in bed surrounded by official papers.
The Prime Minister greeted him warmly, then handed him a
bulky document entitled 'Operation "Overlord"' and told him
to read it. By the next morning, after staying up half the night,
Montgomery had briefed himself on the contents and was, like
Eisenhower, unhappy about it. Churchill asked him what he
thought of the plan, and received from his general a typed report
which condemned the plan because the front for the landings
was too narrow. Montgomery considered that the Channel
Islands should be retaken to provoke an air battle, and made to
Churchill the important point that for the Sicilian landings he
had only needed special craft for the initial assault, and that
once the beaches were taken he had been able to land large
numbers of troops from liners five miles out to sea.'
Montgomery's memorandum had the effect of weakening
Churchill's faith in Lt-Gen Frederick Morgan, Chief of Staff to
the Supreme Allied Commander, who had been responsible for
drafting the original 'Overlord' paper. Indeed, so pleased was
Churchill with the memorandum that he wrote to the Chiefs of
Montgomery and the Invasion
61
Staff heartily endorsing it. He went on to tell Montgomery that,
in his view, it was an advantage to invade a long Continental
coastline from an island because 'our forces are concentrated at
the start while the enemy are forced to spread themselves out
over a wide range'.
Churchill insisted that the Allies must not use the word
'invasion' until they had crossed the German frontier. He also
objected to Roosevelt's use of the phrase 'fortress of Europe' in
a recent speech, telling the Chiefs of Staff that they must
eliminate all expressions
such as 'Invasion of Europe' or
'Assault upon Fortress of Europe' - instead he insisted upon:
'"Liberation of Europe from Germans"
... We must not make a
present to Hitler of the idea that he is the defender of Europe
which we are trying to invade.' Churchill also wrote to the Air
Ministry on 2 January that he was pleased to hear from
Montgomery that many landing points ought to be chosen
instead of concentrating as at present proposed through one
narrow funnel.'
The Prime Minister loved talking about strategic details, and
Montgomery indulged him as they both went on a picnic with
Churchill's wife, Clemmie.
Altogether,
Churchill was highly
pleased with Montgomery and his memo, while his general was
at his most cordial and
delighted him by explaining the
technicalities of an amphibious assault. This was right up the
PM's street, since he loved being an amateur soldier.
General Morgan, with a secret staff known as 'COSSAC'
(Chief of Staff to
Supreme
Allied Commander) had been
working on the plan for invading across the Channel since
March 1943, having established a combined American/British
headquarters, also known as COSSAC, at Norfolk House in St
James's Square in London. Originally, when an early invasion
appeared more likely, a British C-in-C for the invasion was
considered essential, and Churchill had originally promised the
job to the CIGS, Brooke.
As the months went by, however, it
became clear that the invasion could not be launched until 1944
and that the United States would have to provide most of the
troops and resources once the campaign of the Continent was
under way. Churchill was considered by the Americans to be
lukewarm about a cross-Channel attack because of his keenness
on
attacking
the
"soft
underbelly'
of
the
Axis in the
Mediterranean; it was therefore agreed that there should be an
