326
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Supreme Commander.
Montgomery had wanted to attack at Celles and pinch out the
extreme tip of the bulge, but the American Generals Hodges,
Collins and Ridgway argued that he should instead lop off the
German salient at its widest point, across the base. This would
have necessitated US First Army converging on Patton's Third
Army over sixty-five kilometres of poor hilly roads which the
winter weather had made almost impassable. Montgomery
therefore refused to entertain the American plan. Bradley then
proposed a compromise. Third Army would drive northwards
from Bastogne, and First Army south-east towards St Vith, the
aim being to meet at Houffalize having pushed through the
middle of the bulge; it was this proposed attack
Montgomery announced to Eisenhower in his late signal on 31
December 1944. At 1140 on 6 January elements of the two US
armies met south-west of Houffalize and the Battle of the Bulge
was over, although the original American positions were not
restored until 7 February.
On 7 January US First Army was returned to Bradley's
command, and Montgomery wrote to him:
What a great
honour to command such fine troops... How well they have all
done.'
But the
American
generals
now began
to
abuse
Montgomery, saying that the junction at Houffalize was a
compromise solution which had been forced upon them, and
which had allowed a large proportion of the German armies to
escape, whereas an attack across the base of the bulge would
have trapped the major part of the enemy force engaged. Von
Rundstedt's offensive had cost the Germans 85,000 men killed,
wounded or made prisoner, and 600 tanks; the Americans lost
70,000 men and much equipment.
On 1 January, the German air force had carried out large-
scale attacks on the Allied airfields in Belgium and Holland.
Montgomery's Dakota, the aircraft that Eisenhower had given
him in Sicily in exchange for a Flying Fortress, was shot to
pieces in one of the raids. With great generosity
and tact,
Eisenhower replaced it at once, and, in reply, Montgomery
wrote an effusive letter of thanks, concluding: If there is
anything I can ever do for you to ease the tremendous burden
that you bear you know you only have to command me. And I
want you to know that I shall always stand firmly behind you in
everything you do? Sadly, Montgomery did not hold to his
Ardennes
327
promise either to ease the burden or to stand firmly behind his
superior. On other occasions than those cited he tried to force
Eisenhower to put American troops under his command, and he
continued a truculent and unruly subordinate.
As US First and Ninth Armies' attacks from the north on 2
decided to hold a press
conference. He
signalled the Prime Minister that he hoped by
such a conference to put an end to the 'slanging match' in the
British press, which gave the impression that the Americans had
got into terrible trouble in the Ardennes and had had to call in
Montgomery to sort it out. Churchill was keen on the idea, as
CIGS. The conference was therefore called for
January, and on that day Montgomery signalled the CIGS that
53rd (Welsh) Division had captured Grimblemont and the high
ground east of it, cutting off the Germans' northern maintenance
route - he had told his staff that he coveted this road, for its
capture must hamstring the German communications. US 82nd
Airborne was also making good progress in the south, and
Montgomery's signal demonstrates that he was happy with the
battle, and felt that the Germans must lose heavily if they were
to hold on to the salient any longer. He considered that he
personally had won the Battle of the Bulge, and was as a result
even more cocky than usual.
Unfortunately, the full text of his prepared statement to the
press correspondents, given out as a record of what he had said
at the conference, described his own part in the battle in rather
too glowing terms:
1. Object of this talk
I have asked you to come here today so that I can give you
some information which may be of use to you, and also to
ask you to help me in a certain matter.
2. The story of the present battle
Rundstedt
attacked
on
16
Dec.; he obtained
tactical
surprise. He drove a deep wedge into the centre of the First
US Army and split the American forces
in two.
situation looked as if it might become
awkward;
Germans had broken right through a weak spot, and were
heading for the Meuse.
3. As soon as I saw what was happening I took certain steps
myself to ensure that ifthe Germans got to the Meuse they
