68
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the War Office from them on.
This great personal charm had already served Montgomery
well. Soon after his arrival in London in January he had had an
audience with the King at Buckingham Palace. Montgomery
had heard on the grapevine that some of the 'old school' -
especially the Brigade of Guards - had put the King up to
objecting to his black beret, which by now had become famous.
He had immediately told the King that the black beret was an
important factor in building up morale and that, as all soldiers
knew it was worth 'at least an Army Corps', it was vital that he
should go on wearing it. The King, like Grigg later, succumbed
to Montgomery's charm, and raised no objection to this
unorthodox use of uniform. He greatly liked Montgomery and
thoroughly enjoyed his later visits to Twenty-First Army Group
Montgomery had quickly reassembled his old team from the
Mediterranean - de Guingand, Williams, Belchem, Richardson
and Graham, and Eisenhower and Bedell Smith gave this staff
and their commander a fairly free hand over planning. SHAEF
and Twenty-First Army Group were very friendly in these early
stages, although Morgan at SHAEF resented the criticism of his
original invasion plan.
Unfortunately, de Guingand's health was deteriorating, but
otherwise he was an excellent choice as Chief of Staff.
Regular soldier, ten years younger than his chief, he loved staff
work, was content as a subordinate, and was utterly
invariably loyal to Montgomery during the war. He had been at
the War Office in 1939/40 as Military Assistant to the then
Secretary of State for War, Leslie Hore-Belisha, and this civil
service experience was invaluable during the planning of
'Overlord' with the necessarily involved War Office so close to
Twenty-First Army Group HQ. De Guingand was gregarious
and tactful; Eisenhower and Bedell Smith liked him greatly, and
at this stage he was able to sort out any misunderstandings
between Montgomery and the Supreme Commander and his
staff.
Bill Williams, Montgomery's BGS (I), an able Oxford don,
had a flair for Intelligence work and, being twenty years younger
than Montgomery, enjoyed a happy working relationship with
him. David Belchem had commanded 1st Royal Tank Regiment
in the Desert in 1943, and had joined Montgomery's staff for the
Montgomery and the Invasion
planning of the invasions of Sicily and Italy. He now became
head of the Anglo-American Planning Staff (BGS, Ops), in
which key role he was responsible for co-ordinating the Allied
naval and air forces. He was an excellent linguist and entirely
loyal to his general.
Charles Richardson, in charge of Montgomery's planning
(BGS, Plans), was extremely capable, a Sapper
obtained a First Class Honours degree at Cambridge. Miles
Graham, the Chief
Administrative
Officer, lacked flair,
according to Bill Williams, but was ably backed by Colonel
Fielden and Oliver Poole (after the war, the latter achieved
distinction as head of the Longman Financial Times Group).
Twenty-First Army Group's commander always tended to be
abrasive, but his talented team were tactful and charming, and
credit must go to Montgomery for choosing them and inspiring
their devoted loyalty.
As has been said, a limiting factor on more assault divisions
and a wider front was the shortage of landing-craft, and as early
as 5 January Bedell Smith had cabled Washington to inform
Eisenhower that Montgomery insisted categorically on the wider
front, and that this presupposed more landing-craft which could
only be made available by postponing 'Anvil', then planned to
synchronise with 'Overlord' (at Teheran Stalin had said he
favoured a simultaneous 'Anvil', and
it was vital that the
Western Allies should sustain Russia in its desperate battle
against vast Nazi forces.) Eisenhower agreed reluctantly to
postpone 'Anvil' in view of the statistics of landing-craft
available for 'Overlord', and
heated argument
between Eisenhower and Montgomery
ships to be earmarked for the postponed 'Anvil'. The British
Chiefs of Staff backed Montgomery and wanted to downgrade it
to one division,
as he had suggested on 21 January.
SHAEF meeting on 16 February Montgomery presented an
'unacceptable' and that he must have 'the craft and shipping
essential for a successful Overlord'. Eisenhowever would not
'Anvil', and
Montgomery three days later:
convinced that Anvil will be of great assistance to
Overlord by
diverting German Divisions away
from the
