64
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
be made on the widest possible front.?
Montgomery, with his orderly mind, had grasped immediately
that an assault on the scale of 'Overlord' needed several beaches
for the massive build-up of supplies and the onward movement
inland of huge numbers of troops, and at Marrakesh Churchill
had agreed with him in principle. Now, instead of COSSAC's
three-division assault, Montgomery insisted on a fifty-mile front
from the River Orne to Cherbourg. There were to be five landing
beaches, each under a corps commander, and on D-Day one
division, backed by ancillary troops, would land on each beach,
to be followed by a second division on each beach on D-plus-1.
From the start Montgomery wanted British Second Army to
attract and contain German armour to the east while the
Americans
first
took Cherbourg and
then overran the
Cherbourg peninsula on the west to reach the Brittany ports.
There were no quarrels with the US generals over this vital
principle at the time, though it was to become the subject of
controversy later.
Montgomery claimed in the early discussions that the wider
front would permit more divisions to penetrate inland, and
minimise traffic and administration difficulties. He
always
emphasised the paramount importance of capturing Cherbourg
early, showing his characteristic concern for the supply build-
up; he emphasised also the need for capturing Brest and other
Brittany ports..
The COSSAC planners from the start had misgivings about
their proposed three-division assault, yet some of them disputed
Montgomery's arguments for a wider front on the grounds that
the initial beach assault might fail because naval and air support
fire would be
dissipated instead of concentrated on three
beaches. Montgomery, flushed with his African victories, with
Sicily and Italy behind him, and with his reputation at its highest
point,
was
backed by Eisenhower and insisted on wider
amphibious landings. Here he was clearly correct.
With
Eisenhower still absent, Montgomery held his first
London conference at St Paul's on
7 January, where he
announced that 'the British have reached the limits of their
manpower' and would be unable to form an extra army group.
Two armies must be committed in the assault as the areas for
the landings were now extended to stretch from Varreville to
Montgomery and the Invasion
65
Cabourg. The Americans were to be on the right, and the British
on the left; the former were to take the Cherbourg peninsula and
the town and port of Cherbourg. The British would operate to
the south to prevent any enemy interference with the American
army from the east. He added that he hoped eventually to get a
firm lodgement from Caen to Nantes, with the British army
being supplied and reinforced through the Cherbourg peninsula
and the Americans through Brittany.
Owing to limitations imposed by problems of mine-sweeping,
naval support and craft, only eight brigade groups could be
employed initially, he said.
The allotment of these groups
between the British and the Americans had not yet been decided,
although it would probably be three American and five British.
Montgomery stressed that he wanted to land everywhere at once
rather than spread the assault over two days, and that the heavy
shore batteries at Le Havre set a limit to the area of landing on
the east. In discussion, he stated that his reasons for wanting five
British brigade landing groups and only three American was the
urgency of securing airfields, which were in the British sector.
Bradley commented that it would be difficult to explain away the
smaller initial American effort, and a decision was postponed
until the next meeting, set for 10 January.
At this second conference - Eisenhower was still in America
- Montgomery said that his ideal would be five divisions landed
on the first tide, followed by the essentials of two divisions on the
second, including the British 7th Armoured Division. He also
needed one airborne division on D-Day ahead of the American
landing on the Cherbourg peninsula, to be followed by a second
airborne landing at a place to be selected. Ramsay, the naval
commander, said the expansion of the front on Montgomery's
lines would expose the navies to more fire from coastal defence
guns, and that the soldiers would have to stay aboard the ships
longer because they would be embarked at ports further from the
landing
beaches; more naval escorts would be required, he
added. His remarks, as recorded in the minutes of the meeting,
do not sound enthusiastic; he
was not prepared to commit
himself at this stage but said that if extra resources could be
provided
'the
new
concept might be possible'. The
air
commander, Leigh-Mallory,
said the extension of the front
might mean more damage inflicted on the invasion force by the
Luftwaffe.
