246
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Antwerp was irrevocably lost. Montgomery himself admitted
that failing to clear the Scheldt was a bad mistake on his
part - the corollary is that his Arnhem decision was also wrong.
What is unquestionably false is the statement in the Twenty-
First Army Group report that if the weather had been good
enough to allow Polish 1 Parachute Brigade to land on D-plus-2,
then a complete victory would have been assured. In fact, by D-
plus-2 the German armour dominated the Poles' designated DZs
south of Arnhem Bridge; if the planned drop had been executed
it would have been catastrophic. At the time there was
insufficient news of German troops and movements to warrant
changing the plan, and it was therefore a happy accident that the
drop was
cancelled on D-plus-2 because
of bad weather.
Instead, the Poles landed at Driel on the afternoon of D-plus-4,
and their arrival was fiercely contested by the Germans. Frost
wrote that if the Polish drop had taken place on D-plus-2, as
planned, he was ready to send a suicide squad to rush the south
end of the bridge, but that he dreaded to think of the reception
they (the Poles] would have'. Sosabowski himself was highly
critical of the lack of drive shown by both Horrocks
and
Browning. He pointed out in his memoirs that the road from
Nijmegen to the banks of the Rhine where his brigade was
deployed was open, but that no large body of troops was moved
up it for an assault, and gave as his view that if Montgomery
had been on the spot then a final, and possibly successful, attack
over the river would almost certainly have been mounted.
In his report to the US Chiefs of Staff, Brereton stated that 'It
was the breakdown of 2nd Army's timetable on
the first
day - their failure to reach Eindhoven in 6 to 8 hours as
planned - that caused the delay in taking Nijmegen Bridge and
the failure of Arnhem.'8 Here, however, he is wrong,
Frost's cogent views are clearly right. By the wrong, -da
XXX Corps was thirty-three miles behind according to its
planned timetable. If the leading Guards' tanks had found
Nijmegen Bridge in the hands of 82nd Airborne Division when
they arrived, then they
could have pushed
straight on and
reached Frost on D-plus-2, and the whole course of the tragedy
would have been altered. But the XXX Corps vanguard could
not have advanced from Eindhoven on the evening of D-day, as
Brereton claimed, because the Zon bridge was down and was
not repaired until 0615 on D-plus-1. This delay was entirely
Arnhem
247
Brereton's fault for refusing Montgomery's request to allow US
101st Airborne to drop on both sides of the Zon bridge, in which
case it would almost certainly have been captured intact. At
Grave, in contrast to Eindhoven, the US paratroopers dropped
on both sides of the river and captured the bridge there before it
could be demolished. Brereton, like Montgomery, refused to
admit any mistakes in planning.
General Frost told me that: 'Parachutists should always land
behind the enemy and not be forced to cross rivers in the face of
intense fire. Rivers and defiles are always considered vital and are
heavily defended. You need to be on both sides. We wanted to
drop on both sides of the river at Arnhem, but the air forces would
not comply', and these views are echoed in his book.
Frost added that one glaring
snag about the Arnhem
operation was that the DZs, selected by the air forces, were
several miles from the objective, and all on the north side of the
great main river obstacle. During the planning for 'Market-
Garden' the air force staff had claimed that the polder nearer
Arnhem was unsuitable for glider landings, as it was too soft.
This was not, in fact, the case. I Airborne Corps' After Action
Report stated: 'The difficulty of selecting DZs and Ls was
greatly over-estimated. Landings could have been made almost
anywhere as far as the terrain was concerned. ' It is quite clear
that, had the air forces agreed, Ist Airborne could have landed
south of the river close to Arnhem Bridge, as well as to the
north.
Chester Wilmot exculpates Montgomery, and claims that
where XXX Corps failed was in their drive forward from
Nijmegen on D-plus-5.10 When I put this to General Frost he
scoffed and said: 'It did not matter in the least what XXX Corps
did on Friday (D-plus-5] We were bound to have been out of
ammunition long before then, and you cannot fight tanks and
armoured cars without plenty of that. If it had been Wednesday,
that would have been another matter.'
How far Browning was out of touch with the battle is shown
by his reaction to Maj-Gen Hakewill Smith,
GOC
52nd
(Lowland) Division, when, on D-plus-2, the latter offered to take
one of his brigades by glider to Urquhart's rescue. Browning
replied: 'Thanks for message. Offer not, repeat not, required as
situation better than you think?'"
General Belchem considered that 'Browning had no idea
