210
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
damaged his knee and was unable to walk. In fact, during the
campaign Montgomery never offered to visit Eisenhower, and
always expected the Supreme Commander to come to him.
Two days later, Montgomery received the missing part of
Eisenhower's signal. It proved to be another compromise
between the conflicting aims of Montgomery and
Bradley
because it said, surprisingly, 'I agree with your conception of a
full blooded thrust to Berlin', but contradicted this by also
stating, 'We must immediately exploit our success by promptly
breaching the Siegfried Line crossing the Rhine on a wide front
and seizing the Saar and Ruhr. In response to Montgomery's
answer of the 7th, Eisenhower agreed to a meeting at Brussels
on 10 September. By now Montgomery was desperate, and
thoroughly fed up
with Eisenhower's indecision,
generally
expressed in messages from his HQ 400 miles
from the
battlefield. He considered the Supreme Commander to be
'completely out of touch'.
The Fatal Wrong Decision
Hitler, like Ramsay, appreciated the vital importance of holding
both banks of the Scheldt, not only to deny Antwerp to the
Allies, but also to provide an escape route for his 100,000-strong
Fifteenth Army trapped on the coast west of Antwerp in the
Dunkirk-Ostend-Bruges-Zeebrugge area. As long as Ger-
man
guns dominated the Scheldt these troops
could be
evacuated north to the port of Flushing on Walcheren Island.
The only approach to Walcheren from the mainland is through
the long and narrow South Beveland peninsula, which XXX
Corps could have sealed off on 4 September. The Canadians
were advancing along the coast, but had to take Le Havre,
Dieppe and Boulogne en route, and they could not put much
pressure on the still powerful Fifteenth Army.
On 4 September the German High Command admitted that
the fall of Antwerp had closed 'the ring around the 15th Army,
and that a threat to Breda at the neck of the Scheldt peninsula
must be expected; on the 6th the German Admiralty ordered
energetic mining of the Scheldt channel. Hitler commanded
Fifteenth Army to withdraw fighting
on Boulogne,
Calais,
Dunkirk, Ostend and the Breskens pocket, designated them all
as 'fortresses', and directed that strong forces were to cross the
west Scheldt
channel to
Flushing on
Walcheren Island.
His personal directive stated that it was vital to hold the coastal
fortresses, as well as Walcheren Island with Flushing harbour.
Field-Marshal von Rundstedt was reinstated as C-in-C, West,
while Model commanded Army Group B under him.
The Germans expected Montgomery to drive north from
Antwerp immediately on 4 September and seal off Walcheren
