316
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Montgomery
neglected this good advice. When Bradley
visited him at Zondhoven on Christmas Day he could not
resist the temptation to crow, and told Bradley that he had
always said that the Allies should not try two thrusts at the same
time because neither would be strong enough. 'Now', he
summed up, 'we are in a proper muddle. Bradley contained his
rage so well that Montgomery was unaware of it.
Tactlessly, Montgomery went on to tell the American that in
future they must hold shorter fronts in the south, and withdraw
units from there for an all-out attack in the north. On his return
that evening Bradley, infuriated by his talk with the Field-
Marshal, told Patton that if Hodges stayed under Montgomery
then 'First Army would not launch their attack for three
months', and, to Patton's disgust, forecast that the southern
thrust would probably have to fall back to the Saar/Vosges line,
or even to the Moselle.®
Montgomery wrote to Grigg of Bradley that he looked thin
and worn and ill at ease', and added, incorrectly, that the
American had agreed with everything he had said. He went on
patronisingly: 'Poor chap, he is such a decent fellow and the
whole thing is a bitter pill for him.'9
In fact, Bradley silently disagreed with almost everything
Montgomery had said, but felt, at the moment when his
divisions had been removed from his command, that he could
not argue. In particular, he was cross because Montgomery
wanted to retreat to shorten the front, which Bradley felt might
prejudice the eventual Allied counter-attack. Hodges and Collins
were also strongly opposed to Montgomery's plan for a limited
withdrawal.
Eisenhower held a meeting with his staff and Bradley on
Boxing Day. There Bradley said that he wanted immediately to
be given back command of Seventh * First and Ninth Armies,
but the Supreme Commander refused, saying that it was logical
for Montgomery to command on the northern flank of the
German salient. Eisenhower added that he did not hold with
Patton's demand for an immediate counter-offensive and that he
* US Seventh Army (Lt-Gen Alexander Patch) was normally a part of
Devers's Sixth Army Group, but during the Battle of the Bulge covered much
of the US Third Army's front, freeing Patton's forces for counter-offensive
operations.
Ardennes
317
agreed with Montgomery that the Allied attack should not begin
at once. Montgomery claimed that he
had reorganised the
American armies during
his period
of
command
in the
Ardennes; the US
generals merely said
that "interrupted
communications had been restored'. The truth lies between the
two claims.
write my views on what has gone on here. I do not know of any
ink that would stand it.
interesting battle, but we ought to be in tears at the tragedy of
the whole thing.' Unhappily, such talk about enjoying very
interesting battles while commanding American
shortly to lead Montgomery into another crisis.
assumed command, he was
position, despite reports received on 21 and 22 December by
Twenty-First Army Group that the enemy intended to launch
parachute attacks on the Brussels and Antwerp areas
RAF advised that the Germans were capable of putting up 125
troop-carrying aircraft, enough for 1,500 men.lº Calmly and
methodically, the British commander and his staff set about
restoring the situation.
Williams's Twenty-First Army Group Intelligence Report 169,
dated 20 December, shows strong indications of having been
written in consultation with Montgomery. It states cryptically
that 'We were wrong' on 3 December in anticipating that von
Rundstedt
would husband Sixth SS Panzer Army 'until we
crossed the Roer', and continues:
So the bruited drive for Antwerp, the dash to the wire,* is on.
The next 48 hours should reveal what are the limits of his
Ivon Rundstedt's potential which
in early December we
deemed inadequate.
The plan of the attack is for two drives
westwards towards the Meuse between Liege and Givet made
by 6 SS Panzer Army on the right and Fifth Panzer Army on
the left ... Companies of paratroopers were dropped close
* A familiar expression to anyone who, like Williams, had served in the
Western Desert. The Wire' was the name given to the border between Libya
and Egypt, and the phrase 'dash to the wire' refers to Rommel's lightning,
though
eventually
unsuccessful,
armoured thrust westwards during
the
Crusader' battles in Cyrenaica in November 1941.
