62
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
American Supreme Commander.
Morgan's planning had been handicapped throughout by lack
of a Supreme Commander. At the Quebec Conference in
August 1943 his draft proposals had been accepted, but five
precious months were allowed to slip away before the overall
commander was appointed, and thus final plans could not be
drafted until that appointment.
Roosevelt and Churchill had agreed unofficially at Quebec
that General George Marshall, the American Army Chief of
Staff, should be Supreme Commander, but no decision was
recorded. At the first Cairo Conference in November 1943
Churchill had pressed for Marshall, but Roosevelt could not
make up his mind since he was anxious to keep Marshall with
him in Washington. Finally, at the Teheran Conference on 1
December 1943, Roosevelt offered Marshall the post, but to the
President's
relief he
was reluctant to accept.
Thus the
appointment went to Eisenhower, while Marshall stayed at the
President's side in Washington.
Eisenhower wanted Alexander as Field Commander, for he
knew he would find him more amenable than Montgomery,
though he overrated Alexander's ability and powers of decision.
Brooke and Grigg, the Secretary of State for War, wanted
Montgomery because they knew he had a quicker brain and was
better
at decision-making; he had
additionally the
gift of
boosting the morale of troops by the exercise of his strong
personality. Brooke recorded in his diary several times his low
opinion of Alexander's ability, while Churchill, who also
overestimated Alexander, remained neutral about the choice of
Field Commander. Montgomery, with such backing, got the job,
to the disappointment of the American generals.
Stimulated by the Prime Minister's admiration in Marrakesh,
Montgomery flew to England in a four-engined bomber
provided by Eisenhower, who thought two engines risky) on 2
January 1944. The supreme challenge of his lifetime faced him.
He was fifty-six,
technology and utterly
extremely fit, expert in all modern war
confident of his own ability to lead a
combined US/British Army to victory. Above all, he had a clear
and
incisive mind.
As a result his
orders were always
understood, while his personality ensured that they were carried
out. Undoubtedly he was the right choice, and although he was
to make mistakes and to incur much criticism during the next
Montgomery and the Invasion
63
eighteen months, no other serving British general was so well
equipped for the job. The rundown of the British Army in the
1920s and 1930s had had deplorable effects on the calibre of
Regular officers, and in 1943 there were few men of outstanding
ability, ambition and foresight in its upper echelons.
Eisenhower changed COSSAC into Supreme Headquarters,
Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) and told Morgan that he
wanted his former Chief of Staff, Bedell Smith, to be in charge.
Morgan gracefully accepted the position of Deputy Chief of
Eisenhower was by now in America, having relinquished
command
of
AFHQ, Algiers, on
becoming
Supreme
Commander. Montgomery took
charge of reshaping the
'Overlord' plans, and immediately set up his headquarters in his
old school, St Paul's in Hammersmith. The chain of command
was now: Eisenhower,
Supreme Commander; Air Chief
Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder, Deputy Supreme Commander;
Bedell Smith, Chief of Staff; Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay, C-
in-C, Allied Naval Forces; Air Chief Marshal Sir Trafford
Leigh-Mallory, C-in-C, Allied Air Forces. There was no C-in-C
Allied Land
Forces,
but
Montgomery
was
Commander,
Twenty-First Army Group, with operational control of all land
forces during the assault phase. Eisenhower would assume direct
command when an American Army Group was formed under
Lt-Gen Omar Bradley once the assault phase was over, and the
American
troops
considerably
outnumbered
Meanwhile, Bradley
the
British.
would
serve under
Montgomery
as
Commander,
Twelfth Army Group, though it was always
intended that he would have equal status with the British general
once the assault phase was completed.
Morgan's COSSAC plan had
postulated three divisions
landing on the Normandy beaches close to Cherbourg. In his
hurried
memorandum
to Churchill written at Marrakesh
Montgomery had stated:
This is just not an operation of war. By D plus 12 twelve
divisions would have been landed on the same beaches as
were used for the initial landings. This would lead to appalling
confusion on the beaches ... further divisions would come
pouring in all over the same beaches; confusion instead of
getting better would rapidly get worse... initial landings must
