286
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the Rhine, and he issued a directive (MS32) on 16 October
giving, in the clearest possible terms, absolute priority to freeing
the approaches to Antwerp.
21 Army Group
GENERAL OPERATIONAL SITUATION AND
DIRECTIVE
General Situation
1. The free use of the port of ANTWERP is vital to the
Allied cause, and we must be able to use the port soon.
2. Operations designed to open the port will therefore be
given complete priority over all other offensive operations
in 21 Army Group, without any qualification whatsoever.
3. The immediate task of opening up the approaches to the
port of ANTWERP is already being
undertaken by
Canadian Army and good progress has been made.
The whole of the available offensive power of Second
Army will now be brought to bear also.
In addition, the Canadians were to be relieved of all
responsibility for holding Second Army's eastern flank. Instead,
the Canadian right wing was to attack the South Beveland
peninsula,
with
US 104th Infantry
and 52nd (Lowland)
Divisions assigned to Crerar's army for the purpose. Previously,
Montgomery had intended to use these two divisions for Second
Army attacks. All 'large scale offensives' by Second Army
towards the Peel marshes were to be 'closed down' - the battle
for the marshes would not be won until 3 December.
So instead of driving the enemy back from the east flank of
Nijmegen and out of the salient over the Meuse, as ordered in
M530 on 9 October, Montgomery directed in M532 a week later
that: 'The whole available offensive power of Second Army will
be employed in a strong thrust westwards on the general axis
Hertogenbosch-Breda with the right flank on the Meuse'; in
other words, to clear the north bank of the Scheldt. This was a
complete change of direction. Montgomery had shelved for the
time being any thoughts of crossing the Rhine, while he himself
moved from his Tac HQ at Eindhoven to Main HQ at Brussels,
in order to be nearer 'the vital point of Antwerp. Belatedly, he
had come to see the crucial necessity of clearing the Scheldt
estuary. The Directive went on to state: 'I must impress on my
After Arnhem
287
Army Commanders the early use of Antwerp is absolutely vital.
The operations now ordered by me must be begun at the earliest
possible moment; they must be pressed with the greatest energy
and determination; and we must accept heavy casualties to get
quick success.'
Impulsively, Montgomery now abandoned operations on his
right flank where, in co-operation with the Americans, he had
almost cleared three German divisions out of their bridgehead
over the River Roer. As a result of attacks by VIII Corps these
Germans were in a hopeless position, and on 17 October the
corps commander was planning to throw in a fresh division
(15th Infantry) to finish the job. On that day, however, orders
came suddenly from Montgomery that 15th Division was not to
be used for this attack, but would instead be sent north to help
with the attack on German Fifteenth Army in the operations to
clear Antwerp. After 20 October VIII Corps made no further
progress against the Germans in the Roer bridgehead, and
suffered heavy casualties in enemy counter-attacks a few weeks
later.
General Roberts feels strongly that weakening VIII Corps'
offensive capability
at this time was a mistake, and that
Montgomery threw away an important tactical advantage
during a moment of tension caused by Eisenhower's firm orders
to concentrate on clearing Antwerp. General Roberts wrote to
me:
Another example of Monty's inflexibility was on 17th October
1944. Then the Operation 'Constellation' carried out by VIII
Corps to clear up what was known as the Maas pocket around
Venlo was suddenly
discontinued by Monty at the very
moment when it could have cleaned up the whole pocket within
forty-eight hours.
No doubt this was to meet Eisenhower's demand to open up
the port of Antwerp, but forty-eight hours' delay was nothing
compared with the advantage of folding up the Maas pocket,
where later we had fairly heavy casualties.
I cannot believe that Monty was misinformed about the
dominating position of VIII Corps, and he missed grasping a
splendid opportunity.
Eisenhower had at last got his way, although Montgomery
