410
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the by-now out-of-date pre-invasion plan, which had laid down
the next step as being the capture of the Brittany ports for the
build-up of reinforcements and supplies direct from America.
On 20 July Montgomery had told Eisenhower that *We must get
the Brittany peninsula. From an administrative point of view it is
essential," and the two commanders had no further discussions
about it, although Eisenhower echoed this in a letter on the
following day: "Time is vital. We must not only have the
Brittany peninsula. We must have it quickly.'1ยบ It is strange that
neither general, then or later, queried the wisdom of detaching so
many American troops and sending them towards Brest, when
an entire German army lay within their grasp.
When, on 31 July, the Americans broke out at Avranches,
there were only a few German battalions defending the ninety-
mile corridor between that point and the Loire, and US 4th
Armoured Division, which had spearheaded the Avranches
break-out, could have advanced
without opposition. Instead, it was halted and the German
forces, battered but still coherent, pulled back to the Seine,
although most of their tanks and equipment were lost in the
Falaise Gap and they suffered some 400,000 casualties killed,
wounded, missing or made prisoner.
According to Liddell Hart, after the breakthrough at
Avranches on 31 July 'American spearheads could have driven
eastwards unopposed ... the Allied High Command threw away
the best chance of exploiting this great opportunity by sticking
to the outdated pre-invasion programme in which a westward
move to capture the Britanny Ports was to be the next step.'"1
In the event, Montgomery decided to send
only
one of
Patton's corps towards Brest although the original 'Overlord'
plan involved all US Third Army going into Brittany. This was
sensible, and probably as much as he could do under the
circumstances, since Eisenhower had divided the British and
Americans into
two
groups with effect from
1 August.
Montgomery was to retain operational control and 'tactical co-
ordination of both
Army
Groups'
until SHAEF,
under
Eisenhower, became operational as an HQ in France on 1
September. Thus on 31 July Montgomery could hardly, on his
own initiative, have ordered the Americans to abandon the
entire preconceived
plan to capture
the
Brittany
ports.
Unfortunately, and largely because of Montgomery's aloofness,
Conclusion
411
no conferences were held between him, Eisenhower and Bradley
to consider how best to exploit the heaven-sent opportunity
provided by the near-collapse of the German forces facing them.
Whatever the rights and wrongs of the controversy over
closing the Falaise Gap, in the final battle for Normandy
Twenty-First Army Group's progress towards Argentan was
undoubtedly slow, and the American sweep into Brittany and
drive towards the
Seine stole the
headlines.
Montgomery,
impervious to the criticism of slowness, felt strongly that it was
his victory because his own master plan was responsible for the
success. He felt that he deserved to continue in sole command
and, according to Bill Williams, hoped against hope that
Eisenhower would not take away his overall command on 1
September. He
could not realise that politically
this was
impossible as 'it had to be an American victory', although
Brigadier Williams told me that he had emphasised this point to
his chief. Brooke and Grigg foolishly encouraged Montgomery
to believe that he ought to retain overall command, ignoring the
fact that Marshall had firmly told Eisenhower that for political
reasons he must immediately assume the land command. Not
unnaturally,
Eisenhower
deeply
resented
Montgomery's
opposition to his taking over command.
Montgomery despised Eisenhower as a field commander, and
made no secret of this contempt, which was echoed by Brooke.
There can be no doubt, however, that if Grigg and Brooke had
firmly told Montgomery to keep his peace and to accept the
Supreme Commander's authority then the hideous internecine
quarrels
between
the
two commanders would have been
avoided.
In the
middle of August, Montgomery conceived a plan
whereby, after crossing the Seine, the British and US forces
should keep together as a solid mass of forty divisions, a mass
so strong that it need fear nothing and which should advance
northwards to Antwerp and Aachen with its right flank on the
Ardennes.
The Americans would not hear of this, however. Twenty-First
Army Group had crossed the Seine well behind the Americans,
and Bradley and Patton were eager for the US armies to make
the main thrust past the Saar to the Rhine, south of Frankfurt,
with the British northern thrust reduced to a secondary role.
Here began the controversy over the northern ('narrow front'
