318
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
behind the Allied line to hinder the move of reinforcements
from the north and confuse the issue.
Between these two powerful drives, the more northerly of
which is the more formidable and evidently the main thrust,
the situation is obscure
the situation is uncertain it is
clearly also serious... it is evidently a measure of desperation
for Von Rundstedt who has now committed 6 Panzer Army
which we failed to force him to do a few weeks ago, and he
has left the excellent defensive positions nature and sweat had
given him in a prodigious effort which may prove indeed the
last Blitz to disrupt our preparations for a winter assault of
Germany
... Von Rundstedt is playing for high stakes,
Antwerp among them."
Montgomery was in no doubt that he might have to fight a
desperate battle to defend Antwerp, but he was determined not
to be panicked into hasty reactions, or indeed to make any move
until he knew the full strength of the enemy attack.
The next Intelligence Report, 170, issued on Christmas Eve,
made it clear that the threat to Antwerp had receded: 'The
Allied hinge in the area Monschau-Malmedy has frustrated
every enemy attempt and proved expensive for him ...
6 SS
Panzer Army has abandoned its attempt to reach Liege by
Verviers and instead is trying a left hook across the Salm... The
object remains Liege but now the enemy is trying to take it from
the south?'
On Boxing Day, Williams's report (171) gave full credit to
Patton's Third Army for relieving Bastogne, adding that US
101st Airborne Division's defence of the town was reminiscent
of Alam Halfa, Montgomery's successful defence
Alamein line in August 1942. The report continued:
of the
The second plan for 6th SS Panzer Army to approach Liege
from the south is going more slowly than the enemy had
assumed for the Allied Air Forces have reduced the sting and
denied impetus to 2 SS Panzer Division. 6th Panzer Army on
the left has discovered that probing forward with tanks will no
longer prove sufficient and that a properly co-ordinated
attack is called for
... Sth Panzer Army must now consider
how much help it can give to its right hand neighbour if its
own underbelly is being threatened. The enemy has been
319
Ardennes
trying to get his second wind.12
Patton noted on Christmas Day, the day before his Third
Army troops relieved the key nodal point of Bastogne, that 'The
German has shot his wad. We should attack,' and told his staff:
'The damn Jerries have stuck their heads in the meat grinder and
I have got the handle. Montgomery was equally confident, but
he was not in a hurry to attack even the head of the 'pincer',
which was now becoming inviting for him. And he still baulked
altogether at a big bite across the base of the salient, although
Collins was proposing a major attack southwards to drive right
through to Bastogne.
Patton, irritated by Montgomery's caution in restraining
Collins, commented: 'If Ike put Bradley back in command of 1st
and 9th Armies we can bag the whole German Army. I wish Ike
were more of a gambler, but he is certainly a lion compared with
Monty. This remark sums up the
Montgomery who, oblivious of their discontent, was hoping that
the Germans would attack again, and thus give him
better opportunity to catch them on their flank. 13 Eisenhower,
with his
feared that the British commander would delay his counter-
attack and thus give the Germans a chance to consolidate their
positions and bring up supplies and reinforcements - he knew
from past events, however, that there was little good in giving
Montgomery direct orders.
Eisenhower and Montgomery conferred at Hasselt on 28
December. The American was somewhat put out because the
meeting had been planned to take place in Brussels, but when he
got there he
found that Montgomery
had gone forward
unexpectedly. This sort of thing had happened before, and it did
not put the Supreme Commander in a good temper.
Montgomery was
most impressed by American
security
arrangements when Eisenhower arrived at Hasselt in his special
train on the 27th. At the time it was thought that the Germans
had sent out squads of SS troops dressed in US Army uniforms
to assassinate the American chiefs, and possibly Montgomery as
well. Colonel Otto Skorzeny had indeed organised an operation
during von
Rundstedt's attack when disguised
troops
operated
behind
the
American lines,
and
these
caused
considerable confusion, though their numbers were greatly
