334
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Commanders with power of decision vested in C.I.C. 21
Army Group.'
Delighted that he retained US Ninth Army under command,
and had 'power of decision' over Bradley, Montgomery told
Eisenhower that he agreed enthusiastically with this plan, and on
18 January he signalled Brooke that he had held
"a fine
conference with Bradley. Agreement reached on every point.
Veritable to start on 10 February'. But although Montgomery
was content with the short-term plan, both he and Brooke were
in fact at loggerheads with the Supreme Commander. The two
British field-marshals were
adamant that the Allies must
advance into Germany on the front from Bonn northwards,
leaving static the rest of the Allied line to the south. They would
not entertain even a secondary thrust in the south,
for they
knew that if Bradley and Patton were given any leeway they
would seek - and obtain - too great a proportion of the supplies,
and that Eisenhower was too weak to restrain them.
Eisenhower,
however,
had different
ideas.
Backed by
Marshall, he wanted to close up to the Rhine along its entire
length, and then force crossings both in the south and the north.
Nevertheless, he always conceded that the (predominantly
British) northern crossing should have priority, although this
was hotly disputed by Bradley. Marshall continued to
Eisenhower that he must not give authority to the British, and
that neither American public opinion nor the troops in the field
would stomach Montgomery commanding many
divisions for long.
American
In discussions, SHAEF told the War Office that the Supreme
Commander would try and seize the bridgeheads between Wesel
and Emmerich in the north, and Mainz and Karlsruhe in the
south, Eisenhower explaining that he insisted on the southern
attack because if successful, it would deprive Hitler of the
industrial production of the Saar. It would, moreover, give the
Allies some degree of flexibility if the British attack in the north
failed - since Normandy, he had viewed somewhat cynically
Montgomery's promises to win battles against the Germans on
schedule.
Churchill, Brooke and the British Chiefs of Staff agreed to
ask the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington to order Eisenhower
to concentrate his immense air and tank superiority upon an all-
Rows Over Strategy
out attack on the Northern German plains north of the Ruhr,
and around Hanover. At the same time,
they also decided to
urge a change in the command structure at SHAEF, and to seek
the appointment of a single overall ground commander. Brooke
was not at all confident of forcing
change out of the
Americans because the US generals were still sensitive about
their failure in the
Ardennes, and
outcome of the 7 January press conference. Furthermore, by
Washington made
the fact that they
Brooke persuaded
Churchill to reactivate the British memorandum to the Joint
Chiefs of Staff which he had prepared at the Prime Minister's
request, but which had been held in abeyance since the German
attack on 16 December, and to request an urgent meeting of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff to discuss
Eisenhower's strategy. The
memorandum, duly despatched to Washington, concluded with
(a) All available offensive power must be allotted to the
northern front i.e. from Prum northwards, and
(b) One man must have power of operational control and co-
ordination of the ground forces employed on this front.?
row over Montgomery's press conference still
ringing in American ears it was an unfortunate moment to raise
again the question of command. The American Chiefs of Staff
replied that Eisenhower should be ordered to submit a detailed
of his plans, and that a tripartite summit on
strategy should be held with the Russians
at Yalta on 4
of Staff conference in
Not surprisingly, the
Americans told the British that they firmly opposed any change
in the system of command. Montgomery was ready to leave the
subject there, at least for the time being, but not so Brooke.
General Sir Frank Simpson told me that the CIGS realised that
he was almost certainly banging his head against a brick wall,
but he was so certain that putting Montgomery in command
would shorten the war that he felt it was worthwhile forcing the
The following extracts from Eisenhower's long appreciation
