36
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
The war correspondent Christopher Buckley wrote:
British commandos had reported from the further shore and
in view of their reports and other indications of no serious
opposition on the beaches the bombardment seemed rather
unnecessary and wasteful. There was little evidence of any
guns near the enemy beaches. Personally I believe this heavy
bombardment could have been perfectly well dispensed with,
but it had been elaborately planned and I suppose it was not
easy to call it off. 26
Buckley expresses the consensus view, held by those present at
the time, of this extravagant barrage on which Montgomery had
insisted.
3 September was a perfect Mediterranean morning. As the
barrage lifted 5th Division and 1st Canadian crossed the Straits
in a flotilla of boats and quickly occupied a little chain of fishing
villages and the small town of San Giovanni. The large town of
Reggio further south was occupied without opposition, and none
of the beaches were wired. Italian soldiers emerged from their
few pill-boxes and trenches with their hands up, and helped the
invaders to unload their stores. Reggio had been occupied by
0930, and within four hours RAF fighters were using the
aerodrome. Most of the inhabitants had fled into the hills, and
the town was heavily damaged by shelling and bombing.
In his intelligence report up to 1900 on 3 September Bill
Williams wrote: 'No effective resistance was encountered.
Civilian Reports say Germans retreated two days ago to Bagadi
and Gambaria. From Air Recce it
appears this is only
temporary Dips. During the day there was no contact with
The invasion was like a naval regatta. Hundreds of boats
crossed and recrossed the three miles of dead calm sea of the
Straits of Messina - motor- and steam-boats and warships. On
the Sicilian side Italians gave or sold flowers and fruits to the
Allied soldiers as they embarked. It was a beautiful scene except
for the horror of the thick palls of smoke rising from Reggio
after its unnecessary bombing and shelling. During the morning
Montgomery crossed in his own launch and then transferred to
a DUKW, loaded in advance with cigarettes to give away to the
troops. He received an enthusiastic welcome both from his own
Sicily and After
37
men and the Italians as he returned to Europe, more than three
years after his ignominious departure from Dunkirk.
Bill Williams, crossing with his General, found him
relaxed and happy as a schoolboy. When he got into Reggio
Montgomery went into the local Fascist HQ and there found
a fantastic
writing paper, which
immediately appropriated because it was so much better than
the Eighth Army issue paper. He was normally strongly anti-
looting, but that morning was a 'relaxed magpie.
Montgomery used this Fascist stationery for his letters.* and
many Eighth Army files are encased in thick cardboard marked
in Italian 'various subjects' and 'curriculum vitae'.
Telephone calls made by obliging Italian local government
officers revealed that 29th Panzer Division had been withdrawn
to the north; Montgomery had the toe of Italy to himself. That
night a signal announced that the Italian surrender had been
signed secretly, yet he issued no orders to his troops to advance
quickly or urgently to reconnoitre the road to Salerno. Had
Montgomery himself been responsible for 'Avalanche' as well as
'Baytown' he would have had his troops scampering up the
approach roads from the toe to the Salerno beach-head to secure
the south flank of 'Avalanche'. Now he deliberately ignored
Alexander's
instructions of
20 August
about
assisting
'Avalanche', and
instead concentrated on building up his
supplies in preparation for a German counter-attack which,
since they had pulled back, could never come. The Canadian
division marched north-east through the hills via Aspromonte,
enjoying the cool upland air,
and reached Locri on the east
coast. They met no opposition,
and for the next few days
advanced leisurely along the pleasant coast road, arriving at
Catanzaro Lido on the evening of the 10th with no battle
casualties.
The western coastal route was the direct link with Salerno,
and 5th Division following it met no Germans on the first day.
* Montgomery loved appropriating captured stationery. At the end of
April 1945, after Twenty-First Army Group captured Munster, he used the
writing paper of the GOC, German Sixth Army Corps, for his letters to the
War Office.
