Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
map caravan and looked at us in silence for a moment. Then I
remember very clearly he produced a long chain with keys on
it and unlocked two despatch boxes. They were full of papers
all mixed up. He said:
'There is something about it in
here - see what you can find.
Monty and I scrabbled through these papers. They were
Cabinet papers, Ultra signals, and other intelligence reports
all muddled up. I quickly
saw that von Witzleben was
Winston Churchill then began to mumble to himself
rhetorical sentences how he would deal with the overthrow of
the Nazis and peace proposals, and began to coin phrases for
I suddenly realised that Winston had come from London
with all this stuff in his despatch case unread, and that he was
"naked' in face of the possible sudden end of the war. I was
amazed that he could have been as unbriefed about what was
going on in Germany as he was on July 20th.
I am sure that von Kluge knew a great deal about the plot
but didn't want to be contacted by the conspirators until he
was sure Hitler was dead, and I feel sure that von Kluge was
thinking of a battlefield surrender. Monty had never given any
thought to it before July 20th but he was excited like a
schoolboy at the possibility of a surrender that morning.
Perhaps Churchill recalled the dramatic surrender of the
Austrian Army to the Italians on the Isonzo in October 1918,
when a captain, accompanied by two private soldiers with large
white flags, crawled up a railway embankment in the Austrian
front line and walked
gingerly through the forward Italian
positions bearing an official surrender from the last Austrian
Emperor, Karl. There might have been a repeat performance in
Normandy on 20 July if Rommel, instead of von Kluge, had still
been in command of the forces confronting the invasion.
The Ultra decrypts which had given Montgomery such
*Field-Marshal Erwin von Witzleben and Generaloberst Friedrich Fromm
were both active conspirators against Hitler, Witzleben since as early as
1938. After the failure of the bomb plot Fromm sought exculpation by
having a number of the chief plotters executed, but to no avail. Both men
were executed for treason, Witzleben in August 1944, and Fromm in January
1945.
145
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
confidence after the 'Goodwood' failure were sent to Normandy
from Bletchley as soon as the Enigma signals had been decoded,
often within four hours of their German origination. Churchill
saw the decrypts, and copies went to SHAEF, Twenty-First
Army Group,
Twelfth Army
Group,
British Second Army,
Canadian First Army, and US First Army. They confirmed very
positively that Montgomery's overall plan of drawing off the
main strength of the German armour to the British front was
paying off, despite the near disaster of 'Goodwood'. The Ultra
intelligence gave undeniable evidence that the Germans on the
American
front would not be able to withstand the 'Cobra'
attack, for the enemy infantry lines through which 'Cobra' had
to drive a path were fragile. For instance, General Eugen Mendl,
commanding Il Parachute Corps,
exchanged
signals
with
General Kurt Student, commanding
the Parachute
Army
in
Germany,
complaining
that
the
fighting
power
of
his
parachutists
was
dwindling
daily. His last two requests for
reinforcements had been ignored and the critical situation forced
him to commit the few replacements he received as soon as they
joined, with the result that 90 per cent quickly became casualties
because they
were
so young
and had so little training.
He
declared to Student that most of them had never thrown a hand
grenade, fired more than a few rounds of live ammunition, or
learned
much
about
machine-guns,
entrenching
tools
or
general starved of trained
reinforcements,
believed it proved that the German divisions about to face the
immense American assault were unlikely to be able to launch an
effective counter-attack, and were anyway far below the normal
standard of the parachutists who were usually the élite of the
German infantry.8
Student
promised 2,000 reinforcements, but Meindl asked
3rd Parachute Division
would be
well below
strength
reported that artillery and air bombardment had so reduced its
fighting power, and that casualties amongst officers had been so
heavy, that the corps could no longer guarantee to hold the line;
