308
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Ultra intercepts became good. Hitler had
amazing luck
because all our aircraft were grounded when his Ardennes
offensive began.
By 2240 on 16 December Ultra had confirmed to Twenty-
First Army Group that on the next day German fighter aircraft
would support the assault by the two Panzer armies. No one on
the Allied side, however, appears to have been unduly troubled,
although at first Montgomery took the German attack more
seriously than did the Americans or the staff at SHAEF. For
instance, Strong's weekly SHAEF Intelligence Summary of 17
December (alleged by one historian to have been
later
doctored*) dismissed the enemy offensive as 'a diversionary
attack on a fair scale', and declared that it was too early to say
much about it, insisting it was designed only 'to relieve pressure
from the Cologne, Dusseldorf and Saar sectors?
On the same day Montgomery, not over-worried by the
situation south of his army group, presented medals to the
Canadian troops, and held a conference to discuss 'Veritable,
the proposed combined British-Canadian attack to close up on
the Rhine. But on the following day, 18 December, there came
the alarming news that Ist SS Panzer Division was within a few
miles of Stavelot, where there was a giant American petrol dump
containing two million gallons, and almost no troops to defend it.
Fortunately, the Panzer columns turned away three miles from
the dump, but there were other German gains. The Panzers were
pouring through a fifty-mile gap in the line, and the American
forces were scattering in front of them. By nightfall German
forward troops were some twenty miles over the Belgian frontier.
Montgomery, well briefed, but still effectively out of the
battle, signalled Brooke on 20 December:
Situation in American area is not not good ... great confusion
and all signs of full scale withdrawal. There is definite lack of
grip and control ... and atmosphere of great pessimism in
First and Ninth Armies. Bradley is still at Luxemburg but I
understand he is moving as his HQ are in danger ...
I have
heard nothing from Ike or Bradley and had no orders or
requests of any sort. My own opinion is the American forces
have been cut in half and the Germans can reach the Meuse
* David Irving, Hitler's War, p.342.
Ardennes
309
at Namur without opposition.
The Command set up always
faulty is now futile. I have told Whiteley that Ike ought to
place me in operational command of all troops on northern
half of the
front. He should be given a direct order by
someone to do so. The situation needs to be handled very
firmly and with a tight grip.
Brooke, fearing that Montgomery would upset Eisenhower by
badgering him for command of the northern sector, included the
following in his reply:
would be a great
advantage to have one
Commander (preferably
all troops on
northern half of front. But only authority which can order
Eisenhower to do so is Combined Chiefs of Staff, and I see
no chance of our being able to convince US Chiefs of Staff
at present that necessity exists for
Combined Chiefs of
Staff to take the drastic step of instructing Eisenhower on
his conduct of the battle.
6. Be careful what you say to Eisenhower himself on subject
of command set up as it may do much more harm than
good especially as he is now probably very worried about
whole situation. It is a different thing to make suggestions
to Whiteley as you have done and this may bear fruit.
7. I have sent the P.M. copy of your telegram.
Fortunately Eisenhower, supported by Bedell Smith, had
already decided that he had no option but to put Montgomery in
charge of all the northern sector, where a great number of troops
from US First and Ninth Armies had been cut off from Bradley
by the 'bulge' of the German attack. On the morning of the 20th
Eisenhower telephoned Montgomery
from Rheims, and told
him: We now have two fronts
and I want you to assume
command
of the northern front. The Supreme Commander
went on talking, but Montgomery paid no attention (the line was
in any case very bad). He had got what he wanted, though under
much less happy circumstances than would have prevailed at the
end of September, when he would have had virtually the same
command of the northern sector if only Twenty-First Army
Group had succeeded in crossing the Rhine at Arnhem.
As soon as Churchill received from the CIGS a copy of
