128
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
be bound to produce a fearful traffic problem. The plan was for
the tanks to form up at the start-line and pour down the pre-laid
bombing carpet right up to their planned objectives,
while
infantry divisions were to widen the flanks of the breakthrough.
Unfortunately, because of traffic queues the lorried infantry
could
not keep
up
with the tanks, and 11th Armoured
Divisions's infantry
were soon left behind
in mopping-up
operations. In spite of the bombardment, many German anti-
tank guns in the stone-built villages survived and held up the
British armour (incidentally creating traffic jams) until Panzer
reserves emerged to seal off the penetration.
The artillery and air bombardments, arranged for first light on
18 July, went according to plan, and at first the armour had an
easy run, with the stunned enemy putting up little opposition.
But by 0900 the tanks had passed beyond the range
of their
supporting artillery, and the Germans began to recover. The first
trouble was from a small wood at Cagny, where 88-mm guns
knocked out twelve Shermans, and in the village of Cagny itself
six or eight Tiger tanks, although buried for a time, had survived
the bombing. To the north and west, stiff resistance was also
encountered by the Canadians in the remains of the Colombelles
steelworks on the eastern outskirts of Caen. And, unfortunately,
the bombing programme had not included the German artillery
in the wooded country around Garcelles Secqueville, which lay
out of range of the British medium artillery during the fighting;
from there the Germans poured shells on the British infantry.
German troops in the area round Couverville and Demouville
had virtually
escaped the bombing, and held back 11th
Armoured's infantry throughout the first morning when they
were badly needed further forward, while the partial failure of
the bombing of Cagny, already mentioned, took a heavy toll of
the British tanks. The infantry asked afterwards why only light
fragmentation bombs had been used against these targets, as
they did so little harm to the enemy when well dug in. They
considered that Montgomery had let them down by agreeing to
the use of such bombs.
Between 1000 and 1200 on the 18th the Germans delivered
an armoured counter-attack. Tanks of Ist SS Panzer Division,
quite intact having been far away from the British bombing,
descended Bourguebus Hill. As Panthers and Tigers destroyed
British tanks wholesale with their high-velocity guns, traffic
Normandy Assault
129
congestion
over the Orne bridges made it impossible for
Dempsey to send forward reinforcements. From 1100 onwards
there was a tank mêlée which defied description. The front line
was dust, confusion, smoke and flames; the approach roads
one long traffic jam which prevented
7th
Armoured
Division tanks reaching the fighting zone until evening.
The German Panzer division infantry travelled in armoured
carriers; most of the infantry with a British armoured division
(apart from the
armoured brigade and
the reconnaissance
companies, which used half-track armoured cars and bren
carriers) had to travel on lorries. As a result, and quite apart
from the congestion on the bridges,
Dempsey could not get
enough of his vulnerable lorried infantry far enough forward
during the tank battles, although an infantry battalion of 29
Armoured Brigade (11th Armoured Division) took Hubert
Folie, well forward.
The British had 750 tanks against the Germans' 230, but the
Tigers and Panthers, with their thicker armour
and better
armament again proved superior to the British tanks, apart from
the Sherman Fireflies with their 17-pounder guns. Only one in
four Shermans had 17-pounders, however, the rest being armed
with 75-mm guns. As a result of this inferiority the British lost
413 tanks during 'Goodwood' to German losses of 140, although
many
British
tanks
were of course reparable.
And,
as
Montgomery had always feared, German morale was as high or
higher than that of the British.
Montgomery
employed
his
armour,
as he had
on the
unsuccessful first day at Alamein, as a giant battering ram to
overcome German positions.
This was most unorthodox, since
in
the
Second
World
War
virtually
everyone, including
Montgomery, believed armour should
be used
to exploit
successes created by infantry and artillery; indeed, General
Essame
claimed that
'Goodwood'
tactically
was
the German
encounter with Montgomery.
Maj-Gen (later
from the
desert, thought "Goodwood'
