106
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
contained a translation of a captured German document in
which were several derogatory remarks about the British
infantry: 'A successful break-in by the enemy is almost never
exploited to pursuit. If our own [i.e. German] troops are ready
near the front for a local counter-attack the ground is
immediately regained. The German conclusion was that they
should occupy the main line of resistance very thinly, holding
behind every sector a local reserve supported by tanks ready to
advance as soon as the British artillery fire lifted. 'It is best to
attack the English who are very sensitive to close combat and
flank attack at their weakest moment - that is when they have to
fight without their artillery? The report described the fighting
morale of the British infantry as being 'not very great', and
continued: 'They rely largely on the artillery and air forces
support. In the case of well directed artillery fire by us they often
abandon their position in flight. The enemy is extraordinarily
nervous of close combat. Whenever the enemy infantry is
energetically engaged they mostly retreat or surrender.
The report, from Panzer Lehr Division HQ, was more
admiring of British
armour, described as having 'a good
offensive spirit and liking to attack in pairs'. It also said that
the Cromwells, with their high tracks, were more mobile in the
bocage than German tanks, but 'battle recce [sic) advances very
cautiously in spite of strong artillery support directed by
Forward Observation Officers with the infantry. It went on to
say that the Germans could generally tell exactly where a British
attack was coming because artillery fire was concentrated on the
target usually for three hours beforehand. 18
If Dempsey,
as GOC, Second Army, authorised the
circulation of this document he was courageous. The sentences
derogatory to the British infantry have since been widely quoted,
but they are in fact a short excerpt from a long German
document, and it is possible that they slipped into the summary
without the GOC's authorisation.
But while there was
an
element of truth in the German appreciation, there was also an
element of propaganda. The Germans too, had their own
weaknesses, especially with their numerous Polish conscripts,
who would desert wholesale from forward positions. One Polish
deserter told his interrogator: 'I had a sympathetic German
NCO. When I volunteered for duty in a forward post he said
"You are asking me for a passport to Britain" ?19
With
his
collapse in France in 1940, Montgomery was very conscious of
the need to take every possible step to improve the
infantryman's morale, and to prevent flight or surrender. This
was his main reason for visiting and addressing every unit before
D-Day, and on his tours of the battlefront in Normandy he
would always stop to talk to small groups and give out handfuls
of cigarettes; everyone agreed that his optimism and personality
were good for morale. Adolf Hitler had an advantage in that so
many of his soldiers were devoted to his magnetic personality
and were fanatic
soldier, however, had to rely on his sense of conscience and
duty; and nearly five years of war, with air raids, separation,
food rationing and other deprivations had produced a profound
war weariness.
dedicated leadership of officers maintained the courage of the
British infantry in the dark days following the landings and
before the Normandy break-out.
Hubert Essame found the difficulties that faced stretcher-
bearers in finding and picking up wounded in the Normandy
standing corn to be detrimental to the troops' morale.
A soldier who is hit when advancing through corn of this
height (27 feet) will fall to the ground and be invisible to the
stretcher-bearers looking for him. His comrades know this
and have to go on with the advance. They are also well aware
that a wounded man may die if left unattended for any length
of time
... The sights and sounds of the wounded can create
tensions too great for soldiers unused to battle
man was hit a comrade stopped briefly, took his rifle and
bayonet and struck it in the ground beside him and placed his
steel helmet on top of the rifle butt to guide the stretcher-
bearers
... it was a poignant sight to gaze on these rifles
surmounted by their tin helmets looking like strange fungi
sprouting up haphazardly throughout the cornfields.20
Old hands from
Great War, like Montgomery
Essame, knew well the difficulty of keeping infantry attacking,
especially after the young officers who trained the soldiers were
killed or wounded. The break-out from Normandy could only be
achieved by a hard slogging match with high infantry casualties;
