256
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
thought, tactful, ... I had ... a definite responsibility to my
Government and country which, at times, might run counter
to his own wishes. There was a powerful Canadian reason
why I should have been present with 2 Cdn Inf Div at Dieppe
that day. In fact, there were 800 reasons - the Canadian dead
buried at Dieppe cemetery. I went on to say that he should
realise, by our considerable association, that I was neither
self-opinionated, nor unreasonable, but that, also, I would
never consent to be 'pushed about' by anyone, in a manner,
or direction, which I knew to be wrong.
The Field-Marshal reiterated that I had failed to comply
with an instruction issued by him and that such situation
could only result in his decision that our ways must part. I
replied that I assumed he would at once take this up through
higher channels and that, I, in turn, would at once report the
situation to my Government.
At this point Montgomery, to Crerar's surprise, suddenly said
that the incident was closed. The Canadian replied that he did
not want it closed, and desired that it be properly ventilated
through official channels. After further discussion, Montgomery
again said that he wanted the matter closed, and went on to give
Crerar the gist of what had happened at the conference.
At the time, Montgomery had just given up overall command
of the ground forces, and he was desperately anxious to have
that command given back to him. He had always found it hard
to prevent himself from treating both the Canadians and the
Poles (as has been shown earlier) as subordinates and not allies,
but as soon as the Crear stood up to him, refusing to be bullied,
Montgomery became cautious. He knew that his chances of
becoming overall commander again would be ruined if he
started a row over a triviality with the Canadian Government,
which undoubtedly would back Crerar. Dieppe was an emotive
word in Canada, and Montgomery himself was blamed by many
Canadians for his part in that disaster.
Crerar recorded his conviction that the row was started in an
attempt to rub in the fact that he was a subordinate, and had no
duty to anyone except Montgomery, and certainly the Canadian
emerges from the incident with greater dignity than his C-in-C.
Thwarted by his failure either to humiliate or to sack Crerar,
Montgomery vented his irritation that night by writing to the
The Canadians on the Coast
257
CIGS in his daily signal: 'Canadian operations since crossing
the Seine have been badly handled and very slow.' At that time
he wanted to replace Crerar with Simonds, but had no power to
do so.
In fact, Montgomery soon made amends. Crear gave him
details showing how the signal calling him to the meeting had
been delayed, and Montgomery wrote him a pleasant note dated
5 September: 'I am sorry I was a bit rude the other day, and
somewhat outspoken. I was annoyed that no one came to a very
important conference. But forget about it - and let us get on
with the war. It was my fault? But unfortunately the incident
served to heighten the tension between the two men.
In a directive given out on 3 September Montgomery wrote:
'5 Canadian Armoured will clear the coastal belt and will then
remain in the general area Bruges-Calais until the maintenance
situation allows of its employment further forward. When he
issued this,
however, he
did not realise that the Germans
intended to fight for the Channel ports, for when Hitler ordered
them to be defended as
'fortresses' the Nazi commanders
obeyed his instructions to the letter. On 4 September Simonds's
corps directive ordered his divisions to advance to the Scheldt
and destroy or capture all the enemy south of it within the
Canadian Army boundary. Alas, this was quite impossible.
Boulogne, Dunkirk, Calais and Le Havre were all strongly
defended, and the German Fifteenth Army held the south bank
of the Scheldt in great strength.
On 9 September Crerar attended a conference at Twenty-
First Army Group with Montgomery, Dempsey and Hodges.
There it was decided that the Canadian Army was to take over
Ghent and the south bank of the Scheldt as far east as the point
where the Dutch border crosses the river north-west of Antwerp,
but that the first priority was to capture the Channel ports. On
12 September, after three days of fighting, Le Havre fell to
British I Corps. But then, in a letter to Crerar on the 13th,
Montgomery ordered priority to be given to 'setting in motion
operations designed to enable us to use the port of Antwerp'.
Later in the day he signalled 'Early use of Antwerp so urgent
that I am prepared to give up operations against Calais and
Dunkirk and be content with Boulogne.' Boulogne did not fall to
the Canadians until 22 September, and Calais until 1 October,
but the sea approaches to Antwerp remained obstinately in
