DZ - Dropping zones
LZ - Landing zones
SDP- Supply dropping GP. Glider pilots
The Arnhem Battle Plan
DZ'Y
LI'S
14 PARA BDE,
1на Hoeve®
Wolfhezen
POL PARA BDE]
TALBDE
Heelsum,
• Oosterbeek
'PARA BE I
Heteren
DZ'K'
Arnhem
237
Reconnaisance Squadron of Ist Airborne should drive off
immediately to capture Arnhem bridge in a surprise attack, and
hold it until the rest of 1 Parachute Brigade arrived. Unfor-
tunately, although only a few gliders had gone astray, hardly
any of the Recce Squadron's armoured jeeps had arrived on
the landing ground.
The German High Command reacted spontaneously. Almost
incredibly, Field-Marshal Model was sitting down to lunch in his
HQ at the Taffelberg Hotel at Oosterbeek, only two miles to the
east of Renkum Heath. Had the British been luckier, he would
have fallen into their hands like a ripe plum,
but within
minutes of seeing the British parachutists Model's car was
speeding to Area Command HQ in Arnhem, where he radioed
news of the landings to Hitler at the Wolf's Lair, adding, I have
escaped through the eye of a needle.' Hitler's reaction, typically
selfish, was: 'Everyone must understand the deadly danger in
which I stand. The enemy
would not hesitate to risk two
parachute divisions if at one blow they could get their hands on
me and the whole German command."
The Dutch Resistance had passed news to the Allies of
Model's whereabouts, but why this vital information was never
used remains a mystery. Had Ist Airborne known where he was,
he would almost certainly have fallen into their hands — a very
valuable prize indeed. Model was the most efficient of the pro-
Nazi generals. Always well briefed, up to date and modern in his
thinking, Hitler relied on him whenever the front line was
crumbling or needed restoring. If Model had been captured on
17 September the war would have been shortened.
After contacting Hitler, Model drove on to Deetinchem to the
HQ of Lt-Gen Willi Bittrich, the GOC, II SS Panzer Corps, who
had 9th and 10th SS Panzer Divisions under his command.
Model and Bittrich conferred at 1430, and within five minutes of
the landings Bittrich had alerted Harzer, commanding 9th SS
Panzer (Hohenstaufen) Division at Beeksbergen, and Harmel,
commanding 10th SS Panzer (Frundsberg) Division in Ruurlo,
together with the Luftwaffe.
9th Panzer was ordered to Arnhem, and 10th Panzer to
Nijmegen to defend the bridgeheads south of the Waal. These
SS armoured divisions were only at one-third strength, but they
were still far too formidable opposition for lightly equipped
airborne troops.
