20
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
tragic early death, in his arms, in October 1937 accentuated his
abrasiveness, a characteristic which made him unpopular with
many in the British Army.
Field-Marshal Lord Gort, CIGS in 1938 until he became C-
in-C of the BEF in 1939, disliked Montgomery and refused to
give him command of a division because of his reputation.
However, thanks to his friend Lt-Gen Sir Alan Brooke, Bernard
became a divisional commander as war broke out, and returned
from the shambles of Dunkirk with a well-earned reputation as
the most efficient of the British generals - his great personal
courage had (and has) never been in doubt.
But although he was disliked by many of his contemporaries,
Montgomery had admirers and friends in high places - notably
Brooke, CIGS from 1941, Maj-Gen Frank Simpson, Director of
Military Operations in 1944, and Sir James Grigg, Secretary of
State for War from 1942. There was unparalleled efficiency in
the armies he commanded, and his staff always worked
devotedly for him.
Montgomery was brilliant at organisation; all his working life
was devoted to studying how to make army staff work more
efficient. He understood every branch of the army and its
weapons; he was expert at moving great numbers of men and
huge quantities of stores and vehicles at great speed across large
distances; above all, his personality was always good for the
morale of his troops. He understood how to co-operate with the
RAF and the Navy, and appreciated the immense value of
interpreting and using Ultra signals* and other intelligence about
the enemy. And, provided he was in sole charge, he was good at
commanding the troops of other nations.
Any errors he made were in strategy; his armies were always
highly efficient technically. No departmental head under
Montgomery could pull the wool over his eyes; they had to do
the job properly or he would find them out. He devoured and
understood statistics of vehicles, stores and ammunition, and
always knew the current reinforcement position. As a result his
* At Bletchley Park, near London, certain enemy signals were tapped and
decoded by experts using Enigma machines. The decrypts were sent to the
armies in the field and were known as 'Ultra'. It was imperative that the enemy
did not know that their most vital and sensitive signals were being interpreted,
and the existence and use of Ultra remained the most closely guarded secret of
the war, one which was not revealed until thirty years afterwards.
Sicily and After
21
decisions were soundly based on a proper appreciation of what
it was possible for his army to do, provided that the intelligence
about the enemy was correct. His successes were due to this
professional brilliance.
His
mistakes were due to
his
temperament, notably in dealing with others, to sudden swings
from optimism to gloom, and to extreme jealousy and dislike of
any criticism of his plans. Apart from Arnhem, he tended to be
over-cautious.
Montgomery's greatest moment was his victory at El Alamein in
October 1942, and the triumphant advance of his Eighth Army
into Tunisia early in 1943. Once in Tunisia he had to co-operate
both with the British First Army and the US Army. For the first
time his over-caution began to show, and his arrogance
alienated the American generals.
At the Casablanca Conference in January 1943 Roosevelt
and Churchill had decided upon an Allied invasion of Sicily later
that year, once the Germans had been cleared out of North
Africa. Montgomery expected to be in sole charge of the Allied
armies in Sicily, and General Sir Harold Alexander, C-in-C in
the Middle East, proposed him for the post. General Dwight D.
Eisenhower, C-in-C Allied Forces in North Africa, was against
him and was backed by Churchill. As a result Montgomery was
left in command of the British Eighth Army, and General
George Patton had a separate command, the US Seventh Army.
Both were to be under Alexander's Fifteenth Army Group with
Eisenhower in overall command at Allied Forces HQ in Algiers.
Eisenhower set up his planning team for the Sicily campaign,
codenamed 'Husky', in the Ecole Militaire in Algiers
in
February 1943. From the start he and Alexander made it plain
that Patton and Montgomery were to be on an equal footing.
This cooled the Eighth Army commander's ardour. In his own
words it was no longer to be 'a private war conducted by the
Eighth Army. Instead we had to adjust our way of doing things
to a larger canvas and this would mean compromise'.!
Curiously, in addition to the Algiers effort other planning
staffs were at work in London, Cairo and Rabat. Montgomery,
not liking
what he heard from these sources, demanded
an
urgent conference with Eisenhower in Algiers, which took place
on 19 April 1943. There he asked for Eighth Army HQ to be
withdrawn from the fighting in Tunisia as soon as possible in
