136
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
had the chance to topple the Nazis. Had the attempt succeeded,
it is likely that Rommel would have called for an immediate
battlefield armistice, or even surrender, on hearing the news.
Early in July, with von Kluge's agreement, Rommel had made
a trial of the possibility of a local suspension of hostilities in
order to parley with his enemy. General von Luttitz made
wireless contact with the Allies in the US 2nd Division sector.
The
Allies agreed to exchange German female personnel
(medical and signals), kept in Cherbourg, for severely wounded
Allied soldiers, and named a rendezvous. Two hours of local
armistice were enough for this act of humanity, but Hitler was
furious with Rommel when he heard about it. This story must,
however, be treated with some caution, since it appears only in
Lt-Gen Hans Speidel's autobiography, written after the war
when he was seeking rehabilitation. There is no trace of it in the
archives. 45
It is a poor reflection on the Allied leaders that the
assassination attempt took them by surprise, for if on 20 July
the German Army had believed Hitler to be dead, there must
have been a slackening of resistance. No instructions were given
to the psychological warfare branches of the US or British armies
to exploit the situation, nor was any attempt made to produce
leaflets and broadcasts telling the German soldiers fighting at
'Goodwood that Hitler was dead, the Nazi regime at an end, and
peace in sight.
Like Rommel, von Kluge was implicated in the plot, but he
was nervous and would not declare himself unless or until Hitler
was dead. Von Rundstedt knew of the plot but would have
nothing to
do with it; General von
Stülpnagel, Military
Governor of France, was one of the ringleaders, and on 20 July
arrested the Gestapo leaders in Paris.
Deliberately von Kluge stayed away from his HQ until he
saw how the land lay. When he returned there, at 1800 on the
20th, he found a telephone message saying that Hitler was dead,
and a note that German radio maintained that he was alive.
General Ludwig Beck, ex-Chief of the General Staff and a
leading conspirator, telephoned von Kluge from Berlin and
asked him whether he would accept his (Beck's) authority as
Acting Head of the Reich. Von Kluge did not refuse, but played
for time in order to see whether Hitler
meanwhile he asked von Stülpnagel to come from Paris. While
Normandy Assault
the Military Governor was on his way, von Kluge telephoned
the Wolf's Lair (Hitler's HQ in East Prussia) and in his War
Diary it is recorded that he was informed by General Walter
Warlimont, Jodl's deputy, that the plot had failed but that
perjured officers had tried to form a new regime and to declare a
state of emergency.
At dinner that night, von Stülpnagel tried in vain to persuade
von Kluge to try and end the fighting in Normandy as, he
claimed, Rommel would have done. But the army commander
had no stomach for a hero's part, and told von Stülpnagel that
he must release the Gestapo leaders in Paris, making it clear that
these arrests were made without his (von Kluge's) authority.
Von Stülpnagel left for Paris, and in the early hours of 21 July
von Kluge, at the prompting of von Rundstedt's staff officers,
agreed to suspend von Stülpnagel. He then sent a telegram of
congratulations to Hitler.
In the end the plot had no effect whatsoever on the fighting in
Normandy. The German Army in the field, hotly engaged on
that day with British forces in the 'Goodwood' fighting,
with the Americans around St Lô, knew only of the broadcast
an attempt to kill Hitler had failed. The
background to the news was too obscure to affect their morale
or lead them to think that the Nazi regime might tumble.
