148
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
nominally under his control. Collins, a tough and aggressive
commander, had the resilience and cheerful confidence which
Bradley lacked, and together they made a good team.
Eisenhower went on to visit Montgomery,
though the
interview did not go well. The American found Montgomery
complacent, his morale having been boosted by Churchill's visit,
and did not like his attitude that the British had played their part
in drawing Rommel's armour, and now it was up to the
Americans. This was the line being taken by the American press,
which Stimson had stressed to Eisenhower must be stifled. And.
too, the openness and enthusiasm of Bradley and Collins was in
marked
contrast to Montgomery's cold defensiveness and
arrogance.
When Eisenhower
back to
London he
complained bitterly about Montgomery to his chauffeuse and
confidante, Kay Summersby, who noted in her diary that he had
said: Monty seems quite satisfied regarding his progress; says it
is up to Bradley to go ahead
...Eisenhower is not pleased at
progress made.'11
Not only was Eisenhower
worried by what he termed
Montgomery's 'excessive caution', but he was also pessimistic
about the chances for American armour in the bocage, for he
did not share Bradley's and Montgomery's faith
in the
Rhinoceros attachments. Ever since D-Day SHAEF had been
very concerned at the deficiencies of the US Army's tanks
compared with the Germans'. In a recent long report to
Eisenhower Maj-Gen Maurice Rose, commanding
US
3rd
Armoured Division, had confirmed emphatically how inferior
were American M4 and AM4 A3 tanks to Tigers and Panthers.
Rose wrote: 'T have personally seen projectiles fired by our 75 and
76 mm guns bouncing off the front plate of Mark V tanks at 600
yards range'12 The whole report stressed that Panthers could
only be destroyed by American tanks at very close range or from
the flank, and that the bazooka (a hand-held recoilless rocket-
launcher) had so little penetration that American soldiers were
being trained to use captured German Panzerfaust anti-tank
weapons, which could penetrate far thicker armour.
Fearful that Montgomery
propaganda by
not
would add fuel to anti-British
attacking hard enough, a
problem
exacerbated by the American tank weaknesses, Eisenhower
wrote to him on 21 July: 'A few days ago I was extremely
hopeful and optimistic that at last we were going to roll up the
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
149
enemy. That did not come about? The letter demanded that
Dempsey should attack continuously in order to
open up
airfields and
gain ground in the east, thus relieving
one
American flank. Significantly, Eisenhower commented that he
knew that Montgomery was short of reinforcements, but he
hinted very strongly that the British and Canadians were not
pulling their weight: 'Eventually the USA ground strength will
necessarily be much greater than the British. While we have
equality in size we must go forward shoulder to shoulder with
honours and sacrifices equally shared. 13
On 21 July, Montgomery's Twenty-First Army Group Direc-
tive (M512) emphasised his policy of 'holding our left.' But
Eisenhower's letter, received later that day, alerted him to the
need to heed the Supreme Commander's wishes, and he replied;
'There is not, and never has been, any intention to stop offensive
operations on the eastern flank? Dempsey was regrouping prior
to another attack, he added - 'Does this above assure you that
we see eye to eye?'14
was by then on the brink of asking for Montgomery's dismissal.
During a half-hour conversation the American probed to find
out Churchill's reaction to such a course, only to discover that
the Prime Minister was now solidly on Montgomery's side. Next
morning Eisenhower told his naval aide, Captain Harry Butcher,
that Montgomery had sold the Prime Minister ' a bill of goods' at
his Normandy HQ, and that 'the P.M. is supremely happy with
the situation', 15 but he realised that no matter how maddening he
found Montgomery, he must live with him for the time being.
When,
later
that day, Tedder
offered to come
replacing Montgomery,
Eisenhower
told him
that
such
discussion would be fruitless in view of the Prime Minister's
attitude.
the German rear towards Coutances. 1,887 heavy and medium
bombers and 559 fighter-bombers, carrying between them more
than 4,000 tons of bombs, were to
blast a hole in the thin
German front line for American tanks to exploit. Unfortunately,
when 'Cobra' was postponed for the second time, from 24 to 25
