Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
signal to the Prime Minister was intended more as a subtle
reminder of his claims to command in North-West Europe than
an optimistic forecast of victories, and in the remaining weeks he
was to spend in Italy his enthusiasm waned fast.
Eighth Army Intelligence discovered that the Germans were
preparing defence positions at Termoli, behind the Biferno river.
Accordingly, Montgomery sent 78th Division ahead at top
speed and planned a daring commando raid from the sea with
over 1,000 men for 20 October. The raiders landed north of
Termoli behind the German positions almost without opposition
and swiftly captured the town; indeed, they achieved such
surprise that German lorries were still arriving in Termoli with
supplies after its capture and were ambushed one after another.
Kesselring counter-attacked the Termoli bridgehead with 16th
Panzer Division, equipped with Tiger tanks. The Germans had
practically broken through into Termoli when, after some
desperate fighting, and helped by reinforcements landed by sea,
the Eighth Army held them at the eleventh hour. The Germans
withdrew northwards to the River Trigno. Montgomery's
unusually bold tactics had paid off handsomely, though it had
been touch and go at Termoli. Hitler took a great interest in 16th
Panzer's counter-attack and was so cross at its failure that he
sacked the divisional commander, General Stettinius.
With Termoli in Eighth Army hands, the Foggia airfields,
captured by Eighth Army by 27 September, were now safe from
counter-attack and operational. Eighth Army regrouped, and
the RAF and USAAF sent floods of aeroplanes and supplies
into the Foggia airfields complex not only for tactical support of
the armies, but also for long-range bomber raids as far afield as
the Ploesti oilfields in Rumania.
The air forces made huge demands on shipping space for their
large-scale operations, and the supply services, now under the
mammoth Anglo-American HQ in Algiers, came under severe
stress.
AFHQ
was
inexperienced
and
inefficient,
and
Montgomery found his supply situation much more difficult
than in Africa and Sicily, when it had been under his own
control. He complained continuously, and became increasingly
unenthusiastic for the unglamorous role which lay ahead of him
up the Adriatic coast.
At the end of October, Montgomery decided that an extra
division would speed his advance. He wired Alexander on 29
Sicily and After
55
October
that he
needed
this reinforcement (Ist Infantry
Division) 'to smash through Sangro line and get to Pescara.
Definite limit to the distance I can go if resistance continues as
at present? He realised almost immediately that he had
insufficient supplies for these troops, and insufficient room to
deploy them on his single axis; two days later he
told de
Guingand to inform Alexander's HQ that he no longer required
an
extra division.46
This
sudden
change
of
mind is
uncharacteristic of Montgomery. Normally he was so incisive
and positive, but now the strain of fighting a long
winter
campaign against a determined enemy in the mountains was
telling upon him.
As the weather broke,
Eighth Army had to contend with
horrific mud, which covered the
roads and made them so
slippery that they became death traps for incautious drivers.
After hard fighting on the Trigno at the beginning of November,
Eighth Army reached the south banks of the Sangro by the
middle of the month. Now they faced the German winter Gustav
Line, and the daunting task of crossing the Sangro river, 400
feet wide in flood with a flat plain, 2,000 yards long, to the north
ending in a steep escarpment 150 feet high. Montgomery was to
have no more victories in the Mediterranean, and his heart was
no longer in the Italian campaign. Although Alexander, his
immediate superior, complied with his every request, he disliked
having equal status with Mark Clark, and had resented Rome,
Churchill's
title deeds to Italy', being allocated
to the
Americans.
On 18 November he wrote to the CIGS:
I am preparing a heavy blow on the Adriatic side. All I want
is good weather. I have gone all out for surprise and have
such strength
weather and dry ground under foot, I will hit the Boche a
crack that will be heard all over Italy ... I fear the Fifth Army
is absolutely whacked. So long as you fight an army in
combat teams and the
big idea is that everyone should
'combat' someone all the time you do not get very far. My
own observation leads me to the conclusion that Clark would
be only too delighted to be given quiet advice as to how to
fight his Army. I think he is a very decent chap and most co-
operative; if he received good and clear guidance he would do
