12
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
meanwhile those of us who knew about and took part in the
Second World War are growing older.
I have thus not read Montgomery's so-called diary for the
period covered by this book. I have not missed much. Lt-Col
Christopher (Kit) Dawnay,* who was Montgomery's Military
Assistant from shortly after the Normandy landings until the
end of the war, told me that his general was too busy to write a
daily diary. Instead he instructed Dawnay to keep a series of
Twenty-First Army Group files giving a description of the main
events and Montgomery's reasons for his decisions; the result
was known as 'the Log'. Dawnay had frequent conferences with
his commander on what to insert and how to phrase it, but the
whole record was in fact written by Dawnay in the third person.
In addition, these files contain duplicates of important letters
written by Montgomery and Eisenhower, and of key directives.
There were at least six copies of the Log, and the Prime
Minister, the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, and the
Secretary of State for War were each sent one. There are copies
in the Dawnay archives, in Churchill College, Cambridge, and
in the Public Record
Office. At other
periods of his life
Montgomery wrote a daily diary, but for the North-West
Europe campaign his 'diary' probably consists of inserts added
after the war to the Log kept by Dawnay. Extracts referred to as
'diary entries' in his post-war books do not correspond exactly
with the Log.
Brigadier Sir Edgar (Bill) Williams, Montgomery's head of
Intelligence, helped his chief with his memoirs, and rewrote
substantial chunks from drafts in the Field-Marshal's own
handwriting. Normally, Bill Williams told me, Montgomery
would accept his alterations, but when there were queries he
would
never produce his sources.
According to Williams,
Montgomery's diaries would tend to show history as he would
like it to be written, not as it actually was. Williams continued:
My chief interest in the Montgomery diaries when they are
eventually released would be to see what boasts Montgomery
made about events in which he and I were intimately involved
together. Kit Dawnay told me that Montgomery always wanted
the Log written to show events as he liked to view them in
retrospect.
* He was Montgomery's G (Ops) officer at Twenty-First Army Group Tac
HQ, and was in charge of the liaison officers and the whole of Tac HQ.
Foreword
13
The Eighth Army files for the period I have covered are
reasonably complete, but the Twenty-First Army Group files
have been ravaged; I suspect that the Field-Marshal was
partially responsible. After all, Winston Churchill, when Prime
Minister after the war, gave Montgomery virtual approval when
he defended him for keeping the original Lüneburg surrender
document. In the House of Commons Churchill refused to take
complaints about this 'liberation' seriously, saying: 'If such
trophies became the personal property of the Commander-in-
Chief in the field it would be an incentive to all young officers in
the British Army? He went on to tell the late Dick Stokes,
Labour MP for Ipswich, that if he (Stokes) had secured the
surrender of half a million enemies 'he could keep the receipt for
the transaction, but I can assure the House there is no chance of
anything like that happening' (Hansard, 17.6.1954, Col. 2277).
Fortunately, however, I have found the key records missing
from the Twenty-First Army Group archives by searching in the
files of other British formations and of SHAEF at the PRO, or
in American archives and other archives at home.
I have unearthed a great number of Montgomery's letters and
notes, mostly in his own handwriting. I have quoted copiously
from these both because they reveal him as a man, and because
they give the background to his often crucial decisions far better
than his own post-war writing and speeches. His letters, notes
and orders written in the heat of battle show dramatically his
frame of mind at the time, and the considerations behind his
actions and decisions.
His
sometimes
inflammatory
correspondence
with
Eisenhower, much of which I have reproduced, demonstrates
the at times bitter hostility between them. These internecine
quarrels
threatened the
Anglo-American
alliance,
and the
enmity between Twenty-First Army Group and the War Office,
on the one hand, and SHAEF on the other, has never been fully
underlined before. I have not taken sides, but have produced the
facts for the reader
to make his own judgement on the
controversy. Nevertheless, I feel that the contrast between
Montgomery's clear views on how the war should be conducted
and Eisenhower's compromise and lack of decision emerges
very clearly from their letters.
I give my sincere thanks to David Montgomery, the present
