388
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
no more enquiries on that line.
After a spell of lovely weather it is now cold and wet
and altogether very unpleasant. I hope it will clear up before
tonight.
Yours ever,
B.L. Montgomery
P.S. Since writing the above I have had a wire from Ike about
Lubeck. I enclose his wire and my answer.5o
Eisenhower's wire, passed on to Simpson, took the form of a
letter, and was copied to Brooke at the War Office. It read:
Dear Monty,
All our plans have agreed on the tremendous importance of
anchoring our flank on Lubeck as quickly as possible. I know
that you fully appreciate the importance of this matter in the
mind of the Prime Minister. I note in this morning's briefing
that the front around Stettin is, as we anticipated, growing
fluid. This re-emphasizes the need for rapidity. While I realize
that you are straining every nerve to move as quickly as you
can, I want you to let me know instantly if any slowness on
the part of the U.S. corps assigned to your command might
hold up your plans for a day or even an hour. I am informed
here that additional logistic support promised your army
group is fully forthcoming. This
headquarters will do
anything at all that is possible to help you insure the speed
and the success of the operation.
As ever,
Ike
Montgomery replied on the same day with a letter marked
"Top Secret', 'Personal', and 'Eyes Only for Eisenhower':
Dear Ike,
I have your signal of today's date. I have always realised
the great importance of getting quickly up to the Elbe and
crossing it without delay, and it was for this purpose that I
issued my signal of March 28.
That plan could not be implemented quickly as you took
the 9th Army away from me on April 1 and left me very weak
in the north. The whole tempo of operations in the north
Eisenhower's Revenge
389
slowed down after that and I did the best I could with what I
had left.
We have had some heavy fighting against some fanatical
resistance. It is not easy to recover lost time. You can rely on
me and my troops to do everything that is possible to get to
Lubeck as quickly as we can.
Yours ever,
Monty.51
Having written this relatively mild reply to Eisenhower,
Montgomery let off steam by dictating a note for the Log full of
resentment at Eisenhower's behaviour.
The following is an
extract:
Note by the Field-Marshal
on 27th April 1945
1. This has been a very difficult period.
2. The ship very nearly went on the rocks ...
The reason for Eisenhower's plan was the old business
of command; Bradley did not want the Ninth Army to stay
under me; the anti-British party at SHAEF felt the same; they
were all quite prepared to adopt an unsound plan in order to
satsify national considerations and public opinion ...
3. ... Eisenhower gave way to pressure from Bradley and
the SHAEF party, and he removed the Ninth Army from 21
plan adopted
consulting me, and the staff at SHAEF had not considered
the repercussions of the plan on operations in the north. The
British Group of Armies struggled on with what it had got,
but the whole tempo of the operations became slowed up ...
4. ... Eisenhower produced a new plan [15 April 1945] ...
again I was not consulted, and again the Staff at SHAEF had
not considered the repercussions on my operations in the
I immediately had to represent to SHAEF that I would
be able to carry out my task with great difficulty and very
slowly.
The only alternative was to give me less frontage on the
ELBE, and at once to give me some American divisions.
SHAEF became very alarmed and gave me what I asked ...
5. The net result of all this was a definite danger that the
