274
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
American Army under Monty. If it is the best way to get the
Ruhr and thus win the war, the chips can then fall as they will'
On the day before, 21 September, Montgomery had sent this
personal note to Bedell Smith:
I consider the organisation for command control of the
operation to capture the Ruhr is not satisfactory. It is a task
for one man and he should have the operational control and
direction of all the forces involved. To achieve success the
tactical battle will require very tight control and very careful
handling. I recommend the Supreme Commander hands the
job over to me and gives me operational control over First US
Army. "1
It says a great deal for Bedell Smith's tolerance
of
Montgomery at this time that he took this arrogant message so
well, and was himself prepared to agree to an extension of
Montgomery's command to include US First Army.
to Simpson's
Guingand's
persuasiveness, the conference decided exactly as Montgomery
had hoped. That evening (22 September) a happy de Guingand
signalled his chief that the conference had given 100% support.
Paragraph IV of the minutes of the Versailles conference
shows how completely Eisenhower endorsed Montgomery's
Minutes of Meeting held in the War Room
SHAEF Forward at 14.30 22nd September 1944.
IV - ADJUSTMENT OF THE BOUNDARY BETWEEN
21ST AND 12TH ARMY GROUPS
General de Guingand outlined the 21st Army Group plan
for attacking the RUHR from the north and pointed out the
necessity
for
employing
three Corps in that effort.
inquired into the practicability of the 12th Army
Group
taking over the sector occupied by the BRITISH 8th Corps.
General Bradley outlined his views as to various solutions
which were practicable.
The Supreme Commander approved the following:
a. The envelopment of the RUHR from the north by 21st
Army Group, supported by Ist Army, is the main effort of
the present phase of operations.
After Arnhem
275
b. The boundary between 21st and 12th Army Groups
to be HASSELT
- WEERT - ASTEN
DEURNE
VENRAY - MAASHEES, all inclusive to 12th Army Group.
Effective date of alteration and detailed boundary to be
settled between 12th and 21st Army Groups.
c. General Bradley to bring up two divisions as quickly as
possible to take over the sector now held by 8th Corps.
General Bradley hoped to complete this in about ten (10)
days.
d. (1) 12th Army Group to continue its thrust so far as
current resources
permit towards COLOGNE and 12th
Army Group
will
be prepared to seize
any
favourable
opportunity of crossing the RHINE and attacking the RUHR
from the south in concert with 21st Army Group's attack on
the RUHR from the north when the maintenance situation
permits.
(2) The commander of 12th Army Group will take no
more aggressive action than is permitted by the maintenance
situation after the full requirements of the main effort have
been met.
Next morning, Bedell Smith handed de Guingand a copy of
the minutes for him to take back to Twenty-First Army Group,
but the latter responded by telling the American that, in his view,
the instructions in IV d. were not strong enough to stop Bradley
indulging in further attacks in order to consume resources, and
thus force
Eisenhower to support the American front.
The
original draft of IV d. (2) read: '
... 12th Army Group to remain
on the defensive on the remainder of the front [that is, apart from
aiding Twenty-First Army Groupl until logistical considerations
permit a more active policy? In his own handwriting de Guingand
been met.'12
This amendment
of the main effort have
between Bedell Smith and de Guingand.
