188
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Montgomery had little idea that these factors were already
weighing upon Eisenhower's mind. He planned to railroad a
reluctant Supreme Commander into accepting his point of view
by a combination of military arguments and his own strong
personality and reputation as a battle-winning general.
Bedell Smith arrived with Eisenhower but, to the latter's
indignation, Montgomery insisted on excluding him from the
conference, although he retained de Guingand. Montgomery
began the meeting with a lecture in his usual Staff College style.
Then, after describing his plan and the supply back-up it would
need, he remarked that 'The immediate need is for a firm and
sound plan,' and asserted that if Eisenhower's plan was followed
it would lead to 'failure' - You must not descend into the land
battle and become a ground C-in-C. The Supreme Commander
must sit on a lofty perch to be able to take a detached view of
the whole intricate problem which involves land, sea, air, civil
control and political problems, and someone else must run the
battle for him? Eisenhower replied. that both because of his
instructions from Washington and of American public opinion,
he had no alternative but to take command of the land battle. At
this point Montgomery realised that his retention of overall
command was a lost cause. Almost desperately, he
told
Eisenhower that he was willing to serve under Bradley because it
was so vital that there should be unified control. The American
interrupted him, however, saying that the argument was at an
end and that he, Eisenhower would definitely assume personal
control on 1 September.
Frustrated in his
attempts to resolve the command
controversy, Montgomery now tackled Eisenhower again over
plans. He asked for Patton to be halted, and for all his US Third
Army's supplies to be cut off and transferred to Twenty-First
Army Group for its advance. He also asked for the use of First
Airborne Army (the SHAEF strategic reserve) and for US First
Army to be put under his command for the drive to Antwerp,
explaining that he would have to shed the Canadians en route in
order to capture the Channel ports, where the Germans had left
strong garrisons. His arguments were, however, weakened to a
certain extent because the British forces crossed the Seine four
days behind Patton, a cause for unfavourable comparison.
After an hour's argument Eisenhower conceded some points
to Montgomery not so much because he was impressed with the
Eisenhower Takes Command
189
cogency of the latter's arguments, but because he had come to
the conference with his mind partly made up to give temporary
priority to the northern drive because of the importance of
capturing ports and overrunning the V2 launching sites.
Finally, the Supreme Commander told Montgomery that he
would issue a SHAEF directive
giving
Twenty-First Army
Group the task of pushing on to Antwerp, and thence eastwards
to the Ruhr.
Bradley would
be
ordered to
advance
on
Montgomery's right, his 'principal offensive mission'
being to
support the British commander. Montgomery would be given
First Airborne Army (consisting of one British and two US
airborne
divisions),
and also
the "authority to
effect the
necessary operational co-ordination' between his right and US
First Army.
An exasperated Montgomery expressed his frustrations, with
his usual clarity, in a letter he dictated to Brooke as soon as
Eisenhower had left his caravan:
Ike came to see me today. After a long and weary discussion
he agreed on our left flank we must clear the channel coast
and establish a powerful Air Force in Belgium and invade
Ruhr. He also considers it necessary to invade Saar and
would like to split the force. After
further discussion he
agreed that left flank movement must be strong enough to
achieve quick success and it was then suggested there would
not (repeat not) be enough left over for Saar operations at
present. The problem of Command and control was then
discussed. It seems public opinion in America
demands
Bradley shall hold his command directly under Ike and shall
not be (repeat not be) subordinated to me. I said that left flank
operations into Belgium and beyond would require careful
coordination and control and that one Commander must do
this.
This
was finally agreed. Bedell came with Ike but I
insisted that Ike must settle big points with me alone and
Bedell was excluded. They have now both gone off to draft a
directive as a result of our conversation.
I think discussion
was valuable and cleared the air and there is a good hope that
directive will be what is wanted. The draft is to be shown to
me before it is issued. It has been a very exhausting day.
On the
next
day, 24 August, Eisenhower
wrote to
