344
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
There is no question, of course, as to the good work that
Alexander could do. I admire him and regard him as a great
friend. One of the things that has caused me some concern is
to provide for all of the liberated countries and people of
Western Europe a decent living standard, and, where this is
not possible, to keep them convinced that we are doing
everything humanly possible to
meet their requirements.
Many of our current problems in liberated manpower, relief,
rearmament, and so on, will influence Allied relationships, far
into the future. As the Prime Minister brought out when we
had our great struggle concerning the bombing of French
communication systems, Great Britain is much more closely
concerned, at least geographically, than is the United States
in the development and maintenance of friendly relations with
the peoples of Western Europe.
Because of these reasons I have recently directed that my
present Deputy be brought into these matters more and more
closely and to examine carefully everything that is done
currently, and with respect to future plans, to assure these
things are handled sanely and skilfully. This is a job for the
senior British Officer present in my headquarters, and I shall
expect Alexander to concern himself in them very intimately.
Naturally, it will be a great pleasure to me to discuss every
type of problem I have with a man of his stature and
experience. I do not want this letter to be interpreted as a
protest against any arrangements my superiors may find it
necessary to make. But it is one of my principal jobs
occurs that may
misunderstandings within my own command, or to mar the
generally splendid British-American relationships that we try
to promote. Unless all concerned, including Alexander, are
perfectly aware of these implications, difficulties of this nature
may arise. Consequently, I will be very glad if you will make
certain that both the Prime Minister and Alexander are
informed as to my views and intentions so that the perfection
of cooperation, which is the secret of every success we have
had, may be fully preserved.
If you think it advisable, either or both of them may read
this letter, since I am certain that both will understand it
merely represents on my part an attempt to be perfectly
straightforward in a matter which is almost certain to have its
345
Rows Over Strategy
delicate aspects.
With personal regard.
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower'
Brooke immediately showed this letter to Churchill, who was
annoyed by it, and especially by the suggestion that Alexander
would be chiefly concerned with the living standards of the
people of the liberated countries, rather than with the conduct of
the battle against Nazism.
Eisenhower's reference to possibly
damaging newspaper reaction also disturbed the Prime Minister,
although he probably did not realise that bringing up again the
question of Montgomery's injudicious
January
press
conference was a measure
how
upset
the
Supreme
Commander was. Churchill immediately dictated an irate letter
to Eisenhower, in which he said:
...In that spirit I placed Alexander under you in the Tunisia
operations although I think we had four times as many troops
engaged as the Americans.
Similarly I was
delighted to
propose the appointment of General Mark Clark to the
Command of the 15th Army Group where we also had a
large preponderance of British or British controlled troops. 1ยบ
In the letter he actually sent two days later, on 22 February, the
Prime Minister cut out these phrases as being too strong, but
made it clear that he would
not abandon the proposal even
though he was shocked at the idea of Alexander being used for
non-military functions'. The letter also gives the impression that
Churchill was prepared to railroad the change though, in spite of
Eisenhower's objections (General Simpson told me that the
latter admitted to him more than once that he was frightened of
Churchill).
The
Prime Minister followed
up
the letter with a
signal saying that he would personally use his influence with the
Fleet Street newspaper proprietors to prevent any news of the
changeover in command or of the five divisions coming from
Italy to North-West Europe from being published for six weeks,
the
period
set by Marshall and
Roosevelt before Alexander
could assume his new post. The signal read:
Personal from Prime Minister to General Eisenhower. Not
