434
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
invasion. Thereafter the advance into Germany will not be as
rapid as it was in France, because we won't have the F.F.I.
[Forces françaises de l'intérieur - the Resistance] in the
German rear, but I doubt that there will be another full-
dress battle involved. The big crash to start that move may
prove to be a rather tough affair.
Recently
Spaatz
received
a message
from
Arnold*
suggesting the desirability of moving
a lot of our heavy
bombers to France immediately. This is simply beyond the
realm of feasibility
at the moment. Big bombers can still
operate effectively from England and we need every ton of
space and every bit of port capacity to get in the things that
the ground troops and their shorter range air support units
require. This will continue to be true for an indefinite period.
Sincerely,
Ike®
On 28 November 1944 Montgomery and Eisenhower had a
discussion at Twenty-First Army Group Tac HQ at Zondhoven,
after which Eisenhower
stayed the night.
Commander listened patiently to Montgomery's demand for one
land
and the latter took
Eisenhower's silence for agreement, although Dawnay warned
him later that in fact he was far from agreeing. Two days later
Montgomery put his suggestions in writing, saying, among other
things: 'We have failed... Bradley and I make a good team ... to
be certain of success you want to bring us together and one of us
should have full operational control north of the Ardennes, and if
you decide I should do the work that is OK by me. He also asked
for another conference with Eisenhower, suggesting that their
respective Chiefs of Staff should be present but forbidden to
speak. Eisenhower was furious, and wrote the following letter:
Dear Monty
1 December 1944
From my personal knowledge of appointments early next
week, it appears to me that our conference will have to be
operating against Germany;
* General Carl Spaatz commanded the US Strategic Bombing Force
General of the US Army Air Force.
General Henry Arnold was Commanding
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents
435
held on Thursday
morning, possibly about 10:30. I will
confirm details later.
At first I thought no more detailed answer was necessary
to your letter, merely leaving the various subjects to be
discussed at our conference. However, you have stated your
conception of the points that were 'agreed upon' during our
conversation, whereas there are certain things in your letter in
which I do not concur. Your letter does state your conception
and opinions as presented to me the other evening.
I am not
quite sure I know exactly
what you mean by
strategic reverse; certainly to date we have failed to achieve all
that we had hoped to by this time,
which hopes and plans
were based
upon conditions as we knew them or estimated
them when the plans were made.
The Ruhr is an important
place, but let us never forget for one second that our primary
objective is to defeat the German forces that are barring our
way into Germany. The Ruhr itself was always given
as a
geographical objective,
only
for
its importance
to
Germany, but because it was believed that in that region the
German forces would be largely concentrated to meet our
attacks.
Specifically, I agree to the following:
a. We must determine how much profit there is in the
continuation of our current attacks in the 12th Army Group,
and whether they give real promise of reaching the Rhine.
b. We must recast our future general plans in the light of
conditions as they now exist.
c. We must chose [sic] the best line of attack to assure
success, including the maintenance of deception lines.
I also stated that from my personal viewpoint, it would be
simpler
for me to have the battle zone divided into two
general sectors, in each of which one individual, could achieve
close battle coordination. I expressed some doubt whether
this zone should be divided on the basis of our rear areas or
on the basis of natural lines of advance into Germany. There
was some question in my mind whether the Ardennes or the
Ruhr should mark the dividing line, if such a plan should be
adopted.
do
not agree that things have gone badly since
Normandy, merely because we have not gained all we had
hoped to gain. In fact, the situation is somewhat analogous to
