72
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
and he sought to dispel their gloom by instilling a revivalist
fervour. In this he was right, for morale in Britain was low.
The home army - which was chiefly British Second Army -
was frustrated. It had spent four years in training, yet was
untried in battle. A small proportion were survivors from the
Dunkirk fiasco, and memories of that 1940 disaster still loomed
large throughout the army, fuelled by these veterans. The best
divisions had toiled away too long at exercises which produced
only artificially the atmosphere of war. There were, too, many
veterans of the First World War, unable to understand why they
had won in 1918 and then been defeated in 1940; younger men
were puzzled why their own generation had lost all the land
battles until Alamein in 1942. Those senior officers who were
survivors of the First War bored and horrified their juniors with
reminiscences of trench warfare, which seemed entirely out of
date to young men now expert in mobile warfare, tank movements
and RAF support.
Now, in Montgomery, they saw a survivor of the First World
War who had mastered the art of modern warfare, and who had
won his battles against the Germans. They felt he knew how to
use in action the modern technology in which they had been
training for so long, and that he had the authority and
knowledge to lead them to victory over Hitler's armies, armies
that had been invincible until they had crumbled before this
same commander in Africa. And, instead of going to France, as
in 1940, with bayonets to face men with sub-machine-guns and
feeble Boys anti-tank rifles to fire uselessly against armour, here
was a properly equipped, well-trained army which would sweep
all before it. This was the message Montgomery put over, and he
did a magnificent job in raising morale just when it was essential
to do so.
So popular did Montgomery become as a result of his tours
that Churchill and other politicians worried that he might
become almost a military dictator, for he addressed factory
workers as well as soldiers. The BBC cut down his invitations to
speak, and unofficial messages were sent to ask him to stop his
tours. He refused. He knew he was doing good, and that the
assault would test the morale of the troops. He had confidence in
his staff, and felt that the best use of his time was to make
personal appearances so as to get to know the commanders and
to inspire his soldiers.
Montgomery and the Invasion
73
Early in March he visited the Polish Army in Scotland, but
here his address did not go down so well. Several of those
present on that day have told me they regretted that he said
nothing about liberating Poland and that they did not like his
remark 'together we shall kill a lot of Germans'. Many of the
Polish soldiers had been German or Austrian citizens themselves
before the war and although they were vehemently anti-Nazi, they
had many German relations and friends.
In a letter dated 14 March to General Casimir Sosnkowski,
C-in-C of the Polish Army, Montgomery wrote about the visit:
'I met quite a number of men who had fought against me in the
Africa Corps under Rommel; I now know why the Africa Corps
was so good.' This was tactless. Only 400 were recruits from
North African POW camps, and
these mostly came from
Silesia - a part of Poland which Hitler had incorporated in
the German Reich, and where young men of conscript age
were forced to join the German Army under threat of reprisals
against their families. They had been, for the Nazis, anyway,
unwilling warriors who contributed little or nothing to Rommel's
effectiveness.?
A few weeks, later Montgomery again revealed himself to the
Poles in a poor light. General Sonkowski had told the War
Office that he would only put the Polish Parachute Brigade at
*the disposal of the Supreme Allied Commander for operations
in Western Europe
provided it would be
withdrawn
if it
sustained 25 per cent casualties, which would endanger its use in
Poland, and that it must not be used with Twenty-First Army
Group if 'an opportunity arose for its employment in Poland'.
Sosnkowski wrote that he feared high casualties might reduce its
effectiveness to that of one battalion, just at the very moment
when the Brigade will be badly needed in Poland'. Brooke, as
CIGS, was prepared to agree, but as soon as Montgomery heard
of these reservations he wrote this unattractive letter to Simpson,
the Director of Military Operations at the War Office:
20th March 1944
Freddie [de Guingand] has shown me your letter of the
19th March, and enclosures,
referring to the Polish Para
Brigade. I have decided to answer you myself as I feel very
strongly in this matter.
