130
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
armour';41 he did not bring his division into action until 1930.
Maj-Gen 'Pip' Roberts told me that at 1130 Brigadier Hinde,
commanding 7th Armoured Division's Armoured Brigade, came
up to his tank and said 'There are far too many bloody tanks
milling around here. I am not going to advance until you have
taken Couverville and Demouville.' Hinde stayed put until later
in the day, according to Roberts.
By nightfall, Montgomery had lost 1,500 men and 200 tanks.
All he had gained was a small bridgehead east of the Orne to a
depth of six miles, and a wider base at Caen. In spite of the
greatest air support and the largest British tank attack of the
war, no more ground was gained after 1100 on 18 July.
At 1620 Montgomery, completely misinformed about the true
situation, signalled the CIGS: 'Operations a complete success,
have ordered armoured cars to reconnoitre towards and secure
crossings over dykes between Mesidon and Falaise. Situation
very promising. Few enemy tanks met so far and no mines. It was
all untrue. The Times carried these headlines: '2ND ARMY
BREAKS THROUGH. Armed forces reach open country.
Montgomery well satisfied [19 July]. Wide corridor through
German front [20 July)?
How Montgomery could have been so wide of the mark has
never been explained. His liaison officers must have been
misinformed, although Pip Roberts told me that none of them
got near him. His misleading communiqué did his reputation
considerable harm when the true situation was revealed, and
provided his critics with useful ammunition, while a statement he
made to the BBC was equally ill advised, ending as it did,
•General Montgomery is well satisfied with the progress made in
the first day's fighting of the battle? Yet on the far side of the
Bourguebus Ridge the enemy defences had survived the
bombing intact.
Montgomery had arranged with Bradley that the major
American offensive to the west (codenamed 'Cobra') should also
start on 20 July, but unfortunately, the attack was postponed
and did not start until 25 July. Montgomery later admitted that
he had
been
"too
exuberant' at
his
"Goodwood'
press
conference. 42 He felt that 'Goodwood' and 'Cobra' were one big
operation; he wanted to make the Germans feel they must keep
their armour on the British front, and did not realise that he was
giving a hostage to fortune by exaggerating the first day's gains.
Normandy Assault
131
would have had much less ammunition.
Pip Roberts recalled the first day of 'Goodwood' to me:
VIII Corps. My orders were to establish my
had to capture Cagny, close to the start line.
further forward
with me?' O'Connor replied that Monty
would not hear of 5lst Highland Divsion getting out of their
trenches because that might put our tiny but vital bridgehead
over the Orne in jeopardy, and this faced the finest tank going
in all Normandy. O'Connor told me if I did not want to lead,
another division could go, so I accepted the plan.
In the event
we made a good start behind a creeping
barrage, but as soon as we got out of range of our own field
guns the Germans came to after the bombardment, and I had
to use my own infantry to take Coumerville St Honoré and
If we could have kept our own infantry with us we might
have got further, but we had no chance of a break-out to the
south of Bourguebus Ridge because the German defences
were ten miles in depth. The trouble was the Germans came
to after the air bombardment too
quickly, and I could not
silence their anti-tank
weapons further forward
with my
infantry bogged down miles away from my objectives. It was
a grave drawback
that
infantry
belonging
to
armoured
divisions had to travel in soft lorries. My only alternative
would have been to put them on top of tanks - not feasible at
'Goodwood' in face of the German guns.*
* During 'Goodwood', an armoured division would have had four infantry
