248
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
about whether or where his troops landed, and relied on me at
21 Army Group HQ for information.' He made the point that
'Ist Airborne Divisions's communications systems remained
dead, and no one has found out what their senior signals director
was doing from D-day until D-plus-4'; his conclusion was that
Urquart failed to appreciate the over-riding importance of
radio communications, and lacked expert professional signal
advice'. He maintained that Urquhart understood neither the
importance of, nor what top priority had to be given to, radio
and WT communications in air landings, although he had been a
"splendid infantry commander' - but Belchem thought that
artillery or tank units understood the need for radio links far
better than the infantry, even at this late stage of the war. And
shortly before his death Belchem wrote to General Richardson:
Can you imagine that you or I would have conceived a
seaborne or airborne operation without insisting on a deputy for
all key commanders?'12
General Poett disagrees strongly with Belchem about the need
for a deputy, however. He told me that it was just a waste of a
good man and 'a rotten frustrating job': 'For the D-Day landings
I refused a Deputy Brigade Commander and I was sorry for the
Deputy Commander of the other Brigade in 6th Airborne
Division who had no real job on D-Day.
After the war, Montgomery always claimed that 'full success'
at Arnhem was denied to him because of bad weather preventing
the planned build-up of forces. Belchem and others who helped
Montgomery with the writing of his reminise others wad that he
would never discuss the rights and wrongs of the Arnhem
operation.
In his books and post-war lectures Montgomery overlooked
the fact that neither he, nor anyone else at Twenty-First Army
Group, realised in time that, by sending Ist Airborne in two
drops to DZs eight miles from the objective, not only was the
fighting force halved on landing, but it was in fact reduced to a
quarter because half of the initial force successfully landed had
to stay eight miles from the Arnhem bridge to guard DZs for the
second lift. Once Montgomery had agreed to two lifts
successive days, instead of all on D-day, he ruined his chances
of victory. Ronald Lewin rightly points out that out of some
10,000 men of Ist Airborne Division landed near Arnhem, only
about 700 reached the bridge, the focus of the whole operation. 13
Arnhem
249
The same handicap was an important factor in preventing
US
82nd Airborne from capturing the Nijmegen Bridge before
Guards Armoured arrived.
Belchem, in a correspondence with Williams, contradicted
and effectively
demolished Montgomery's assertion that the
weather can be blamed for the failure:
Weather conditions greatly hampered air co-operation and air
delivery, but this was not the principal shortcoming. On some
occasions when the Allied tactical air force was standing by
to take off to support the land troops, it remained grounded
because the air force ground controller accompanying the
foremost elements lost radio contact with his air force base.
This was an additional planning failure. The possibility that
air supply drops might have to be changed in the course of
operations was overlooked. An experienced planning staff
would have organised a ground signal procedure indicating
the change of dropping zone.
These procedures would, of
course, be independent of radio or WT failures. No such
arrangements were considered, and much of the drops fell'
behind German lines and many air crew were lost trying to
supply Ist Airborne.14
Another major, avoidable, problem noted both by Belchem
and by Chester Wilmot was that, for XXX Corps, the traffic
congestion was much worse than it need have been because it
was never realised that the road verges were not mined by the
Germans - two additional traffic lanes could have been in use if
the verges had been driven over. No mine clearance notices were
put up, and bottlenecks would have been avoided if the drivers
had known they could use the verges. On one afternoon Chester
Wilmot drove for miles on the verge past stationary traffic in
order to file his copy, yet it took 43rd Division seventy-two
hours to drive fifty-five miles in trucks to reach Nijmegen on
Wednesday. They were better off on foot. No blame can be put
on Montgomery for the failure to fix 'mines swept' notices on the
verges, which was a matter for divisional staff, and the signals'
failure, the choice of dropping zones, and the failure to give
priority to Nijmegen bridge are
indictments of Allied First
Airborne Army, not Montgomery's Twenty-First Army Group.
Similarly, the blame for the failure to react correctly to available
