382
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
According to Simpson, Tedder went back to Rheims 'not only
confused, but battered'; the Air Chief Marshal made no reference
to these incidents in his autobiography, despite its title - With
Prejudice
Churchill
now
vigorously took
up
the cudgels
for
Montgomery.
Worried
by
Russian intentions,
the
Prime
Minister desperately wanted Allied troops to take Berlin, and
knew that the logical advance upon the German capital was by
Twenty-First Army Group from the north. On 29 March he had
telephoned Eisenhower and emphasised the political importance
of Allied troops taking Berlin as a counter-balance to the
imminent Russian occupation of Vienna (although that city was
not eventually captured until 13 April). On the next day he
followed up his telephone call with a signal:
Withdrawal of 9th US Army from 21 Army Group may
stretch Montgomery's front so widely that his offensive role
may peter out ... I do not consider myself Berlin has lost its
military and certainly not its political significance .. While
Berlin remains under German flag it is the most decisive point
in Germany ... I prefer the plan on which we crossed the
Rhine, namely that the 9th US Army should march with 21
Army Group to the Elbe and beyond to Berlin.
Churchill had sent a similar message to Roosevelt.
The
American President had been gravely ill and exhausted since the
Yalta Conference in February, and as a result Marshall had
taken over the reins of military affairs. The latter was backing
Eisenhower to the hilt, and Churchill was therefore rebuffed. But
on 2 April the Prime Minister had tried again with Eisenhower,
writing: 'I deem it highly important that we should shake hands
with the Russians as far east as possible, and
reminding the
Supreme Commander that Tedder, the senior British officer at
SHAEF, had neither been informed of, nor consulted about, the
signal to Stalin.39 Eisenhower had made his decision, however,
and would not yield an inch, even to the sometimes domineering
and intimidating Churchill.
This last rebuff tipped the balance. With the American forces
in Europe outnumbering the British by almost two to one,
Churchill sensibly realised that, in this hour of victory, he had
fired his last shot in defence of Montgomery. He therefore wrote
Eisenhower's Revenge
383
to Eisenhower, concluding his letter: 'All this business is settling
down quite satisfactorily,
' and added in a letter to Roosevelt:
'Changes have turned out to be very much less than we first
supposed. My
relations with General Eisenhower are of the
most friendly character.
In the meantime Bradley had been urging
Eisenhower to
withdraw US Ninth Army from Montgomery as soon as was
practicable, rather than desirable. Bradley was also strongly
opposed to capturing Berlin, for he knew that if the Allies
adopted such a plan, then Montgomery would need US Ninth
Army, and that in turn would mean halting Patton at Leipzig.
Alone amongst the Americans Lt-Gen Bill Simpson, whose army
was the subject of the controversy, wanted to go to Berlin, and he
was in any case less 'anti-Monty' than the other US commanders.
Simpson's view, expressed later, was that when his Ninth Army
crossed the Elbe on 12 April, forty-eight miles from Berlin, he
could have been in Berlin in a day and a half because 'German
resistance was non-existent. There was none.
An important factor in the decision to leave Berlin to the
Russians was that SHAEF had become obsessed by intelligence
(false, as it turned out) that Hitler was preparing a last-stand
redoubt in the Alps, on the Italian-Austrian frontier. A SHAEF
Intelligence Report of 10 March 1945 read:
There have been numerous reports that Hitler and his Nazi
leaders supported by SS units, young Nazi fanatics and
Quislings, are planning to make a last stand in the so-called
redoubt in western Austria ...
it is unlikely that large scale
preparations for organised military resistance are being made.
We should therefore be prepared to undertake operations
in southern Germany in
order to overcome rapidly any
organised resistance
by the German armed forces or by
guerilla movements which have retreated to the inner zone
and to this redoubt.
And on 25 March the G2 sections of US Seventh Army had
concluded that there was hard evidence that Hitler intended a
final stand in an Alpine redoubt.41 Even the shrewd Kenneth
Strong, sceptical about the strength of the redoubt, nevertheless
believed that Hitler would try to create the legend of a fighting,
unconquered, immortal Nazism, a legend that would one day
