204
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
OPLADEN (on the RHINE) - WARBURG -
BRUNSWICK
Canadian Army
5. Canadian Army will clear the coastal belt, and will then
remain in the general area BRUGES-CALAIS until the
maintenance situation allows of its employment further
forward.
Second Army
On 6 September, the Army will advance eastwards with
bodies from the
ANTWERP. Before that date light forces will operate far
7. The western face of the RUHR between DUSSELDORF
and DUISBERG will be threatened frontally.
The main weight of the Army will be directed on the
RHINE between WESEL and ARNHEM.
The RUHR will be by-passed round its northern face,
and cut off by a southward thrust through HAMM.
9. One division, or if necessary a Corps, will be turned
northwards towards ROTTERDAM and AMSTER-
10. Having crossed the RHINE, the Army will deal with the
be directed
on
the
general area
OSNABRUCK-HAMM-MUNSTER-RHEINE.
Operations of 12 Army Group
11. First US Army is being directed to move its left forward
in conjunction with the advance of 21 Army Group.
12. First US Army is directing its left two Corps (7 and 19)
on:
MAASTRICHT-LIEGE
SITTARD-AACHEN
COLOGNE-BONN
13. First US Army will assist in cutting off the RUHR by
operations against its south-eastern face, if such action is
desired by Second Army.
205
Over the Seine
General
14. The Belgian and Dutch Contingents will be transferred at
once from Canadian Army to Second Army.
15.
The Armies of the Allies
will
soon
be
entering
Germany; we shall then be in an enemy country, and
must expect that the inhabitants will be hostile and
possibly treacherous. Care will be necessary, and all
officers and men will be warned to guard against spies,
gestapo agents and treachery.
B.L. Montgomery
Field Marshal,
C-in-C,
21 Army Group.
Although it is not stated in this directive, Montgomery
intended to
use airborne troop drops in his advance to the
Rhine. Even as news reached him on 4 September from XXX
Corps that 3rd Royal Tank Regiment and 23rd Hussars,
together with 8th Rifle Brigade, had entered Antwerp but had
been unable to prevent harbour demolitions, a sure guide to the
trouble that was to follow, Montgomery wrote to the CIGS: I
intend to advance on Wesel and Arnhem (main Rhine bridges)
and want to drop Ist British Airborne Divisions and Polish
Airborne Brigade between Wesel and Arnhem.' So great was his
optimism at this time that he wrote to Simpson that he expected
to be in Berlin in two to three weeks.
There was by now considerable euphoria in the Allied camp.
The then Brigadier Charles Richardson, BGS, Plans at Twenty-
First Army Group HQ, sent the following signal from Main to
Tac HQ on 11 September: 'If Germany should not surrender
when Second Army reaches Osnabruck I suggest Arnhem is the
most suitable location for our HQ after Brussels provided not
destroyed in battle. If damaged I recommend we should move to
either Munster or Bonn.
General Richardson agrees that this was typical of the 'super-
optimism' prevailing among senior officers in those few days
after the giddy successes. After all, it was reasoned, the Kaiser
had been overthrown in 1918, and the German armies
had
surrendered then when they had suffered nothing to equal the
