74
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
The conditions put up by General SOSNKOWSKI are
unacceptable. I feel the time has come for us to adopt a more
realistic attitude towards our Allied nations. To be dictated to
by nations who have been under the heel of Germany as to
how their forces should be used is, to my way of thinking,
quite wrong. We have got a difficult problem ahead, and to
employ the forces of these Allies circumscribed by various
restrictions is militarily unsound, and appears to me to be
politically unwise. Some of these countries who did very little
to help us against the enemy, e.g. France, now appear to be
laying down conditions because they see the end in sight. I
consider that nations who have been under the heel of
Germany must do as we tell them until the war is over and
Germany is defeated; they will probably have to do as we tell
them even after that.
My view is, if I am to be saddled with Allied troops tied
down by various restrictions, I would rather not have them at
all; this applies to the Polish Para Brigade if they cannot be
employed otherwise than in accordance with General SOS-
NKOWSKI's conditions. I suggest you tell SOSNKOWSKI
accordingly, and have no more nonsense about it.®
Montgomery's firm line was accepted completely by the War
Office, and on 12 April Sosnkowski withdrew his reservations,
expressing his complete confidence in General Montgomery?
But the incident did not endear Montgomery to the Poles, whose
patience with him was already short. (On his visit to Scotland he
had addressed one senior Polish officer, through his interpreter,
with the tactless question 'Do you speak German or Russian?'
- forgetting that the Poles had their own language. And towards
the end of the war, when a Polish general told him, at an official
lunch, that he could not return to Poland, Montgomery replied:
'Why not? They will probably make you one of their generals.")
On 7 April 1944 a Presentation of Plans was held in the
lecture hall at St Paul's School. Only 111 passes were issued,
amidst great secrecy since any leaks
would have been
disastrous. Churchill and the British Chiefs of Staff were
present, and all generals of the four armies - British, American,
Canadian and Polish - together with their naval and air force
counterparts. Montgomery, allowed only thirty minutes in which
to put over his views, again made an excellent impression,
Montgomery and the Invasion
75
radiating an infectious confidence. Much of the criticism later
levelled at him over the Normandy campaign arose from this
briefing, so it is appropriate to examine in detail how he defined
his plans.
No minutes were kept, but Lt-Col Dawnay holds in his
archives a copy of the transcript of Montgomery's statement,
which was given out to those present with rigid injunctions
about secrecy.*
Since Rommel toured the 'Atlantic Wall' the enemy has
stiffened up his coastal crust but the movement of his mobile
reserves is south i.e. away from the assault area; this shows
that our target area is not yet known to the enemy. Rommel
will hold his mobile divisions back from the coast until he is
certain where our main effort is being made.
By D plus 5 the enemy will have brought in six Panzer type
divisions. By then we will have fifteen divisions ashore. After
about D plus 8 I think the enemy will have to consider a
roping off policy i.e. trying to stop our expansion from the
lodgement area ... I suggest we should plan in general on the
enemy having a round total of sixty divisions of which ten will
be Panzer ... the armoured divisions are being kept directly
under Rundstedt, and delay may be caused before they are
released to Rommel. This in fact may help us and quarrels
may arise between the two of them.
was kept by Ultra about German intentions.
i email is rophetical necroup
Montgomery's address continued:
There are four armies taking part in the operations:
First U.S. Army
Second British Army
Assault Armies
First Canadian Army
Third U.S. Army
Follow Up Armies
* The only records kept were the guest list, and a note that Twenty-First
Army Group provided lunch and tea.
