Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
order to undertake the planning in Cairo while X Corps
controlled the Eighth Army front. In a memorandum he wrote:
'Some sort of compromise will be necessary to get ourselves out
of the mess we are now in.'?
Montgomery was correct in describing
the planning for
'Husky' as a 'mess'. There had by now been seven different
and Eisenhower's staff
were working on Plan 8.
Montgomery had not been consulted at all, although Eighth
Army was to play a major part. In Cairo his Chief of Staff,
Freddie de Guingand, recently promoted Major-General for the
Sicily planning, showed him Plan 8.
The Eighth Army was to land in the south-east corner of
Sicily around Syracuse and Gela; Patton's US Seventh Army
was to land at the north-west corner around Palermo and
Trapani. Out of hand, Montgomery turned down Plan 8 and
insisted that the Eighth Army assault must be concentrated
around Syracuse and the Pachino peninsula, immediately to its
A conference was held in Algiers on 2 May. According to
Montgomery he buttonholed the American Lt-Gen Walter
Bedell Smith, Eisenhower's Chief of Staff, in the lavatory and
persuaded him before he went back to the conference room that
the two armies should land side by side; in other words that
instead of sending the Americans to the north-west they should
land on Montgomery's left flank at Gela. During the conference,
according to the shorthand notes, Montgomery insisted there
would be severe
opposition from the Germans,
agreed
emphatically with Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder,
commanding the RAF in that theatre, that the airfields around
Gela must be captured during the initial assault, and laid down
that the armies must above all be concentrated. He concluded:
The answer to the problem is to shift the US effort from the
Palermo area to land on either side of Gela. The invasion of
Sicily will then be a complete success?? The next day Alexander
signalled Montgomery that Eisenhower had agreed to his plan.
General Sir
Charles Richardson (at that time Brigadier,
General Staff, Eighth Army HQ), told me that he went with
Montgomery to the Algiers Conference, and that the tale of the
lavatory incident is substantially correct. Before the conference
Montgomery rehearsed his arguments to Richardson, insisting
that the British and American landing beaches must be close so
Sicily and After
23
that the two armies could give each other mutual support. He
had kept on saying: 'Is that clear, Charles?' and Richardson
assured him it was. According to Richardson, Montgomery put
his arguments to the conference so crisply and cogently that he
won the day easily. Patton, however, had set his heart upon
acting independently in Sicily, and was bitterly disappointed at
this turn of events, which meant that his US Seventh Army had
to assault on beaches adjoining the British. He was full of
resentment against Montgomery, though he loyally accepted the
As soon as the Tunisian fighting finished, with the surrender
of all the Germans and Italians on 13 May, General Sir Bernard
Montgomery went home on leave.
He was
hailed as a
conquering hero. He stayed at Claridges, where crowds flocked
to see him going in and out; letters and presents poured in - so
many that he had to employ extra ADCs to deal with them -
and the national papers covered acres of newsprint with his
praises. Britain had lost so many battles in the early stages of the
war that they were starved of a military hero, and Montgomery
filled the bill admirably.
The War Office encouraged him to
show off, since they considered it good for the Army, which
desperately needed a successful general to boost its morale.
Fame,
alas,
is
heady
business, and
without
doubt
Montgomery got a whiff of folie de grandeur. De Guingand,
who knew Montgomery intimately, wrote: 'He lost a little of his
simplicity and realised that he was a power in the land and that
there were few who would not heed his advice. In fact he realised
he could afford to be really tough to get his own way?*
Alan Moorehead, then a war correspondent in North Africa,
had ample opportunity to observe Montgomery, judging that
'He alwavs had a certain intensely serious determination to
impose his will on other people.'
domineering trait was markedly accentuated, and there is little
doubt that this brief trip to London, with its rampant publicity
and admission to exalted circles, produced a subtle character
change. He became more difficult to deal with and keener than
ever to dominate the scene.' This was to have sad consequences
- especially in his relations with the American generals.
Montgomery returned to Algiers on 2 June to meet the Prime
Minister and the CIGS (with them came the King, who knighted
Montgomery in an aerodrome tent on 19 June). The Sicily
