416
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
American public opinion, were all on his side, and American
men and material were fuelling the defeat of Nazism to a far
greater degree than the other western allies. Churchill was as
angry as Montgomery, and protested vigorously, if fruitlessly, to
both Eisenhower and Roosevelt about the abrupt change in the
Allied plan. The Prime Minister did not take up the cudgels for
long, however, for he had learned of Eisenhower's increasing
impatience with him, and the war was too nearly over for more
quarrels. Brooke, the staunchest of Montgomery's supporters,
refused for once to involve himself since, with the European
campaign all but won, his eyes were turned on the continuing
problems in the Far East. He wrote laconically in his diary: 'It is
all a pity straightforward strategy is affected by nationalistic
outlook, a comment which serves admirably as an epitaph on
the later actions of both Montgomery and Eisenhower.
To his credit Montgomery, although he told Simpson that
Eisenhower 'had double-crossed him', quickly learned to ignore
the whole galling incident. As usual his mind was fully occupied
with his fighting troops and with the plans for the hectic
advance, and while the war continued he bore no resentment. He
was, however, right in claiming that Berlin had importance, and
that Twenty-First Army Group was well poised to capture it, for
although the occupation zones had been agreed at Yalta,
Churchill
was prepared to re-open negotiations with the
Russians over the allotment of these areas. There can be little
doubt that if Twenty-First Army Group had taken Berlin, in
accordance with the original Allied plan, then the map of Europe
would be different today.
Field-Marshal Sir Bernard Law Montgomery, later first
Viscount Montgomery of Alamein, helped shape that map, and
no view of him can be entirely one-sided. Bedell Smith provided
a clear assessment in a
Eisenhower, written in April 1948:
previously unpublished letter to
When I last talked with Bradley and we drifted to the subject
of Montgomery, he said with far more violence than I have
ever known from him before: 'Montgomery is a third-rate
general and he never did anything or won any battle that any
other general could not have won as well or better?
As you well know, I am no Montgomery lover, but I give
Conclusion
417
him his full due and believe that for certain types of operation
he is without an equal. On the other hand, he would not have
been worth a damn for the wide sweeping manoeuvre where
Patton shone so brilliantly in the public eye. Nevertheless his
intransigent attitude and behind the scenes conniving to get
his way with regard to military operations, to enhance his
own prestige and to obtain a major measure of command, are
certainly
deserving
of the most severe censure
by
any
unprejudiced observer.
Of course, I cannot claim to be an
unprejudiced observer. 16
It is sad that Bradley became so bitter and unfair about
Montgomery, since during the Normandy campaign the two
commanders had enjoyed a degree of trust and friendship;
indeed, Bradley had commented of that period: 'I could not have
wanted a more tolerant or judicious commander' Probably the
iron entered the American general's soul after the humiliating
reverses in the Ardennes, and Montgomery's infamous press
conference.
There can be few who would quarrel with Bedell Smith's
verdict that Montgomery
was
'without
an
equal'
in
well
prepared assaults such as the cross-Channel invasion, and in
sustaining his troops during prolonged and difficult operations.
Any weakness he had as a commander lay in his occasional
failure to seize the unexpected opportunity, and here his isolation
was a contributory factor.
Again,
Bedell
Smith is probably
correct in saying
that
Montgomery deserved 'severe censure' for his 'behind the scenes
conniving to get his way' and a bigger share of the com-
mand
and
prestige.
Certainly his dislike of playing
second
fiddle
led
to a shameful tale of bickering with
Eisenhower
throughout the campaign in North-West Europe. Nevertheless,
the evidence uncovered can only lead one to believe that Brooke
and Grigg, in their continual encouragement of Montgomery to
seek sole
command when,
politically,
such a course
was
impossible, were as much or more to blame.
