206
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
defeat in the west of 1944. Most people could not believe that
the evil of Hitlerism had so entered the minds of the German
people that they would fight until the bitter end, nor that the
Führer would sacrifice his country in a vain effort to remain in
power, with all his hopes pinned on his secret weapons being
able to wipe out London and thus destroy the British ability to
fight him. Hindsight is all too easy - these considerations must
be borne in mind when passing any judgements on mistakes in
strategy during this crucial short period.
On 3 September Maj-Gen Maxwell Taylor, GOC US 101st
Airborne Division, rushed from the UK to Dempsey at Second
Army HQ, to discuss with him the use of the airborne troops.
He reported back to Lt-Gen Sir Frederick Browning (GOC 1
Airborne Corps and deputy commander of First Allied Airborne
Army
under US Lt-Gen Lewis H. Brereton) who held a
conference at his
Airborne Corps
HQ at Moor
Park,
Hertfordshire, on the next day. There it was decided that Ist
Airborne Division together with Polish 1 Parachute Brigade and
878th US Airborne Engineers were to crash land as close as
possible to the bridges at Arnhem (Lower Rhine), Nijmegen
(Waal) and Eindhoven (Wilhelmina Canal, north of the town),
their landing areas having been marked first by the dropping of
coloured smoke. The assault was to be similar to that which had
resulted in the capture of Bénouville Bridge on D-Day, and the
only criticism of the plan at this conference was that there might
be heavy flak at Nijmegen.* This operation, known as 'Market-
Garden Mark I', was planned for 8/9 September, that is, two
days after the advance had started again from the Brussels-
Antwerp line. The plan was abandoned by Montgomery almost
as soon as it was made, however, because of the German
resistance on the Albert Canal.
Montgomery stated in
paragraph 8 of his 3 September
directive that the weight of the army would concentrate on 'the
Rhine between Wesel and Arnhem', but even at this stage his
thoughts
were already fixed on
Arnhem
bridge. This is
interesting since, later, both Williams and Belchem considered
that he should have made for Wesel.
On 4 September, having received Montgomery's directive,
Horrocks stopped his Corps' triumphant march from the Seine
with this jaunty signal: 'Top up tactically and administratively.
Maximum economy petrol. Recce but not beyond 30 easting
207
Over the Seine
grid. Occupy Louvain. Recce but not across Dutch frontier.
Major moves of main body for Guards Armoured and 11
Armoured unlikely before 7 September."'
Montgomery
was bent on by-passing German
Fifteenth
Army, and shooting straight on and over the Rhine. He might
have been successful if he had continued on 4 September, but
the three-day halt after that date gave the Germans their chance.
For perhaps a day and a half Montgomery had an opportunity
to push his armour into the almost undefended country up to the
Rhine, but he delayed, and the cost of that delay was to be
tragic.
By his heady advance from the Seine to Brussels and
Antwerp in four days, Montgomery had proved that British
armour could move as fast as American. The battlefields of the
First World War had been crossed in hours, Belgium had been
liberated, and the war seemed won. But with his troops short of
supplies, Montgomery would take no chances, and he started
a new polemic against Eisenhower, demanding priority
supplies for Twenty-First Army Group. On the afternoon of 4
September, after reading Eisenhower's directive dated that
morning (which
confirmed the decisions taken
September conference at Chartres with Patton and Bradley, and
which agreed that
Patton should
advance),
Montgomery immediately drafted the following message to the
Supreme Commander:
I would like to put before you certain aspects of future
operations and give you my views.
1. I consider we have now reached a stage where one really
powerful and full-blooded thrust towards Berlin is likely to
get there and thus end the German war.
2.
We have not enough maintenance resources for two full-
blooded thrusts.
3.
The selected thrust must have all the maintenance resources
it needs without any qualification, and any other operation
4.
must do the best it can with what is left over.
There are only two possible thrusts: one via the Ruhr and
the other via Metz and the Saar.
5. In my opinion the thrust likely to give the best and quickest
results is the northern one via the Ruhr.
6.
Time is vital and the decision regarding the selected thrust
