214
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
up assaults by the land forces with the Americans on his right
flank.
By 9th September Montgomery knew, from Dempsey's latest
sitreps, that he must pierce a tough cordon of German troops
before he reached the Rhine. It was particularly galling to him
that Bradley's US XIX Corps (Maj-Gen Corlett) had not been
able to keep pace with Horrocks's advance through Belgium,
since its leading formation, US 2nd Armoured Division, ran out
of petrol, halted for three days and only reached the Albert
Canal on 12 September. As a result, XXX Corps' right flank
was unprotected, and although on the 8th Guards Armoured
secured an important bridgehead
over the Albert Canal,
Student's newly arrived parachutists began to counter-attack in
strength. Only on the lOth did XXX Corps capture a canal
bridge in sufficient strength to be in a position to line up for the
full-blooded offensive on which Montgomery's heart was set.
Dempsey and 'Boy' Browning, the two key commanders for
the proposed operation, met Montgomery at his Tac HQ on the
morning
September. Dempsey
telephoned
Montgomery earlier in the day to say pay he fad ured Wesel,
and had thought that his superior agreed with him.
Also on the same morning, a War Office telegram arrived at
Twenty-First Army Group announcing that the first V2 had
fallen on London." It has been said that the is influenced
Montgomery in his choice of Arnhem, which was nearer to the
rocket launching sites than the German town of Wesel, forty-
odd miles to the south-east, but this is almost certainly not the
case. Churchill and Brooke were abroad, and it is unlikely that
the Home Secretary, Herbert Morrison, tried to exert any
pressure because he never interfered in military matters. There is
no mention of Holland being given priority in the Chiefs of Staff
Minutes, and General Simpson told me categorically that no
pressure was put on Montgomery to opt for Holland. Clearly
the capture of Arnhem would make it easier for Second Army to
advance to the Zuider Zee, thus cutting off Germany from
Holland and eliminating the threat from the V2s. But once over
the Rhine in strength at Wesel, Montgomery could have
dropped another airborne division to close the Arnhem-Zuider
Zee gap.
After the war David Belchem took part in a series of French
television programmes with the German Generals Siegfried
The Fatal Wrong Decision
215
Westphal and Hasso-Eccard von Manteuffel, respectively von
Rundstedt's Chief of Staff and the GOC Fifth Panzer Army.
They agreed that on 10 September, in Belchem's words, '21
Army Group could have cycled to Wesel', and General Günther
Blumentritt, whom Westphal succeeded, also confirmed this.
There was, too, one less river crossing towards Wesel than
towards
Arnhem, which reduced the
need for bridging
equipment, and lessened the chances of being held back by
demolitions.
At the Tac HQ conference on 10 September Dempsey told
Montgomery that Ultra had mentioned the presence of tanks at
Arnhem, and that the Dutch Resistance had reported 'battered
Panzer
Divisions had
been
sent to Holland to refit
near
Arnhem'. Williams had already told his chief that Ultra showed
tanks in reception areas
near
Eindhoven
and Nijmegen,
although there was no indication of the number. Dempsey also
said that the unexpectedly tough resistance on the Albert Canal
made him doubt whether he could advance north fast enough to
link up with a drop at Arnhem, and added that his right flank
would be exposed because the Americans were by now heading
east, not north. He emphasised to Montgomery that he would
like to hold a firm flank along the Dutch border and turn east
against the lighter opposition to cross the Rhine, in partnership
with the Americans, at Wesel.
Unfortunately de Guingand was in hospital in Aldershot with
one of his periodic bouts of exhaustion, and was thus unable to
take a hand in these arguments; Dempsey himself had little
influence on Montgomery. Williams told me that 'Monty treated
Dempsey
more as a Corps
Commander
than an Army
Commander, and although
he
would discuss
a
lot
with
Dempsey, in the end Monty held to his own line.' Moreover,
Montgomery's hand was strengthened because Browning was
itching to see his beloved airborne soldiers in action once more,
and did not care whether it was at Arnhem or Wesel; besides,
elements of I Airborne Corps had been training in England for
some considerable time, without action, and were thought to be
going 'stale'.
After talking
to his two
generals,
therefore,
Montgomery declared for Arnhem. Brigadier Williams thought
that:
It was an appalling decision to go for an airborne operation
