242
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Montgomery's bridgehead over the Rhine was lost.
Horrocks remained optimistic about exploiting the bridgehead
over the Rhine gained by Urquhart's men. His hopes seem still
to have been high - on the morning of 23 September he paid a
flying visit to the Guards and told them that the taking of
Nijmegen bridge was a feat 'which deserved champagne all
round'; he then produced some of the wine from his jeep. On the
same day he signalled Dempsey: 'As more troops
become
available will when road open pass up to two brigades of 43
Division into north of river. For subsequent exploitation an
additional infantry division required.' And later on the 23rd
another
signal to Dempsey read: 'Considerable opposition
between Nijmegen and Arnhem but have broken through west
of main road. Leading elements 43 Division with Recce well out
on left flank are approaching Neder Rijn in close contact Poles
in loose contact 1 Airborne Div? Unhappily, 'loose contact' with
Ist Airborne was wishful thinking. There was no contact, not
even by wireless.
Dempsey was more realistic, and in the afternoon of 23
September he signalled Horrocks: 'If you consider establishing a
bridgehead in Arnhem area too difficult you may withdraw 1
Airborne
without consulting
me.'
The
road
had been
temporarily cut by the Germans behind XXX Corps, and
Dempsey knew that as a result it would be difficult for him to
rendezvous with Horrocks.
In the event, Dempsey and Horrocks met at St Odenrode on
the 24th (D-plus-7). At the meeting Dempsey ordered Horrocks
to see how the planned night operations over the Lower Rhine
fared, when he could either pass a complete brigade of 43rd
Division across the river to support Urquhart's perimeter, or
give
up the existing
slender
bridgehead
and withdraw
Airborne south of the river'. He added that he would give
Horrocks his own decision by 1200 on the next day. During the
night, 24/25 September, the Dorsets and Poles tried, and after
heavy casualties failed, to cross the river to reinforce Urquhart.
On Monday, 25 September, Montgomery and Dempsey met
and agreed that British Ist Airborne Division - such as it now
was - should be withdrawn south of the river that night. The
Arnhem gamble had failed.
Soon after nightfall on the 25th all 43rd Divisional artillery
opened up on the German positions around the Westerbouwing
Arnhem
243
perimeter. Evacuation had been ordered, and during the early
hours of 26 September, under heavy German artillery
and
machine-gun fire, boats manned by 43rd Division infantry and
Canadian sappers ferried Urquhart and what was left of his
division, together with a few Poles and Dorsets, to the south
bank of the Rhine at Driel and safety. Out of 11,000 of
Urquhart's men who had landed, more than 8,000 were killed,
wounded, missing or made prisoner.
On 'Market-Garden' D-day,
Browning and the staff of 1
Airborne
Corps
flew in
gliders and
landed, safely
and
unopposed, in the US 101st Airborne Division dropping zone.
Browning established his HQ near Groesbeek, a small height to
the east of the main axis of advance. Here he was twenty miles
from st Airborne at Arnhem, and he never established any
communication with the beleaguered division at all, although
contact was made both with Second Army and with his HQ in
England. Worse,
transporting
Browning and his
staff had
squandered airlift that could have carried an extra combat unit
to Ist Airborne.
When I spoke to John Frost (now Major-General) he was
scathing about Browning,
and told me that the latter should
have either stayed in England, gone in with 1st Airborne at
Arnhem, or have flown in an aeroplane above them to observe
and take action as necessary. He considers that the presence of
the Corps HQ was 'nothing more than a nuisance. In
his
memoirs, General Frost declares that the worst mistake of the
'Market-Garden'
plan
was
the failure to give priority to
capturing Nijmegen Bridge: 'The capture of this bridge would
have been a walk-over on D-day, yet the American 82nd
Airborne Division could spare only one battalion as they must
at all costs secure a feature called Groesbeek Heights, where ...
the HQ of Airborne Corps was to be sited.'3
According to Twenty-First Army Group's rather defensive
official account, issued a few weeks after the operation, the
Groesbeek Heights had to be captured in order to prevent
German armour from the east from cutting the highway. Neither
Frost nor
the
American historian Russel
Weighey
agree,
however.* Certainly XXX Corps' east flank had to be defended,
but on 17 September enemy forces there were weak. Even so,
Montgomery vitally
needed US VIII Corps as a guard for his
east flank,
and this was
denied him because
Eisenhower,
