146
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
some units were already giving ground. 2nd SS Panzer had kept
the front from collapsing, but this division was dangerously
short of petrol and the fighting for the St Lô start-line had cost it
twenty-two tanks.
Ultra signals also showed that abortive Allied bombing before
the false start for 'Cobra' on 24 July had led German LXXXIV
Corps to believe, at least for a while, that their artillery had
prevented a major ground attack. The guns had, however, used up
far too much ammunition and were especially short of the 88-mm
shells vital for destroying American tanks.
A signal from von Kluge to Hitler that he needed more tanks
"to stop the rot' was intercepted by Ultra, which also decoded a
series of clear indications between 7 and 17 July that the
Germans around St Lô, although still fighting hard, were not
only nearing exhaustion but were becoming so thin on the
ground that they would be in no shape to withstand the massed
US First Army attack.
Montgomery and his immediate staff were convinced that
Ultra intelligence guaranteed the successful result of 'Cobra' in
advance, and that the attack would punch a hole through the
German defences; since there were neither German reserves nor
secondary lines of defence an Allied armoured break-out into
almost undefended country must follow. Their optimism was
enhanced by their faith in the new Rhinoceros ta opattachment,
which Montgomery felt would make American tanks far more
effective in the bocage. US 2nd Division under Gerow had been
so frustrated by the dificulties of operating tanks in the bocage
that they had experimented with devices attached to the front of
a Sherman. The most efficient was the Rhinoceros, which
consisted of heavy steel tusk-like prongs welded to the front
armour. When the tank butted into a hedgerow the prongs dug
into the earth of the bank and pinned the tank down, preventing
it from bellying up over the hedge and exposing its soft
underside to German anti-tank guns; Shermans were able to
drive through hedgerows by sheer force. In order to convert the
tanks swiftly, iron from German underwater devices had been
collected wholesale, and arc-welding equipment and crews were
sent out from England. No Rhino tank was allowed to go into
action before the start of 'Cobra', but by then three out of five
American tanks had been converted. The chief result was that
American tanks could operate off the roads, whereas the
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
147
German armour was confined to hard surfaces. Now the Allied
deficiency in tank power could at last partly be made good, since
the Rhinos could take the pockets of German armour in the
flank, attacking the heavily armoured Panthers and Tigers from
the side (normally a Rhino could cross a big hedge or bank in
bocage country in three minutes). After their disheartening
experiences in the bocage to date, when German tanks had
proved greatly superior, it was a tonic for the Americans to
know that their armour could undertake flanking movements
across the fields.
Eisenhower and his advisers at SHAEF did not share
Montgomery's optimism, which they considered to be quite
unjustified after the failure of 'Goodwood' and all its high hopes.
The Supreme Commander petulantly declared that it had taken
Montgomery 7,000 tons of bombs to gain seven miles, and that
he could not hope to go through France paying the price of
1,000 tons of bombs per mile.' Tedder continually talked of the
'British Army's failure', and Portal agreed that 'Monty was the
cause'. Dempsey, during a visit to SHAEF, asked what all the
fuss was about, claiming that there had never been any intention
of achieving a break-out, 1º though this was hardly true either of
his own plan, or of Montgomery's more cautious predictions.
Bradley, like Montgomery,
sensibly preferred to look on
'Goodwood' as a preliminary to 'Cobra', and considered that the
hostility to Montgomery at SHAEF, however, the 'Goodwood'
failure was immediately seized on as a means of denigrating him.
Yet if 'Cobra' had proceeded as originally scheduled, on 21 July,
this agitation against Montgomery
could never have occurred,
since at that date there
would have been no indication of a
'stalemate'
Unfortunately,
Eisenhower nor Tedder interpreted the Ultra signals as showing
that 'Cobra' must produce a break-out without great loss, as
Montgomery did correctly.
On
20 July Eisenhower visited both
Twenty-First and
Twelfth Army Groups. He found
Bradley
and Maj-Gen
Lawton
Collins, commanding
US
VII
Corps,
both
very
optimistic and enthusiastic for 'Cobra', and he happily discussed
plans with them, feeling much at home.
architects
of the 'Cobra' break-out plan; Montgomery had
no part
in the details, although Twelfth Army Group
