384
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
plant the seeds of the Reich's reincarnation.
So Eisenhower decided to give the non-existent
redoubt
priority over Berlin, influenced by Bradley, who claimed that
taking Berlin 'might cost the Allies 10,000 casualties ... a pretty
stiff price to pay for a prestige objective.'42 This was a false
appreciation in the light of US Lt-Gen Simpson's reports, and
besides, to Stalin's anger the Germans were already withdrawing
troops from the west to fight the Russians in the east.
The
western approaches to Berlin lay almost open, and many
German generals were prepared to surrender to the Western
Allies rather than to the Russians. Doubtless when Hitler
realised that the Allies were approaching Berlin from the west he
would have tried to concentrate divisions for its defence, but this
might have precipitated an earlier break-up of the Nazi regime.
On 7 April Eisenhower signalled Marshall: 'If the CCOS
consider that the Allied effort to take Berlin should outweigh
purely military considerations I would cheerfully adjust my
plans, 43
but he was given no orders to make such an
adjustment, nor did he expect any. Stalin, immediately on
receiving Eisenhower's signal saying that the main Allied thrust
would be towards Dresden, had redeployed the Red Army to
make Berlin its main objective. The Supreme Commander had
no worries
about the political controversy caused by
unprecedented signal to the Soviet leader, for Marshall had
made it plain that both he and the US Government approved.
Berlin fell to Marshal Georgi Zhukov's Russian forces on 2
May.
Eisenhower's three signals of 28 March - to Montgomery, to
withdraw US Ninth Army; to Stalin, to tell him that the western
Allies would not capture Berlin; and to Marshall, to say that his
main effort would be to the south - have been in the American
archives and available to historians for years. These three cables
should be
read by future historians in the
context
Montgomery's exasperated letter to Simpson, which has already
been quoted on pp 376-7, for their military, economic, political
and even social effects upon present-day Europe cannot be
underestimated. In the first week of April Churchill abandoned
ended.
his arguments for capturing Berlin and the controversy was
Eisenhower
had
his
way,
and
Montgomery
philosophically got on with his job; as he wrote in his memoirs:
'It was useless for me to pursue the matter further. We had had
Eisenhower's Revenge
385
so much argument on great issues; anyhow it was almost too
late.*44
After his 'dirty work' tirade to Simpson on the subject of
Eisenhower's duplicity, Montgomery settled down to organise
the final defeat of the Germans in his now-reduced sector. While
he had a job to do he was not one to worry for long about past
grievances, and his daily signals to Brooke were cheerful and
optimistic. He was plainly elated by the rapid advance of his
divisions, and by the coming defeat of Germany. He was not to
enjoy his long-planned
advance over the Hanover plains to
Berlin, but he happily pushed his divisions forward via Bremen
and Hamburg, and on towards the Elbe. His main objective was
to reach the neck of the Danish peninsula before the Russians,
since the
occupation of Denmark
by
Soviet troops would
produce
dire political consequences, and his
targets
were
Lübeck
and
Wismar, with
Hamburg
as his intermediate
objective.
Montgomery's advance would cut off a large enemy army in
Holland on his west flank, but these German troops had little
appetite for fighting by now, and the main problem there was the
lack of food supplies, which was causing grave distress to the
Dutch people. Montgomery told the War Office that he could
clear Holland with two divisions, but that he rated this job 'the
lowest as regards priority, and Simpson replied by warning him
that feeding the people of Holland would be a heavy strain on
his lines of communication and on the Rhine bridges once the
country
was
freed
from
consultation with Montgomery, agreed that Twenty-First Army
Group should clear Holland as far west as the line running north
and south through Utrecht, and that only then would it be
decided whether to go further west or not.
In the event German opposition to the advance was slight,
and on 8 April Montgomery signalled Brooke: 'We now control
country west of Ems River with armoured cars and SAS troops.
A great deal of shooting up of enemy is going on.
The whole
area is covered with small bodies of enemy trying to get away?
He continued by saying that he expected heavy resistance at
Bremen, and that he would therefore cross the Weser River well
to the east, at Verden, and then send back one division west
towards Bremen. Montgomery was encountering trouble from
small German units which had been by-passed by his advance,
