16
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
London; and to the staffs of Churchill College, Cambridge, the
Imperial War Museum, London, and the Ministry of Defence
Library, Whitehall.
I wish to thank most warmly those in America who gave me
their help: Dr Forrest C. Pogue and John Wickman of the
Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas; Dr William
Snyder, University of Texas; Professor Louis Galambos, Johns
Hopkins University; Richard J. Somers, Archivist-Historian, US
Army Military History Institute,
Pennsylvania; Wilbert B.
Mahoney, National Archives, Washington.
My thanks are due to the publishers of the Canadian Official
History for permission to quote from the work of Colonel C.P.
Stacey, and also to Messrs Batsford for permission to quote
from Belfield and Essame's The Battle for Normandy. These and
other useful works are listed in the bibliography. Of recent
books I have found Russell Weighey's Eisenhower's Lieutenants
an excellent, complete and well documented analysis of the
North-West Europe campaign written from American sources.
David Irving's The War Between the Generals provides many
sidelights on the in-fighting between SHAEF, on one side, and
the War Office and Twenty-First Army Group on the other. He
does not give detailed references, but quotes outspoken extracts
from the unexpurgated and unpublished originals of the Patton
Diaries, the Butcher Diaries, the Courtney Hodges Diary, the
Kay Summersby Diaries, and the diary kept for Air Chief
Marshal Sir Arthur (later MRAF Lord) Tedder by Wing-
Commander Scarman.
General Sir Miles Dempsey, who commanded XIII Corps in
Sicily and Italy in 1943, and British Second Army in North-
West Europe, played a key role in these campaigns, yet
Montgomery mentions him little in his writing. Dempsey, a
modest and unselfish man, never courted publicity or renown.
His diary or daily log of the campaign in North-West Europe,
deposited in the PRO, is a useful factual account; but he did not,
however, put into it his views on controversies. For example, he
does not mention the sacking of Bucknall, nor his argument with
Montgomery about 'Goodwood', nor the controversy with the
Americans over their taking Second Army's road on the way to
the Seine. He makes it clear that he wanted the airborne drop at
Wesel, not at Arnhem, but does not write a word of criticism of
the way in which Montgomery frequently by-passed him and
Foreword
17
dealt directly with Horrocks, the XXX Corps commander. I am
grateful to my cousin Geoffrey Hardy-Roberts and to Robert
Priestley for their help over Miles Dempsey's role. Until his
death Dempsey corresponded with certain historians, but under
the thirty-year rule his letters will not be available until the year
2000.
Finally, I give warm thanks to Mrs Joan Moore and to John
Mark for their secretarial help, and to Toby Buchan for his
meticulous editing, and for his encouragement throughout.
Transcripts of Crown Copyright material in the Public Record
Office appear by kind permission of the Controller, Her Majesty's
Stationery Office.
