Mongomery in Europe 1943-/949
Amencan Supreme Commander
Morgan's planning had been handicapped throughout by lack
di a Supreme Commander. At the Queber Conference »
August 1943 his draft proposals had been accepted, but five
precious momhs were allowed to slip away before the cerall
commander was appointed, and thus final plans could nor ba
drafted until that appomtment.
Roosevelt and Churchill had agreed unofficially at Queber
that General George Marshall, the American Army Chief al
Staff, should be Supreme Commander, but no decisien was
recorded. At the first Cairo Conference in November 1943
Churchill had pressed for Marshall, but Roosevell could not
make up his mind since he was anxious to keep Marshall with
him in Washington. Finally, at the Teheran Conference on
December 1943, Roosevelt offered Marshall the post. but to the
President's relief he was reluctant to accept. Thus the
appointment went to Eisenhower, while Marshall stayed at the
President's side in Washington.
Eisenhower wanted Alexander as Field Commander, for he
knew he would find him more amenable than Montgomery.
though he overrated Alexander's ability and powers of decision.
Brooke and Grigg, the Secretary of State for War, wanted
Montgomery because they knew he had a quicker brain and was
better at decision-making; he had additionally the pill of
boosting the morale of troops by the exercise of his strong
personality. Brooke recorded in his diary several times his low
opinion of Alexander's ability, while Churchill, who also
overestimated Alexander, remained neutral about the choice of
Field Commander. Montgomery, with such backing, got the job.
to the disappointment of the American generals.
Stimulated by the Prime Minister's admiration in Marrakesh,
Montgomery Rew to England (in a four engined bomber
provided by Eisenhower, who thought two engines risky) on 2
January 1944. The supreme challenge of his lifetime faced him.
He was fifty-six, extremely fit, expert in all modern war
technology and utterly confident of his own ability to lead a
combined US/British Army to victory. Above all, he had a clear
and incisive mind. As a result his orders were
always
understood, while his personality ensured that they were carried
out. Undoubtedly he was the right choice, and although he was
to make mistakes and to incur much criticism during the next
aghieen menths, no
egupped for tha
19205
and 1900s
nad
had
egula
and in 1941 thes
abilis
unbition and foresight m i
enhower changed COSSAC into S
Stall
Eisenhower was by now in Amenca, naving
relinquasiss
command of AFHO. Algiers.
on
becoming
Commander. Montzomery took charge of reshaping
Overiord plans, and immediately set up ms headquarters in l
old
school. St Paul's in Hammersmith. The chain of comma
was
now: Buenhower, Supreme
Commander
Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder. Deputy Suprem
in-C, Allied Naval Forces: Air Chief Marshal Sir Trafion
Lagh-Mallory. C-in-C. Allied Air Forces. There was no C in C
Allied Land Force, but Montgomery was Commande
Twenty-First Army Group, with operational control of all lanc
forces during the assault phase. Eisenhower would assume dire
command when an American Army Group was formed und
Li Gen Omar Bradley once the assault phase was over, and th
American troops considerabiy outnumbered the Brust
Meanwhile, Bradley would serve under
Mongomery
Commander Twelfth Army Group, though it was alwa
intended that he would have equal status with the Bnitish genera
once the assault phase was completed.
Morgan's COSSAC plan had postulated three division
landing on the Normandy beaches close to Cherbourg, In ha
hurried memorandum to Churchill written at Marrakes!
Montgomery had stated:
This is just not an operation of war. By D plus 12 twelve
divisions would have been landed on the same beaches as
were used for the initial landings. This would lead to appally
confusion on the beaches ….. further divisions would com
pouring in all over the same beaches; confusion instead of
getting better would rapidly get worse ... initial landings must
