332
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
defence lines, the Americans somewhat bewildered, few
reserves on hand and supply lines cut.
The American First Army had
been completely out of
contact with Gen. Bradley. He quickly studied maps and
started to 'tidy up' the front.
He took
over scattered
American forces, planned his action and stopped the German
drive.
His staff, which has been with him since Alamein, deserves
high praise and credit. The Battle of the Ardennes can now be
written off, thanks to Field-Marshal Montgomery.20
It was a skilful piece of black propaganda by the Germans,
and one that helped widen the growing rift between Montgomery
and the Americans.
Collins, for instance, who Montgomery esteemed so highly
and whose troops were fighting under him, was indignant:
Monty got under my skin by downgrading the American troops
at the time of the Battle of the Bulge ... however reassuring it
was to know Brian Horrocks' XXX Corps was backing us up,
only one British Division participated in the fighting. It left a
sour note?21 And Eisenhower wrote to Marshall on 8 February
that
'No
single incident that I have ever
encountered
throughout my experience as an Allied Commander has been so
difficult to combat as this particular outburst in the papers? He
repeated this remark in a letter to Brooke on 16 February, and
added that 'Both the Prime Minister and I tried every device at
hand to counteract this feeling but it was just one of those things
that seem to cause lasting resentment due largely to the fact that
American
troops
here
have
their
principal
sources
information through London newspapers or the BBC. 22
Churchill, much concerned, did his best to calm the situation
and to soothe ruffled American feelings, but with little success.
Eisenhower left US Ninth Army under Montgomery for the time
being, but the notorious press conference was a key factor in his
later
decision to
withdraw
all
American
troops
Montgomery's command in the final triumphal drive to victory.
In his memoirs, Montgomery agreed that he should not have
held the press conference, and that the use of the word
'interesting' to describe the costly battles against the Panzer
armies had been a mistake. By then, however, he had paid for
his rashness.
13
Rows over Strategy
After the 7 January press conference the attacks directed by
Montgomery on the German Ardennes salient from the north
went well, and Patton's army in the south also made progress.
Each evening, the British commander sent cheerful signals back
to the CIGS, but both he and the War Office were becoming
increasingly
concerned
about
Eisenhower's plans for
the
advance to Germany and for dealing with the perennial problem
of command.
The Supreme
Commander
had temporarily
satisfied the British by promising to put the greater weight into
the northern advance, but both Brooke and Montgomery feared
that Patton, Bradley and Devers would deflect Eisenhower from
this course by persuading
him to divert resources into their
subsidiary attacks in the south.
On 31
December Eisenhower had sent Montgomery
his
outline plan for operations once the enemy counter-attack in the
Ardennes had been defeated, which ordered the Allied armies to:
Prepare for crossing the Rhine in force with MAIN EFFORT
NORTH OF THE RHINE ... 21 Army Group with 9 US
Army under operational control to resume preparations for
Veritable [the code-name for a Canadian Army
drive to
secure all the ground west of the Rhine by a push from the
Reichswald Forestl ... the front south of the Moselle to be
strictly defensive for the time being ... as soon as reduction of
Ardennes salient permits 12 Army Group will move north in
close proximity to 21 Army Group ... details of emergency
co-ordination along Army Group boundaries and between the
two Army Groups will be affected by the two Army Group
