200
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
interrogators, and agreed later to collaborate over negotiating a
surrender.
On 3 September a 7th Armoured Division signals officer took
a 'busman's holiday' in a Belgian telephone exchange. He
managed to get a line through to Lille, and was told by the
Belgian operator there that the Germans were pulling out. He
then asked to be connected to Brussels and, on getting through,
learned that the Germans had been moving out of the capital all
day. The line was cut at 1930,' but by then the vital intelligence
was being acted upon.
Horrocks lived
up to Montgomery's expectations by
quickening the pace, and during the night of 3 September British
tanks rumbled into Brussels amid scenes of indescribable joy
from the Belgians. The proud French had welcomed the British
enthusiastically enough, but that had been tempered by the guilt
many felt at their surrender to the Nazis in 1940. The Belgians,
however, were uninhibited in their enthusiasm, and took their
British liberators to their hearts. Queen Elisabeth the Queen
Mother even offered her Palace of Laeken (where Napoleon had
Corps HQ.
THERE
Next day, 4 September, Roberts sent his 11th Armoured
Division triumphantly into Antwerp before the Germans could
demolish the electrically operated sluice gates and cranes in the
harbour. It seemed that the Allied armies, still operating on
enormously extended supply lines from the Normandy beach-
head, at last had their port.
But Montgomery now made a fundamental mistake. He
ignored a signal from Ramsay, the SHAEF Naval Commander,
which had been sent from Portsmouth to him and Eisenhower.
Dated 3 September, the signal read:
Both Antwerp and Rotterdam are highly vulnerable to mining
and blocking. If enemy succeeds in these operations the time
it will take to open ports cannot be estimated. It will be
necessary for
coastal batteries to be captured
before
approach channels to the river route can be established.2
The channel leading west from Antwerp to the sea is sixty-five
miles long. German Fifteenth Army held both the south and
north banks in strength, and their numerous and powerful guns
Over the Seine
201
dominated the water, so that no mine clearance could be
undertaken. But Montgomery had fixed his sights on the Rhine
and Germany, even though XXX Corps could have been turned
left to seal off and defeat German Fifteenth Army to the west of
Antwerp
in early
September,
without heavy casualties.
Montgomery gambled on his conviction that German resistance
was crumbling so fast that the Allies could win the war without
using Antwerp as a port of entry for supplies. As we shall see,
no Allied ship entered Antwerp until 27 November; by then the
full costliness of the mistake had been proved.
The blame,
however, is not all Montgomery's, for Eisenhower too had failed
to appreciate the danger.
General Roberts told me:
Monty's failure at Antwerp is evidence again that he was not
a good general at seizing opportunities. My thoughts, like
Horrocks's and Monty's, on 4 September were east to the
Rhine. We should have looked west towards Walcheren ... I
made mistakes at Antwerp because I was not briefed that the
Albert Canal was one of the most formidable obstacles in
Europe. We only had small-scale maps, and I only saw it as a
thin blue line on my map.
I heard the population of Antwerp were mobbing my troops,
and tempting the officers into the best hotels. I decided not to
go into the city because with my divisional flag on my tank I
would
have
been
drowned in champagne.
During the
celebrations in the town there was a considerable battle on the
Albert Canal inside Antwerp, and we failed to capture the
northern suburbs over the canal.
Unfortunately, I did not appreciate the significance of the
fighting on the Albert Canal, and the Germans did not blow
the crucial bridge for another twelve hours. If briefed before, I
would have crossed the Albert Canal with tanks to the east of
Antwerp and closed the Germans' route into Beveland and
Walcheren.
At that time petrol was coming up regularly on lorries, and
we saved space on lorries by not using much ammunition. I
had enough petrol to continue my advance. Dempsey sent me
a message: 'Push your recce north of the canal with armoured
cars? He did not realise we could not cross the Albert Canal
so I had to tell him 'Message received but cannot comply?
