166
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
week of August he sent from there to Normandy one Panzer
division, three infantry divisions and part of a parachute
division. He unwisely insisted, however, that these divisions
must be thrown piecemeal against the US Army, instead of
being deployed sensibly from a firm base established in advance.
Now, as Patton's Third Army moved far south of Avranches,
Hitler conceived the plan of cutting it off by a counter-attack
from Mortain to the sea. Far away from the battlefield he issued
detailed orders, specifying - from maps, and without having
seen the ground - concentration areas and roads to be used.
The Americans
had
met unexpectedly
strong
German
resistance east of Mortain and around Domfront. Ultra revealed
that Hitler had taken the decision to launch the Mortain
counter-attack and that von Kluge had at first demurred,
although he dared not argue too strongly because of his
involvement in the abortive 20 July plot. Montgomery, however,
was still sure that the next battle would be for the Seine
crossings, because he thought that the enemy concentration at
Domfront shown up by Ultra was not powerful enough for a
successful counter-attack.
But if he was correct about the German strength, he was
wrong about Hitler's intentions.
Von Kluge launched his
counter-attack from Mortain late on 6 August; his forces made
initial advances and got within fifteen miles of Avranches. Six
armoured divisions, some well under strength, led the
way,
encircling elements of US 30th Division, but one divisional
commander, General Gerhard von Schwerin, was anti-Nazi and
delayed the advance of his 116th Panzer.
Eisenhower, in Normandy
conference
with Bradley
at the
time, held a hurried
on 7 August. Without consulting
Montgomery they decided not to reinforce the divisions in front
of Mortain, but to continue rushing as many troops as possible
south through Avranches - if the worst happened and the
Germans got through from Mortain to the sea at Avranches,
Eisenhower guaranteed to provide 2,000 tons of supplies by air
daily. This bold gamble paid off. Von Kluge gained a little
ground, but at great cost, for the weather cleared and the Allied
air force inflicted enormous damage on the attacking Germans.
On the 8th von Kluge had to discontinue the counter-attack.
On the same day Eisenhower telephoned Montgomery from
Bradley's HQ, with Bradley at his side. In a three-way telephone
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
167
conversation the Allied commanders made plans to encircle
100,000 German troops, now in the Mortain 'pocket', which
could be closed if the Americans advanced from the south
through Argentan and the British from the north through
Falaise. Montgomery agreed, and immediately began work on
the directive needed to put the plan in operation.
A day earlier, on 7 August, the Canadians had begun a fresh
attack towards Falaise, code-named 'Totalise'. Montgomery had
noted from Ultra that some of the German tank divisions
concentrating at Mortain had been
drawn away from the
Canadian front, which made the chance of a break-through
beyond the Bourguebus
Ridge more
likely.
"Totalise'
was
entrusted to Canadian II Corps, and the plan was the brainchild
of its commander, Simonds.
He decided to attack by night
without a preliminary bombardment,
and to penetrate the
forward German strong-points
with two columns of tanks,
accompanied by infantry riding in Priest tanks from which the
105-mm guns had been removed. This time the attack was a
partial success, and by dawn the Canadian columns were three
miles inside the German lines, where they were to be joined by
the Polish Armoured Division in an attempt to break through.
The Germans counter-attacked in strength, however, and by dark
on 8 August the Canadian advance was halted. That night
Eisenhower drove to Montgomery's HQ to urge him to continue
the attack.
On the next day the Canadians attacked again, and lost forty-
five tanks in attempts to penetrate the German defences, but
during 9 August the Germans pulled back to a prepared defence
line behind the River Laison. Montgomery had driven the enemy
back nine miles, but his leading troops were still seventeen miles
from Falaise. Once again he had been denied a spectacular break-
through, though he had satisfied Eisenhower by keeping the
German armour engaged. From a historical point of view,
however, it is clear that if 'Totalise' had been a complete success,
resulting in the capture of Falaise, then von Kluge would have
ordered an immediate retreat to the Seine, with the result that
many fewer Germans would have been trapped in the Falaise gap.
Montgomery's Directive M518, written on 11 August as the
Canadian attack was grinding to a halt, outlined a plan for closing
the 'sack' - through which German supplies were flowing - by a
short envelopment.
Twenty-First Army Group would thrust
