Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
and have been sticky.
5. The midday bombing
yesterday by Eighth Air Force
(Fortresses) on the Canadian front was most inaccurate.
Bombs fell in 12 Corps area west of the ORNE, in CAEN
itself, behind CAEN, east of CAEN, in the area of Canadian
A.G.R.A., and on Tac. H.Q. 3 Canadian Div.
A few fell in the target area.
The Canadians had about 300 casualties in personnel, had
about 12
guns knocked out, had a good many vehicles
destroyed, and KELLER (Comd. 3 Cdn. Div.) was wounded
(will be out of action for about 6 months).
The same thing happened on 25 July west of ST. LO; the
Americans had
500 killed
and wounded, and General
McNAIR was killed.
It now seems clear that Eighth Air Force must never come
down into the tactical battle.
6. Harry Crerar is fighting his first battle and it is the first
appearance in history of a Canadian
Army H.Q. He is
desperately anxious it should succeed. He is so anxious that
he worries himself all day!!
I go and see him a lot and calm him down.
He will be much better when he realises that battles seldom
go completely as planned, that great patience is required, that
you keep on at it until the other chap cracks, and that if you
worry you will eventually go mad!!
He seemed to have gained the idea that all you want is a
good initial fire plan, and then the Germans all run away!!
7. Rumours keep reaching me of bad influences at work at
SHAEF.
My own feeling is that Bedel Smith [sic] is all right and not
bad in that way. He is intensely 'national'; but I would say he
is a good member of the Allied team.
His intense national pride may be at work to try and make
it appear that the war in Normandy is being fought by two
separate parties
with no connection between the two.
- a British party and an American party,
If this were so, we would NOT be where we are today.
It is of course one party,
working on
one plan,
and
controlled and directed by one HQ. IKE is quite clear on this
aspect of the matter.
8. But I hear rumours that Gale is bad, in that he openly runs
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 431
down the War Office, and the QMG by name, at conferences
at SHAEF. I shall check up on this, and if it is true I will
tackle him on the matter.
I believe Morgan is suspect too, but have no evidence.
The senior British officers at SHAEF must realise that, in
addition to being good allied chaps, they have definite
loyalties to their own side of the house; and, in our side of the
house, we must all pull together.
9. The P.M. visited me on Monday, and stayed one hour.
He asked me about this idea to switch DRAGOON Ithe
invasion of the South of France, formerly 'Anvil').
(a) I was not in touch with the strategical and political
(b) The date for DRAGOON was 15 Aug and that is only
(c) We have not yet captured the ports in Brittany in to
which the ships could come. The ports may
mined, as was Cherbourg.
(d) From the purely military aspect it seemed to me to be
too late to attempt a switch.
(e) From other aspects it would probably mean a quarrel
with the Americans, and that would do us no good.
Taken all round, I was in favour of deciding well ahead
what we wanted to do - and then doing it. You cannot
make big changes at the last moment.
10. The P.M. struck me as looking old and tired; he seemed
to find it difficult to concentrate on a subject for more than a
few moments; he seemed restless, and unable to make his
mind up about anything.
11. I hear Dicky Mountbatten is in England. I would like to
see him before he goes back, and hear his news about the war
12. Ike came to see me last night. We discussed DRAGOON
and I gave him my views as in para 9.
P.S. [hand-written] Latest reports are that 4 Cdn Armd DIV
is well on. The Poles are still on their start line + thus
exposing the eastern flank of the Cdn spearhead. I have
told Harry [Crerar] to give the Poles a kick in the fork.
