428
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Army, assisted by tremendous air attack, broke through the
enemy's
forward
lines.
I
was
extremely hopeful
and
optimistic. I thought that at last we had him and were going
to roll him up. That did not come about.
Now we are pinning our immediate hopes on Bradley's
attack, which should get off either tomorrow or on the first
good day. But the country is bad, and the enemy strong at the
point of
main assault,
and
more than ever
I think it is
important that we are aggressive throughout the front.
The recent advances near Caen have partially eliminated
the necessity for a defensive attitude, so I feel that you should
insist that Dempsey keep up the strength of his attack. Right
now we have the ground and air strength and the stores to
support major assaults by both armies simultaneously. As
Bradley's attack starts Dempsey's should be intensified,
certainly until he gains the space and airfields we need on that
flank. In First Army, the whole front comes quickly into
action to pin down local reserves and to support the main
attack. Dempsey should do the same. The enemy has no
immediately available major reserves. We do not need to fear,
at this moment, a great counter offensive.
I am sure that in this way we will secure the greatest results
in the quickest possible time, which is our basic objective.
Moreover, I am convinced that in this way we will have in the
long
run the
least
number of casualties. I realize the
seriousness of the reinforcement problem for Dempsey. That
another reason, in my mind, for getting the business
straightened out quickly. Eventually the American ground
strength will necessarily be much greater than the British. But
while we have equality in size we must go forward shoulder to
shoulder, with honors and sacrifices equally shared.
I have taken up the air matters you suggested to me. We
must preserve our organization, because the air, in the whole
campaign, has performed
splendidly, in support of the
ground, in spite of adverse weather conditions.
Good luck!
As ever,
IKE?
The following letter from Montgomery to the CIGS, written
ten days before the Allies closed the Falaise gap, paints
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 429
dramatic picture of the gains won and of the by then almost
certain prospect of a tremendous
victory. It also throws an
interesting sidelight on Montgomery's character in his switching
from describing the battle
which
was to change European
history to
pin-pricking
criticisms
of the
Canadian Army
commander and the British staff generals at SHAEF. The letter
demonstrates, too, his supreme confidence that Brooke would
take his side in any dispute arising from personality clashes.
Simbo takes this and will give you our news.
1. The enemy attack at MORTAIN
was just what we
wanted; it was held without difficulty; I put the 2nd T.A.F. on
to it, as well as the 8th Air Force,
and the pilots all had a
great day. They claimed '120 flamers'; but I doubt that.
2. On the left, the Canadian attack is aimed at FALAISE. 1
have ordered them to hold that place securely, and from it to
operate southwards towards ARGENTAN and westwards
towards CONDE.
8 Corps, the right wing of Second Army,
TINCHEBRAY today, but I do not expect this advance to
progress far. Its main task is to hold the enemy to his ground.
3. The right wing of 12 Army Group, 15 U.S. Corps, is at LE
MANS, where it will secure a bridgehead. I have ordered it
then to operate northwards to ALENCON; this is a very
important thrust.
4. I am aiming at closing in behind the Germans.
The Canadians should be
FALAISE; they will not have the easy time they fancied, but
they should get there; at present their forward movement is
not making rapid progress.
The Germans will fight hard for FALAISE I think. I don't
think the Americans
will have any difficulty in getting to
ALENCON, as there is nothing there to oppose them.
If we can get FALAISE, and can also hold ALENCON
strongly, we should then be able to close the gap in between -
and that would be very excellent.
But the Germans will fight
hard; it is good defensive
country and we must not expect things to go too rapidly.
So far the Poles have not displayed that dash we expected,
