26
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
After this failure Montgomery contemplated using airborne
troops for another drop but Alexander, firm for once, vetoed
this, signalling: 'Not prepared to sanction further use of airborne
troops until training of pilots improved. Do not contemplate
further use?'8
The best commentary comes from Maj-Gen John Frost, who
dropped on Primosole:
The Germans fully realised the importance of denying the
easy run across the plain to the narrow route between Mount
Etna and the sea, which was the key to the defence of Sicily.
In fact Catania was never taken, but was outflanked as a
result of very hard fighting elsewhere: The Catanian plain was
an ideal DZ, and with the whole of it in our hands Catania
and the key would have quickly been at our mercy. I consider
that if the whole of the Ist Airborne Division had been put
down on the Catania plain, from the Primosole Bridge to
Catania, the whole campaign in Sicily would have been won
within ten davs
This is a valid criticism of Montgomery.
At first Montgomery gravely underestimated the strength of
the German reaction. On 13 July he informed Alexander:
'General battle situation excellent. Am making a great effort to
reach Catania tomorrow night 14 July, and with some luck hope
to do so. On 16 July his signal to Alexander read: 'Hope to get
to Catania tonight'10 But he had misread the situation, for
Catania did not fall until 6 August.
Now the Eighth Army commander created grave trouble
between himself and the Americans. On 14 July, with the failure
of the parachute drop, Montgomery found himself held up in the
Catanian Plain by 29th Panzer Division, reinforced by the two
regiments of paratroopers flown in from Avignon in France, one
of which, the 4th, had coincided on the Primosole DZ with the
British. Without warning Patton or asking Alexander for
authority, Montgomery decided to usurp Route 124, running
west of Etna towards Messina, although this had been assigned
to Patton for his advance up Sicily. Late on 14 July Alexander
signalled that he agreed Eighth Army was to have Route 124
and that US Seventh Army was to relinquish it. Patton and the
Americans were furious, feeling that Montgomery, backed by
Sicily and After
27
Alexander, had arbitrarily relegated their role to guarding his left
flank.
Montgomery tried to encircle Etna by sending XXX Corps
round the west on Route 124, while XIII Corps on its own
attacked along the east coast. With insufficient weight to their
attacks and with Eighth Army's artillery and tanks divided, both
corps soon became bogged down. If their commander had sent
both his corps along the east coast and
attack in full strength to the west of Etna, the Allied thrust
would have been too powerful for the Germans.
A livid Patton flew to Tunisia to see Alexander, who soon
realised
how
consolation prize he agreed that Patton could manoeuvre to the
west and capture Palermo. Alexander, by allowing Montgomery
to divide Eighth and Seventh Armies, condemned them both to a
slogging match; the German defences around Etna have been
compared with Torres
British. In four days with a brilliantly executed operation he
captured Palermo in the north-west tip of the island, and on the
next day, 23 July, he attacked east along the north coast.
Despite bitter resistance his troops entered Messina on
16
August, the day before the British, after thirty-eight days of
fighting. He had stolen Montgomery's colours, and was thrilled
to have his revenge for the dirty trick he felt the latter had played
on him by pinching his Route 124.
As the
Eighth
Army
began to make some progress
Montgomery sent signal after signal to Algiers to enquire about
'My Fortress' - a four-engined bomber which Eisenhower had
offered him for his personal use. It arrived in Malta, but then got
lost because it was sent to North Africa for a new engine. On 23
July Montgomery sent a telegram of congratulations to Patton
for capturing Palermo, and accepted an invitation to visit him
there on the 27th. By now the Fortress had arrived, and after
cabling Patton to warn all his anti-aircraft defences on the coast
route, the British general flew in it to Palermo. On the way back
there was nearly a nasty accident, and to Montgomery's relief,
Bedell Smith replaced it with a C47 Dakota which was more
suitable for the short runways available.
When on 13 July Montgomery had decided to use Eighth
Army in a two-pronged attack around Etna, instead of letting
Patton come up on his left flank on Route 124, the Sicilian
