222
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
disobeyed Bradley's instructions and, in order to prevent
American help going to the British, immediately involved Third
Army in an assault on Metz which required yet more supplies;
when this failed he sent an unauthorised spearhead on to the
Rhine. Bradley connived in this disobedience.
By
15
September
the Airborne
Corps'
plan
was
complete - and unalterable - in every interlocking detail. With
only two days remaining to D-day, Montgomery either had to
accept the whole package or call the operation off. He chose to
go ahead, despite the forebodings of his staff.
During the week 10-17 September, more and more evidence
was found of German tanks in the Arnhem area. Colonel Tony
Tasker, in charge of land intelligence at Airborne Army HQ,
and Major Brian Urquart at Airborne Corps HQ, became
convinced that air reconnaissance photographs showed tanks
around Arnhem. This was confirmed by Ultra signals, which
showed II SS Panzer Corps HQ to be there, and which also
positively identified 9th and 11th SS Panzer Divisions in the
area. Of course, no one was able to assess how many tanks
these divisions had left after their battering in Normandy but,
since German tank production was in full swing, these crack
formations would obviously have priority with new tanks.
Bill Williams told me that:
Boy Browning knew that the morale of his airborne troops
was still high, in spite of seventeen cancelled arerations, and
he was determined to go on with Arnhem, ignoring the
alarming reports of tanks. Morale is terribly important in
airborne operations. Browning was good-looking and brave,
but not willing to listen. Both Tasker and Urquhart told him
an appreciable number of tanks had shown up on air pictures
of the Arnhem area. I was horrified when I heard later that
Browning had got rid of Brian Urquhart just as he was being
awkward about Arnhem by alleging he was having a nervous
breakdown.
Brian Urquhart wrote to me that he remembers Brereton as
an extremely unimpressive and somewhat bewildered American
general', and that US Maj-Gen Floyd Parks, Brereton's Chief of
Staff, was the dominant figure at Airborne Army HQ. His letter
continues, very fairly:
The Fatal Wrong Decision
223
I used to believe that Boy Browning was the villain of the
piece, but have since concluded that I was wrong and that he
was obeying, against his better judgement, orders from much
higher up designed to give the British the last victory of the
war (you will remember the publicity that Patton's Third
Army got was extremely unpopular with Montgomery). Of
course,
Browning was
extremely
ambitious,
but my
correspondence with his wife and my look at the papers of
Cornelius Ryan have shown me that he was in fact extremely
uneasy about the task he had been given at Arnhem.
Actually, I liked Browning very much and feel that he has
been unnecessarily made the scapegoat for this disgraceful
disaster. The film of A Bridge Too Far is a travesty on this
score, as on many others. 12
Neither General Sir Nigel Poett nor Field-Marshal Lord
Carver hold to this opinion of Browning, however. Lord Carver
told me that:
The pressure to do 'Market-Garden' came from Airborne
Corps. They were a very expensive organisation and had to
be used. At that time Monty had two priorities:
1. To break his image of being over-cautious.
2.
To make sure he did the main attack over the Rhine
himself.
Of course there was a shortage of experienced planners; at
that stage not many people
had any experience of
operations. Until
D-Day there had only
been one
real
airborne operation in the British Army - Sicily.
This view is supported by General Poett:
Monty alone was responsible for the Arnhem decision, but he
was pushed into it by Browning. Boy Browning was too
anxious to deploy 1st Airborne Division at Arnhem. He was
itching to do it because 1st Airborne, the veterans of airborne
landings, were so eager to go and prove that they were as
good as we new boys in the 6th Airborne Division who had
been so completely successful in Normandy. They were
jealous of us.
