96
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
plan for glider-borne troops to capture Bénouville bridge.
Once he was satisfied that the plan was sound, like any good
general he would leave the details to his planning
staff.
Belchem was a magnificent executive, with a flair for detail.
On D-plus-2, 8 June, Montgomery landed himself. His
destroyer ran aground in trying to get close in to the shore, but
he was soon at his Tac HQ set up in an orchard at Creully, not
more than 3,000 yards from the nearest German lines. He wrote
immediately that day to de Guingand: 'I am very well satisfied
with the general situation."
At Creully Montgomery found ready for him his personal
(and very comfortable) caravan, his mobile map room and office
in a specially built truck, and a large tent as a mess for his small
staff. He settled down to this cosy life with his younger officers,
while Brigadiers Belchem and Williams were ordered to come
over each day in a Dakota from his Main HQ at Portsmouth in
order to liaise with him. Montgomery stayed at Creully until 22
June, when he moved to Blay, six miles west of Bayeux and near
Bradley at Grandchamp, not far from Omaha Beach.
Once on shore in France Montgomery resumed the lifestyle of
his desert, Sicilian and Italian campaigns. Each day he visited
the commanders, and held conferences in forward positions so
as to interfere as little as possible with the movements of his
generals. He would return to his HQ in the late afternoon,
receive his liaison officers' reports, and then deal with his
administration problems. He insisted on a landing strip as close
as possible to Tac HQ, and discouraged unimportant visitors.
German
and
American
generals usually
set
up
their
headquarters in châteaux or other prominent buildings, but
Montgomery's HQs were in caravans, sited in fields or woods.
At his HQ he had a small personal staff, and he depended
greatly on his liaison officers, carefully selected young men who
he considered had drive, courage and good judgement. These
officers were expected to go everywhere and to find out exactly
what was going on, giving their reports to Montgomery each
evening after
dinner. They had access to commanders of
formations at all levels and could give their chief a clear and
vivid picture of the battle by the end of each day. After hearing
their reports, Montgomery sent a daily signal to Alanbrooke.
Yet, however effective, this isolation from other senior officers
Normandy Assault
97
and from people of his own age contributed to Montgomery's
failure to understand the criticism and jealousy
which his
conduct was arousing amongst the British and American chiefs
at SHAEF, and at Bradley's US First Army.
Montgomery found time to write in his own hand to Simpson
on 8 June, and to de Guingand on the 10th. These letters are
clear, frank and revealing:
TAC HQ
June 8 1944
My dear Simbo,
You may like the following news of our battle.
1. There is no doubt that the Germans were suprised, and we
got on shore before they had recovered. The speed, power
and violence of the assault carried all before it.
2. Generally, the beach obstacles presented no difficulty;
where they were troublesome it was because of rough weather
- and on some beaches it was pretty rough.
3. DD Tanks
(a) Used successfully on Utah beaches;
(b) Failed to reach the shore on Omaha beaches and all
(c) Were not launched on 50 Div front as it was too
rough; were landed 'dry' behind the
leading infantry;
(d) Landed dry Canadian front.
(e) Used successfully on 3 Div front.
Generally it can be said that the DD tanks proved their value,
and casualties were high where they could not be used.
4. At a guess prisoners about 6,000 so far.
Turks.
5. British
OC 2 Warwicks. No general officers are casualties.
