276
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
besieged positions over the river.
At the conference, US First Army was not officially placed
under Montgomery, but Bradley was given the clearest possible
orders that he was to put his full weight on the left to support
Twenty-First Army Group, even if that meant grounding his
right flank. In all probability Eisenhower wanted to put US First
Army under Montgomery's command, but was worried by the
inevitability of opposition from Bradley and Patton. What is
certain, however, is that the Supreme Commander's generous
support for Twenty-First Army Group's proposed drive into the
Ruhr, clearly demonstrated at the Versailles conference, frees
him of the charge of being biased against Montgomery. Among
the officers at SHAEF, however, the story was different.
Three and a half weeks previously, Simpson had spent the
day at SHAEF HQ in Portsmouth, just before it moved over to
France. Morgan had invited him down since he felt that SHAEF
staff were under the impression that the War Office was hostile
to their organisation
this 'hostile tone', Morgan
permeated the War Office from Brooke himself downwards.
Simpson did his best to pour oil on the troubled waters, agreeing
that War Office staff had not visited SHAEF sufficiently, and
adding his view that some senior War Office staff officers feared
that there might be an anti-British attitude in SHAFF. Simpson
asked the SHAEF officers how often any of them had visited
Montgomery's own Twenty-First Army Group HQ, and they
admitted that in this respect they had been at fault. At Versailles
senior SHAEF
displayed an 'anti-Montgomery' attitude, while the War Office
supported him strongly.
At lunch on the 22nd, Morgan and Gale defended themselves
to Simpson against a charge that the senior British staff officers
at SHAEF were not supporting Montgomery. Morgan said: *We
do not look on ourselves as British staff officers responsible for
the British point of view. We are Allied staff officers serving Ike,
who is the Allied Commander? To this, Simpson replied:
All I want is that you should try to find out what Monty
wants, just as the American staff officers find out what
Bradley and Patton want, and then put it to Ike in terms that
Ike can understand. Have you ever tried to find out what
Monty wants by going to see him? Gale saw him yesterday
After Arnhem
277
for the first time since coming to France and you, Freddie
Morgan, have not seen him yet. From the War Office point of
view we feel you are not doing your duty in representing
British interests. It can be done in a perfectly fair manner
without prejudicing the Allied cause.
Both Gale and Morgan were on the defensive, replying: *We
know well that we are looked on by everybody as having sold
ourselves to the Americans, but we know also that we have no
future in the British Army once Ike has finished with us.'
Simpson replied that this was nonsense, and that unless they
'pulled their socks up' they would be regarded by everyone as
being 'completely gutless'
- whether as British staff officers,
Allied staff officers, or anything else. Simpson felt that what he
said left Gale quite unmoved, but that it distressed Freddie
Morgan, and might therefore make him more co-operative with
he reported
conversation with the two generals to Montgomery.
General Simpson told me that, with hindsight, his considered
opinion of the senior British officers at SHAEF - Morgan, Gale,
Whiteley, Strong and Tedder - was that they had fallen under
Eisenhower's spell; he had noticed that the American nearly
always inspired a genuine affection in those who served him. For
instance, according to Simpson, Morgan was not malicious, as
Montgomery believed him to be; it was just that he doted on
Eisenhower, although undoubtedly Tedder, for one, was at times
'sharply critical' view of, and a 'distaste' for,
Montgomery.*
Whatever the views of Eisenhower's British staff officers,
however, Montgomery was not without powerful support. For
in his demand for overwhelming strength for his northern thrust,
but the Secretary of State for War, Grigg, was also strongly on
his side. Grigg wrote to Montgomery on 25 September: 'I should
like to know how much you are being injured by what I assume
to be a fact that although Ike has assured you that your thrust
gets priority, his staff, ably assisted by Gale, are in practice
disregarding this pledge.'13
* Tedder's
views
are
given
in Lewin,
Montgomery
Military
Commander, and, more forcefully, in his own memoirs, With Prejudice.
