186
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
2.
The force must operate as one whole, with great cohesion,
and so strong that it can do the job quickly.
3.
Single control and direction of the land operation is vital
for success. This is a whole time job for one man.
4. The great victory in N.W. France has been won by
personal command. Only in this way will future victories
be won. If staff control of operations is allowed to creep in,
then quick success becomes endangered.
5.
To change the system of command now, after having won
a great victory, would be to prolong the war.'
Undoubtedly
had
overlooked the fact that all the
commanders considered the war to be nearly won, and that the
Americans wanted as much glamour for themselves as possible.
For two hours de Guingand pressed Montgomery's case with
Eisenhower, but found him adamant, although good-humoured.
The
SHAEF
planners had decided,
without
consulting
Montgomery, that they wanted 'a broad front both north and
south of the Ardennes', and Eisenhower backed them to the full.
He pointed out that it had always been agreed that he would take
personal charge as soon as there were two army groups operating,
and he added that now there were more Americans in the field
than British and Canadians.
Montgomery was disappointed when de Guingand got back
and told him of Eisenhower's reaction. In an attempt to sway the
American himself, he invited Eisenhower for lunch on the next
day, 23 August, at his Tac HQ, now in an apple orchard at
Condé-sur-Noireau. At first light on the 23rd Montgomery flew
to Laval to meet Bradley. He was seeking to persuade his fellow
commander to lend US First Army for the northern drive,* and
to halt Patton's Third Army so that Twenty-First Army Group
could have the major share of road transport. He was still
confident that Bradley would agree. Instead, Bradley, who had
already
consulted with Patton, surprised Montgomery by
declaring that he favoured making the major Allied drive south
of the Ardennes. He had already promised Patton two extra
divisions for a push to the Siegfried Line', and he now told
Montgomery that US First and Third Armies ought to advance
through the middle of France to the River Saar and, once over
it, to the Rhine near Frankfurt. Montgomery was aghast. If this
plan was operated there would be such a shortage of transport
Eisenhower Takes Command
187
for his own troops that he would play only a minor part in what,
at that time, he expected to be the swift overrunning of
Germany.
He was almost desperate when he got back to his own HQ to
meet Eisenhower for lunch, and he was determined to swing the
Supreme Commander round to his point of view either by
threats or advocacy, for neither of which tasks was he well
suited by temperament. Eisenhower dreaded the meeting. He
disliked having to decide between conflicting views, since his
preferred method of operation was to arrive at agreed, albeit
compromise, decisions after committee-type consultations with
his subordinates. He knew on 23 August that three choices were
open to him: first, a broad-front approach with equipment and
supplies rationed equally between Bradley's and Montgomery's
Army Groups; second, concentration on a southern drive by the
US armies; and third, Montgomery's plan for an all-out thrust in
the north, with US First Army and the bulk of supplies allocated
to the British commander. Eisenhower was well aware that this
last alternative would infuriate the American generals, some of
whom might even resign, and also that it was unacceptable to the
American Government.
Even before the discussion began, however, Eisenhower had
realised that there were merits in Montgomery's plan - SHAEF
Administration kept on emphasising the need to capture other
Channel ports nearer to Germany and, having been in London
himself, he was acutely conscious of the dire threat to Britain
from the V-bombs (several V is had fallen close to him and had
lost him a lot of sleep). Churchill had repeatedly impressed upon
him the paramount need to overrun the launching sites since
there was no
possible defence against the V2s, and Allied
intelligence had learned from Ultra and other sources that these
were about to
be launched against London. The V2s were
rocket-powered ballistic missiles capable of rising to an altitude
of sixty miles and falling at some five times the speed of
sound - their 1-ton warheads caused considerable damage and
casualties. The only way to stop them was to capture their
launching sites. A fortnight after D-Day Churchill had said that
he would not allow the Vis to interfere with the plans for the
battle of Normandy, but now he emphasised to Eisenhower that
the V2s were another matter.
