280
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Armd Div could clean it up; but it cannot. First US
Army is very involved about AACHEN.
Therefore I must use 8 Corps to clean up this area and
push the enemy back of the MEUSE.
2. I could possibly carry ANTWERP, plus B; but I definitely
cannot carry all three, and also launch Second Army
towards KREFELD.
3. If I carry on as we are now, and launch Second Army
towards KREFELD on 10 October, that Army will have
two hostile flanks - as well as strong frontal opposition. A
German threat north of NIJMEGEN, with
possibly
danger of some enemy success,
would unbalance me
completely and my thrust towards KREFELD would
cease.
I would then find myself very stretched, and possibly
unable to hold all my gains.
I might then find that Canadian Army wanted more help
to open up ANTWERP; and I would not be able to supply
this help.
4. I therefore consider that I cannot launch Second Army
towards the RUHR until I have eliminated the following
commitments:
Para 1
ANTWERP.
(A). Finished the operations for opening
Para 1 (C). Pushed the enemy back over the MEUSE.
5. I have decided to act as in para 4. I have ordered that the
attack of Second Army toward KREFELD and the
RUHR be postponed. 14
7-10-44
B.L. Montgomery
Field-Marshal
The opening paragraph is an understatement. 1A. and B. are
together a desperate cry to Eisenhower for more American
divisions,
and 1A. is
also an
admission that too
much
ammunition had been going to Second Army and not enough to
the Canadians. Montgomery had also been unable to release US
82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions - without them he could not
have held the Nijmegen bridgehead, let alone attacked again.
Until he received this very clear statement, Eisenhower had
maintained his faith in Montgomery's promise both to force a
Rhine crossing and, simultaneously, to clear the Scheldt estuary
After Arnhem
and free Antwerp. As a result, he had allowed the US airborne
divisions to stay in the line with Twenty-First Army Group,
despite frantic protests from Brereton that it was a 'useless waste
of trained paratroops'; he had ordered Bradley to take over
more of Twenty-First Army Group's front; and, an hour before
Montgomery's statement arrived, he had dictated that 'the Allies
must retain as first mission the gaining of the line north of Bonn
as quickly as humanly possible.'
All this he had done while
continuing to emphasise to Montgomery that Antwerp must be
was gravely disappointed by the 7 October
situation report; worse, he was extremely angry, and his anger
was fanned by Tedder, Morgan and the American generals at
Versailles, all of whom opposed Montgomery in greater or lesser
degrees. They felt, and Eisenhower shared that feeling, that
Montgomery had let down SHAEF by his over-optimism both
about 'Market-Garden' and the subsequent fighting in the
Nijmegen area, and that they had been persuaded at the
conference to divert
Montgomery
under
Montgomery had disobeyed Eisenhower's order to clear the
TEEN
Scheldt and open Antwerp.
The Supreme Commander now regretted that he had not
backed the southern thrusts by Bradley and Patton instead of
concentrating, at their expense, on Montgomery's northern drive
to the Ruhr, which
he
and
his Versailles
colleagues
now
suddenly realised was a 'shocking failure'. Montgomery would
never see his dream of leading a massive Anglo-American army
to Berlin, because Eisenhower would never again trust
his
promises, nor would he ever receive the support held out to him
at the Versailles conference.
In Holland, as in Normandy,
Montgomery's performance had fallen too far short
of his
promises - but in Holland there was no overwhelming Allied
victory in which to hide the failures.
The
following
letter, written
to Grigg on 10
October,
demonstrates once more Montgomery's conviction that he could
