230
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
to the North German Plains, thus outflanking the Siegfried Line.
In fact, such a plan was never really feasible - the timing was
too optimistic.
Guards Armoured Division was to punch a hole in the
German defences, through which 43rd Division was to follow,
while 50th Division was to hold the flank. All the leading units
were told that they had just two days in which to reach Arnhem.
Tanks of the Irish Guards were to lead the attack at 1435 on
17 September, against opposition identified by Second Army
Intelligence as six infantry battalions, supported by twenty tanks
and twenty-five guns, including twelve 88-mms. It was plain that
if there were many more German anti-tank guns than had been
forecast, the whole effort would be a disaster from the start.
At 1400 the artillery bombardment started as the gigantic air
armada swished through the blue sky overhead. The artillery
fired a narrow rolling barrage up the single road front, while a
'cab rank' of Typhoons surged overhead, waiting for the ground
troops to identify their targets. For the first three miles ahead to
the Dutch frontier all went well, but once over the frontier there
came stiff opposition from Germans concealed in woods. There
had unfortunately been no air reconnaisance photographs of the
area, with the result that enemy anti-tank guns had not been
pinpointed. Nine Irish Guards tanks in a row were knocked out
before a single German self-propelled anti-tank gun
was
identified and destroyed by the Typhoons, which, directed from
the ground, fired at enemy targets and enabled the tanks to
advance. Soon 250 German prisoners were being escorted to the
rear.
At 1730 the leading Irish Guards had advanced seven miles,
and had reached the bridge south of Valkenswaard and found it
intact. German resistance inside the town and in the surrounding
woods was tough, however. When the Irish Guards finally
battered their way in it was'... a complete shambles with three
or four really big fires burning. Germans still firing; other
Germans milling about trying to find their
way
back to
Germany ... all the inhabitants in the streets yelling themselves
hoarse and getting in the way of the fighting? The Mayor's clerk
came running into Battalion HQ with a telephone message
intercepted from the German commander in Eindhoven that
Valkenswaard must be defended to the last man.
The capture of Valkenswaard was good news, but now the
Arnhem
231
first day was gone and the leading troops of XXX Corps were
still fifty miles from Arnhem, which Montgomery had promised
would be relieved by the end of the next day. In Arnhem, British
1st Airborne was already suffering grave problems.
On the
18th, however, the Guards'
advance was slowed
because the Typhoons
were no
longer
available
— 1O
satisfactory reason for their absence has ever been given. The
tanks had to make flanking movements in difficult ground to
pass 88-mm guns and Spandaus concealed behind concrete
walls. But once Aalst, a dormitory town for Eindhoven, was
taken, the managing director of the Phillips Electrical Works
there produced a sketch map of the German positions, marked
with crosses to show the gun pits. His map was completely
accurate, and of incalculable value to the British armour.
During the afternoon the leading Irish Guards were halted yet
again by German 88-mm guns, and spirits fell. Then suddenly
there came a telephone message from Zon that Eindhoven had
fallen to the airborne troops. Soon the tanks were rolling past
Fanandoned German 885, and they entered Eindhoven amidst
cheers
from the
Dutch
and from US
101st Airborne's
parachutists - orange banners and flags, flowers and fruit were
everywhere.
Unfortunately, the bridge at Zon had been blown because no
airborne troops had been dropped to the north of it. Sappers built
a new bridge, and the armoured advance began again at 0600
the next morning, 19 September. Messages came through that
US 82nd Division held the Grave bridge, the Maas-Waal Canal
bridges, and were heavily engaged
300 yards south of the
Nijmegen bridge. There are two bridges
over the Waal at
Nijmegen - a road bridge 1200 yards long and, downstream, a
railway bridge. Both were still intact, although prepared for
demolition.
Cheered on by Dutch civilians and the American parachutists
at every crossroad and village, the Ist Grenadier Guards, now
leading, drove their tanks flat out along the highway, and at
1200 on Tuesday 19 September
- a fine, sunny day
- they
linked up with the US forward units locked in fierce battle with
German SS troops in the streets
of Nijmegen. Lt-Col E.H.
Goulburn. CO of the Grenadiers, held a hurried conference with
Gavin, and learnt that Ist Airborne Division still held the north
end of Arnhem bridge although they were by now in dire straits.
