Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Army Group in the liberation of Europe would be modest. The
Supreme Commander's intention was that they should: 'cross
the Elbe without delay, drive to the Baltic coast at Lubeck and
seal off the Danish Peninsula?
Learning of these events, both Churchill and Brooke were
and horrified
Eisenhower's bloody-mindedness. Throughout the campaign the
American had pandered to the
British, and Churchill, in
particular, found it hard to believe that, suddenly and without
consultation, Eisenhower would make a fundamental change in
the agreed strategy, and would not only downgrade the British
forces to the minor role of occupying Holland and Denmark,
but would also forego the coveted prize of Berlin. The Supreme
Commander's real antipathy towards Montgomery had started
with the latter's disastrous press conference of 7 January, and
had been fanned by Marshall, among others. But a clue to
Eisenhower's sudden firmness on 28 March can be found in a
statement he made to
Cornelius Ryan: 'Montgomery had
become so personal in his efforts to make sure the Americans
and me in particular got no credit, that in fact we hardly had
anything to do with the war, that I finally stopped talking to
Montgomery had misjudged Eisenhower's
attitude towards him at Zondhoven in mid-February, and as a
consequence he had lightly thrown away the opportunity of
bringing Alexander to SHAEF, and thus of strengthening British
influence over strategy. At the time Montgomery had had no
idea of the depth of Eisenhower's dislike for him, but on 1 April
when he wrote this bitter letter (published here for the first time)
to his friend Frank Simpson, his eyes had at last been opened:
It has occured to me that Ike may be saying that I set my
forces in motion for the Elbe without consulting him. The true
facts are that on March 25 when I took the Prime Minister
and the CIGS to meet Ike and Bradley at 15 US Corps HQ, I
got hold of Ike and Bradley and had a talk with them round
the map.
I explained my plan of moving up to the Elbe line and drew
on the map the right boundary that I suggested for 21 Army
Group: i.e. between me and Bradley. The only comment
made by Ike was that he thought Magdeburg, which is on the
Elbe, should be inclusive to Bradley. I had drawn it as
Eisenhower's Revenge
377
inclusive to me. I at once agreed and Bradley agreed also. No
other comment was made, though on that day Ike must have
known that he was going to take the 9th Army away from
me, and that he intended the main thrust to be south-east
towards Dresden so as to join up with the Russians in that
area.
I went away, thought out my plans, and issued my order.
On March 27 T sent these plans to you and to Ike. On March
28 I issued my written directive to my armies. On the same
day I received the blow from Ike in his directive in which he
agrees with my plan and removes 9th Army from me. A very
good counter-attack.
All very dirty work, I fear.
It is useless to deny the events of March 25 as I have
described them above. It was photographed and I enclose a
copy. From the look on Bradley's face* there is obviously
trouble ahead. 33
'Very dirty work' is a harsh condemnation, even
for
Montgomery, but it is justified when
one
considers the
underhand way in which the cup had been dashed from his lips.
His bitterness
was scarcely contained, and on 2 April he
signalled Brooke:
We are about to make a terrible mistake. The great point
now is speed of action so that we can finish off the German
war in the shortest possible time. SHAEF do not understand
if you
make big changes
in
Army Groups you
create
confusion in signal arrangements and communications. My
communications have been built up on the assumption that
9th Army would remain in 21 Army Group until we cleared
northern
Germany, and this was the declared intention of
Eisenhower.
My Main HQ is moving this week to a site
which will now be well inside 12th Army Group. It seems the
doctrine that public opinion wins wars is coming to the fore
again.
* According to Brooke, Churchill had told him that 'Bradley was a sour
faced bugger who would not listen', a picture of the American general that does
not always fit the accepted image.
