182
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
For some time past various statements which we need not
particularise have been circulating about him,
and these
seemed to coalesce into something more than rumour when
on Tuesday Reuter's special correspondent reported that Ike
had taken over and Bradley was equal with Monty. This was
denied by SHAEF at 2250. What is behind this confusing
alternation of official assertion and contradiction we do not
know ... something is clearly wrong which must have an
adverse
effect on the harmony of Anglo-American co-
operation in the field.
The Chief Press Officer at SHAEF informed Washington that
the Daily Mirror was 'not the most reputable of London
newspapers'.
On the next day, SHAEF's Public Relations Department
strongly denied that the activation of Twelfth Army Group gave
Bradley and Montgomery equal status; it did not, however,
make it clear that this equality would be achieved shortly.
Meanwhile, London newspapers
'demotion'.
deplored
Montgomery's
The Washington Times Herald, however, wrote about 'British
dominance of the Expeditionary Force', and the general tone of
the American press was a complaint that the British held the
principal command and that Eisenhower was little more than a
figurehead.
Marshall,
Eisenhower on 17 August:
angered by
these
comments, told
Stimson and I and apparently all Americans are strongly of
the opinion that the time has come for you to assume direct
command of the American contingent because reaction to
British criticism has been so strong by USA journalists that it
could
become
Congressional
an
important
factor
Elections.
in
the
coming
The
astonishing
success
has
produced emphatic expressions of confidence in you and
Bradley, but this has cast a damper on the public enthusiasm.
Eisenhower, by now on the brink of assuming direct control
of the land battle, as soon as he could set up his HQ in France,
had no intention of taking command of just the 'American
contingent', but he was irked by the credit given to Montgomery
in the London newspapers which, since they held Montgomery
Eisenhower Takes Command
183
to be responsible for all ground operations, acclaimed him as the
tactical genius responsible for the victory.
The bickering about status and credit was, however, about to
end, albeit temporarily. A suitable site for Eisenhower's HQ was
found at Juleiville, close to the port of Granville and within sight
of German-held Jersey. (German troops in Jersey
staged a
successful raid on Granville in the last few weeks of the war, but
long after Eisenhower had left.) On 1 September
SHAEF
became
operational
Granville,
and
Eisenhower, not
Montgomery, was now in full charge of the land battle.
It was the day on which Montgomery assumed the rank of
Field-Marshal, but this was cold comfort for him. He longed to
retain command. Bill Williams told me that his chief hoped until
the last moment that Eisenhower would leave him in overall
command after 1 September; he would not believe Williams
when he said: 'You can never command now. The numbers are
such that it must be an American victory?
Eisenhower and Montgomery had been more or less in
agreement over the fundamental strategy for the assault and the
break-out, but now they clashed head-on over plans for future
operations once the Seine was crossed. Eisenhower wanted the
two Army Groups, each under its own C-in-C, to advance
towards Germany north and south of the Ardennes, under his
sole overall command. Montgomery, strongly backed by the
British Chiefs of Staff, wanted both Army Groups to advance
north of the Ardennes under his sole command. There began a
quarrel
which lasted
until
the
end of
the
war.
This
controversy - and the tactless way in which Montgomery
handled it - led to a lasting enmity
between himself and
Eisenhower, and this in turn had an adverse effect on Anglo-
American relations.
Montgomery and Brooke failed to realise that, for political
reasons, it was no longer possible for Eisenhower to give a
British general overall command of the American troops, since
by now they so greatly outnumbered the British; nor did they
understand that US generals might refuse to serve under a
British
colleague.
So
Montgomery
continually
bullied
the
Supreme Commander in an effort to force him to change his
mind. His egotism, and his belief - assiduously fostered by the
CIGS - that he was a better strategist than Eisenhower made
him blind to prevailing circumstances, and the rest of the
