190
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Montgomery summing up their discussion; a copy was sent to
Bradley.
Confirming
our conversation of yesterday, the necessary
directive will soon be issued to outline the general missions of
the two Army Groups. It will be very brief, giving the Army
Group of the North the task of operating north-east, in the
area generally to the westward of Amiens-Lille, destroying
the enemy forces on its front, seizing the Pas de Calais area
and airfields in Belgium, and pushing forward to get a secure
base at Antwerp. Its eventual mission will be to advance
eastwards on the Ruhr. By the time Antwerp is reached the
general strength and composition of the forces needed for the
later task will have been determined.
Bradley's Army Group will be directed to thrust forward
on its left, with its principal offensive mission, for the
moment, to support the Army Group of the North in the
attainment of the objectives noted above. He will likewise be
directed to clean up the Brittany Peninsula as rapidly as
possible,
protect
against
any
threat
against
our
communications from the general area of Paris, and to begin
building up, out of incoming forces, the necessary strength to
advance eastward from Paris towards Metz.
You, as Commanding General of the Army Group of the
North will be given the authority to effect the necessary
operational co-ordination between your advancing forces and
Bradley's left wing. Mechanical details for effecting this will
be left to you and Bradley.
We
must
immediately prepare
definite plans for the
employment of the entire airborne force so as to speed up the
accomplishment of the missions that you must attain rapidly
in the north-east.
Unless
we use
the Airborne
Army,
assuming it is practicable to do so, we will not be using all
available assets and there would be no excuse for insisting
upon the deployment of the major part of Bradley's strength
on his extreme left.
Bradley is coming to see you this morning with instructions
to bend every effort toward speeding up the deployment of his
forces in that direction. The faster we do it the more certain
will be our success and the earlier will come our opportunity
to advance eastward from the Paris area.
Eisenhower Takes Command
191
All of us having agreed upon the general plan, the principal
thing we must now strive for is speed in execution. All of the
Supply people have assured us they can support the move,
beginning this minute - let us assume that they know exactly
what they are talking about and get about it vigorously and
without delay.
Unhappily, the letter was imprecise and woolly. For while it
looked as if Montgomery would get the Airborne Army, as well
as a measure of co-operation, Bradley and Patton wickedly
interpreted it as meaning
east towards
Germany, although Eisenhower
stated Twelfth Army
Group's 'principal offensive mission' as being to thrust forward
on its left to support Montgomery's north-easterly
Antwerp. On 25 August Bradley ordered Patton 'to prepare to
advance rapidly
crossings of the
US Third Army's general
desperately keen to advance into Germany; to him,
prepare meant an immediate dash forward, thus effecting the
Eisenhower, at least temporarily, to avoid.
Montgomery himself felt that Eisenhower's letter was a far
cry from his own demands, but decided to make the best of it by
interpreting its loose writing in his own favour. He wrote to
Brooke as soon as he had received the letter:
Ike has now decided on his line of action. His directive to me
is about all that I think I can get him to do at present. Ike has
agreed that we must occupy the Pas de Calais and get
possession of Belgian airfields and then prepare to move
eastwards into Ruhr and he has given this mission to 21st
Army Group. He has ordered 12 Army Group to thrust
forward its left with what it can spare to assist 21st Army
Group in carrying out its tasks and for this some six to eight
U.S. divisions will possibly be available. The remainder 12th
Army Group is to clear up Brittany and then assemble east of
Paris. Eventually the whole 12th
Army Group is to move
eastwards from
Paris towards Metz and the Saar. Ike is
taking command himself of 12th and 21st Army Groups on
1st Sep. He has given me power to co-ordinate action of
forces being used for northward drive to the Pas de Calais
