152
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the attack, Crerar's forces failed to make ground beyond the
Bourguebus Ridge because there were strong Panzer forces in
the woods behind La Hogue. No opening was secured by the
British armour, and late on the first day Dempsey decided that
the German defence was so strong that he must abandon the
attacks. While it was yet another tactical defeat for Montgomery
von Kluge was so worried by this threat that he came in person
to the Canadian front on 27 July, even though that day was
proving disastrous for
his forces in the west, where the
American attack was now
achieving
considerable success.
Montgomery had been right to order this expensive Canadian
attack, for it made certain that the German armour stayed in the
east, and this ensured victory for 'Cobra'.
Back in London, Eisenhower had decided not to try and
manoeuvre Montgomery out of the saddle - instead he would
ask Churchill to use his influence to make his general move
faster. At lunch at 10 Downing Street on 26 July he asked the
Prime Minister 'to persuade Monty to get on his bicycle and
start moving'®
Churchill,
his
differences with Montgomery
resolved, told Brooke that Eisenhower had complained both
"about your Monty's stickiness'
and about the exaggerated
reports in American newspapers that US troops were taking all
the casualties'.
On the
27th, Eisenhower and Bedell Smith dined at
10
Downing Street, together with Brooke. Churchill had given the
dinner in an attempt to bring Eisenhower closer to Brooke, and
to help smooth the quarrels between Montgomery
and
the
American. Brooke thought that the occasion did a lot of good,
and himself offered to go to Normandy to assist in handling
Monty', but in his diary for that day he made it clear how
strongly he took Montgomery's side: 'Ike knows nothing about
strategy. Bedell Smith, on the other hand, has brains but no
military education in the true sense ... he falls short when it
comes to strategic outlook. With that Supreme Command set up
it is no wonder Monty's real ability is not realised.' And on the
next day, 28th July, he wrote to Montgomery:
The trouble between you and the P.M. has been satisfactorily
settled. Ike was worried at the outlook taken by the American
press that the British were not taking their share of the
casualties. Ike considers the British
Army
could and
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
153
should be more offensive ... and that Dempsey should be
doing more than he does. Ike has the very vaguest conception
of war. He has some conception of attacking on the whole
front which must be an American doctrine judging by Mark
Clark with 5th Army in Italy. Unfortunately this policy of
attacking along the whole front is one that appeals to the
P.M. Ike may obtain some support in this direction. I feel
personally quite certain that Dempsey must attack at the
earliest possible moment, on a large scale. We must not allow
German forces to move from his front to Bradley's or we
shall give more cause for criticism than ever.
Montgomery replied immediately: 'Everything will be thrown
in. Gave orders to Dempsey this morning that attack is to be
pressed with utmost vigour, and all caution thrown to the winds
and many casualties accepted and that he must step on the gas
for Vire.' He was irritated that Eisenhower had complained to
Churchill
about him, but he fully realised the imperative
importance of preventing the Germans from reinforcing the
American front, as he also realised the need for more British
attacks if he was to silence his critics, with their continual
carping about his over-caution. Brooke's letter did little to curb
Montgomery's cockiness,
reality, and the realisation that he was not completely his own
master in Normandy.
On 25 July, a New York Herald Tribune headline had
announced: ALLIES IN FRANCE BOGGED DOWN ON
ENTIRE FRONT. Montgomery was again charged with over-
caution', and The Times regretted his having used the word
'breakthrough' during 'Goodwood', indeed, the whole tone of
attributed this, probably
accurately, to Eisenhower, and felt
strongly that
he
was being
adversely
commented on to
journalists by staff at SHAEF in London. He sent two strong
messages of complaint to Grigg, and received in reply this
sympathetic if unorthodox letter from the Secretary of State for
War:
