270
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
main Allied operations for the present were to be those of
Twenty-First Army Group, which would both free Antwerp and
attack the Ruhr from the north.
Both Alanbrooke and Churchill were away in Quebec,
attending the 'Octagon' Conference, and Simpson flew out to
Brussels on 20 September in Montgomery's personal Dakota,
which had brought back to England the artist James Gunn, who
was working on Montgomery's portrait at the time. Simpson
spent the night of the 20th and 21st at Twenty-First Army
Group
emphatically, briefed him about the non-arrival of the extra
supplies promised by Bedell Smith on 12 September. Simpson
undertook to raise this subject in the strongest terms when he
got to SHAEF HQ at Versailles on 22 September. While at
Versailles, he made a note in detail of his talks (chiefly, as he
says, for Montgomery's benefit), which gives an authentic
picture of the atmosphere at SHAEF, and demonstrates what
united support Montgomery would have received if Market-
Garden' had succeeded. 1º
Morgan was waiting to meet Simpson at Paris aerodrome on
the 22nd, and took him directly to the luxurious Hotel Trianon
at Versailles, where SHAEF had its HQ. Simpson found it all
extremely imposing and comfortable: Masses of officers and
other ranks, both sexes and all nationalities, moving around with
determined faces
...
Smartly dressed sentries
everywhere,
including two very well dressed, curious hybrids from the RAF
Regiment, outside the beautiful château where Eisenhower had
his living quarters? He thought the large organisation was
impressive, but noted that he could not find out what it was
producing, and also that there was 'certainly little thought of any
critical battle being fought on the frontiers of the same country.
Everyone was living in luxury?
On arrival, Simpson
immediately pitched in
with the
complaint about the non-arrival of the promised supplies, telling
Morgan, as nearly as possible in Montgomery's own words, just
what Twenty-First Army Group's commander thought about
* On 21 September Montgomery lent Simpson a jeep to go forward to
Eindhoven. There, crowds in the streets cheered him as a senior British
general and threw flowers into his jeep. Modestly, Simpson says that he felt
"phoney', because he did not think that a 'War Office warrior' should receive
the applause due to fighting troops.
After Arnhem
271
the British staff at SHAEF. The views he expressed
were
certainly not very complimentary - Morgan was 'hit hard', and
at a loss for an answer. Simpson went on to tell Morgan that he
wanted to make the same complaint to Gale* but did not know
him quite well enough. At that moment Gale came into the
room, and Morgan repeated Simpson's remarks to him. Gale
listened, and then replied: 'I was expecting this. You may not
know it, but I had an extremely awkward interview with Monty
yesterday. He cannot understand my difficulties and that I really
have no control over administrative questions, which are run by
the War Office for 21 Army Group and by General Lee's HQ
(Lt-Gen J.C.H. Lee, commanding the US Services of Supply for
the theatre; his HQ was then still in England] for the
Americans.'
Morgan commented: 'Yes, you certainly came back with your
tail between your legs from that interview with Monty,' to which
Gale replied: 'Yes I did, and today I find Monty has followed up
the interview with a telegram to Ike accusing me of being
responsible for the non-arrival of the extra supplies promised to
On 16 September Eisenhower had sent an apologetic signal to
Twenty-First Army Group, just as the struggle for Arnhem
began to get under way:
I hear that our frantic efforts to scratch together ad hoc
companies to deliver you 500 tons a day did not get the
supplies flowing on September 15. However I assure you that
the first batch will arrive there to-morrow morning 17
September. Bradley's left is striking hard to support you.
Montgomery's signal of 21
September to Eisenhower,
complaining of Gale, is tough, even for him, and demonstrates
that he looked upon Gale as an enemy:
Have
seen Gale. Since
the change in
command on
1
September I have not been in touch with the supply situation
in 12 Army Group. From what Gale tells me it seems clear
that
12 Army
Group
has been
allowed to outstrip its
* Lt-Gen Sir Humfrey Gale, Eisenhower's chief Administrative Officer, and
not Maj-Gen Richard Gale, GOC British 6th Airborne Division.
