46
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
arise. If enemy have 20 Divisions in Italy we must ensure that
we do not have disaster ... only first class troops must be in
Italy ... 8 Indian not in this category. 37
It is surprising that Alexander did not give Montgomery a firm
order to use the troops landed at Taranto to help 'Avalanche',
and in view of 8th Indian's performance later the latter's critical
comment is unjustified. Of course at that time the division was
untried, having come direct from the Middle East to Italy; later,
however, Montgomery was to wax enthusiastic over its
performance.
This attitude was unacceptable to Alexander, and on 10
September he signalled Montgomery: 'Utmost importance that
you maintain pressure upon Germans so they cannot remove
force off your front and concentrate against Avalanche ... next
few days crucial. Montgomery ignored this signal, and in spite
of Alexander's emphasising the need for pressure allowed 5th
Division to complete its two days' rest. On 12 September he
signalled Alexander: 'My admin very stretched but will take
every justifiable risk?
Alas for Alexander and 'Avalanche',
Montgomery had no intention of taking risks. While it was
touch-and-go at Salerno Alexander became so unhappy with
Eighth Army's slow movements that he sent his Fifteenth Army
Group Chief of Staff, Brigadier David Richardson,* on 12
September to explain the crisis to Montgomery and to direct him
to press on regardless of administrative difficulties; he also
allocated twenty-seven extra landing-craft in order to speed
reinforcement from Sicily across the Straits of Messina.
Montgomery signalled back on the 13th: 'Increased shipping
now available puts me in much better position and I hope by 17
September to be able to begin to launch a definite threat against
south flank of Germans facing US Army? But on the same day
Alexander sent this ominous signal: 'Position of US Army not
favourable ... your intentions very cheering, I entirely agree?
Alexander must have been cheered by any small thing, since an
offensive not beginning until 17 September would not be much
use to 'Avalanche', where by now the Germans threatened to
divide the Americans and British (X Corps, attached to US Fifth
* Charles Richardson was with Eighth Army, while David Richardson
was with Fifteenth Army Group.
Sicily and After
Army for the landings) and reach the beaches. Certainly
Montgomery had thrown dust over Alexander's eyes about the
lack of opposition and the state of the roads between the toe of
Italy and Salerno.
On 14 September Alexander met Montgomery at Reggio and
agreed with him a plan to attack with 5th Division on a two-
brigade front north of Castrovillari on 16 or 17 September. The
only possible comment on this conference is that if Montgomery
did not know the plain truth, that there were no Germans in
front of 5th Division, he should have done. The Eighth Army
summaries make it clear how weak
opposition, and the local subordinate commanders knew almost
exactly the whereabouts of the Germans since the telephone
system was intact and,
Buckley's party
discovered, co-
operating Italian local officials obligingly found out how many
Germans there were in other towns to the north.
Montgomery
moved with
'reprehensible slowness', and it is impossible to dispute this. His
dawdling as the Germans counter-attacked at Salerno sowed the
seeds of a bitterness between him and the Americans which
lasted until the end of the war. General Mark Clark's force
which landed at Salerno consisted of US VI Corps (45th and
36th Infantry Divisions), and British X Corps (46th and 56th
Divisions). The crisis point came on 13 September when the
Germans opened up a gap between the British and American
elements on the beach-head; emergency measures had to be
taken and any help from Eighth Army would have been a
godsend on that day, but Montgomery was resting his troops
100 miles away. Men from General Matthew Ridgway's US
82nd Airborne Division were dropped as reinforcements and
any available men on the beaches, including those unloading
supplies, were drafted into the line.
The British 7th Armoured
Division was landed in a hurry and, late on the night of the 14th,
509th US Parachute Division was dropped behind the German
lines. These desperate, last-minute measures were expensive in
casualties, but the Germans were finally stopped five miles from
the beaches at a cost of 9,000 Allies casualties, some of whom
could have been saved by a dash forward by Eighth Army.*
* Recently
much publicity has been
to the Salerno mutiny.
Reinforcements from Eighth Army belonging to 50th and 51st (Highland)
