78
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Montgomery detailed the planned drops for the American and
British airborne troops which were eventually
successfully
executed, and which are described later, and added:
The problem with airborne troops is to land enough troops to
do the job, and to land them in the right place. I have laid
down that the smallest number to be landed in any one place,
at one time, is a Bde; and far better to land a whole Division.
Once airborne troops have done their job, they must be
collected into reserve for us again as soon as they are refitted.
During the actual campaign, however, he was unable to
follow this dictum because he was short of infantry. The British
6th Airborne Division fought from D-Day until they reached the
Seine late in August, and the US airborne divisions dropped for
the Nijmegen and Arnhem operation continued to fight with
Twenty-First Army Group for months afterwards, to the
consternation of some American generals.
He also forecast that once the initial operations are over
airborne troops will be used to keep the battle moving by means
of "air hooks" of not less than a Brigade', and he specified
other likely operations, such as an attack on the Brittany ports
by up to two airborne divisions, and an operation in conjunction
with the crossing of the Loire.
To help Montgomery to outline his plan, a phase map was
hung on the wall showing the estimated position at, among
others, D-plus-20, D-plus-35, D-plus-60 and D-plus-90.
According to Maj-Gen Belchem, Montgomery never wanted to
be committed to the phase map but was rail-roaded into it by the
US planners; after the campaign it was used by his critics as an
argument that his master plan had gone astray. On the map, he
forecast that if all went well by D-plus-90 the Canadian First
and British Second Armies would hold the Seine between Paris
and Rouen, while US First Army would drive over the Seine for
Paris, with US Third Army on the most southerly flank.
According to the phase map exhibited on 7 April, by D-plus-
20 the Allied front line would form an arc from the River Orne
to Avranches; by D-plus-35 the line would be from the River
Dives east of Caen through Argentan and Le Mans to Nantes
on the Loire estuary. Commenting on the phase line for D-plus-
35, Montgomery said: The British Second Army will push its
Montgomery and the Invasion
79
left out towards the general lines of the River Touques. At the
same time the army will pivot on Falaise and will swing with its
right towards Argentan-Álençon.' When later, these targets were
not achieved, Montgomery
said that they had had no real
importance for his master
plan,
which
led to grave
misunderstandings with Eisenhower and SHAEF.
His closing comment was:
Given close co-operation between the airforces and the land
armies,
I do not see how the enemy can stop us from
developing the operations as we plan - if only we can get a
good lodgement in the first four days and capture Cherbourg
quickly.
In the afternoon, Bradley told the conference that he had to
tackle the bocage, the countryside of wide hedges and banks and
tiny fields around the Cherbourg peninsula which was appalling
terrain for tanks. That morning
Montgomery had rather
recklessly suggested that Bradley should explore the possibility
of a 'tank knock about' after Omaha Beach* was taken; clearly he
had underestimated the difficulties for tanks in the bocage.
original placing
Americans on the right and the British on the left, but anyway
this could not now be altered since the US supply depots,
training schools and reinforcements were all based in the west of
England. The deception plan - 'Fortitude' - was also discussed
on 7 April. It was to prove to be one of the greatest triumphs of
the invasion, for not only was Hitler successfully deluded into
guessing that the main invasion
would come in the Pas de
Calais,
but he also kept considerable forces in Norway and
Denmark against a possible invasion there. The implementation
of the complex deception plan alone was responsible for keeping
twenty German divisions in the Pas de Calais until too late to
throw back the invasion in Normany, more
than 150 miles
away. Indeed, Field-Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt, the German
C-in-C West, later
admitted that until D-plus-14 he had
* US First Army was allotted two landing beaches in the western sector,
codenamed 'Utah'
and "Omaha'.
East of 'Omaha', the three British and
Canadian beaches were, from the west, 'Gold', 'Juno', and 'Sword' (see map,
p. 95).
