296
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Montgomery -
North of Ardennes
Patton
- South of Ardennes
Montgomery had written to Brooke on 17 November, voicing
more complaints about Eisenhower, and saying that he had
neither seen nor spoken to the Supreme Commander since the
meeting in Brussels on 18 October, and had only met him four
times since the end of the Normandy campaign.
The Directives he issues have no relation to the necessities of
the battle. It is quite impossible for me to carry out my
present order ... He has never commanded anything before in
his whole career and now for the first time he has elected to
take direct command of very large scale operations and he
does not know how to do it ... the urgency to finish the
German war is very great. The only way is to concentrate
strength at some selected place and hit the Germans a
colossal crack. I would be grateful for your advice whether
you think I ought to take the initiative.
Brooke replied sensibly on 20 November:
Without hesitation I would advise you: a) Not to approach
Eisenhower for the present; b) To remain silent now unless
Eisenhower opens the subject. We will
make
strongest
representations in Washington... I feel certain that in view of
American preponderance in strength they will insist on any
Land Commander being American. Do you consider Bradley
fit for the job? Will he be able to control Patton and Devers
(General Jacob L. Devers,
commanding US Sixth Army
Group|? I won't conceal I anticipate the greatest difficulty lies
in getting the Americans to agree to any change in the set up.
If this was Brooke's considered view, then it is strange that he
went on making such efforts to change Eisenhower's mind.
Montgomery replied: 'I have offered in writing to serve under
Bradley but it is no use,' and suggested that the front should be
divided in two, with himself commanding north of the Ardennes
and Bradley
south, the
CIGS's
own solution. But Brooke
immediately saw the flaw in this plan, and told Montgomery, in
a letter dated 24 November, that:
The Dreary Autumn
297
This will not get at the root of the matter and the same evils
will persist ... You are asking for command of the northern
group, and therefore proposing yourself for the one and only
front that can play any major part. Have you considered if
you are likely to be very acceptable in American eyes for this
command? I have grave doubts.
He also again strongly advised Montgomery not to raise
the matter with Eisenhower, and in order to make doubly sure
that the restive Field-Marshal did not do so, he also cabled him
to the same effect.
Montgomery replied that he would do nothing without
authority, and flew back to London for consultation about the
line he should take when he met Eisenhower on 28 November.
The two friends agreed that Montgomery would tell the Supreme
Commander that they wanted Bradley as Commander, Land
Forces, and Montgomery in charge of the northern army group
with Patton with him, and Devers commanding the southern
group. They all also decided to oppose strongly what they
termed 'the pernicious USA strategy of attacking all along the
line.' Brooke told Montgomery that he would raise this matter of
reorganising the command structure with the Prime Minister,
and would suggest that Marshall be asked to come over; he
noted in his diary that: 'Without some such change we shall just
drift on and God knows when the war will end.
The same argument had already been put to Eisenhower, and
lost, in September, and Brooke ought to have known that if
Marshall came over he would be sure to back the Supreme
Commander to the hilt. Nevertheless Brooke saw Churchill, who
ask Marshall to come after they had heard the
outcome of the Eisenhower/Montgomery meeting.
In the event, the encounter between the two commanders on
28 November went badly. Brooke's enthusiastic support had
boosted Montgomery's ego, making him more arrogant and
cocksure than ever.
ringing in his ears, Montgomery had difficulty in hiding his
argument with
his subordinate,
and listened quietly
