212
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Island and the South
Beveland peninsula from the Dutch
mainland. Had he done so, Fifteenth Army would have been
trapped and annihilated, as von Kluge's had been in Normandy,
and the seaward approaches to Antwerp could have been
opened at small cost in casualties. Ultra intercepts before and
after 4 September showed that Hitler was determined to deny
the use of Antwerp to the Allies by holding on to both the north
and south banks of the estuary leading from the city to the sea,'
and the clearing of those banks should have been the first
consideration if the newly captured port was to become
operational.
What an opportunity the Allies missed! Fifteenth Army
poured back across the estuary into the
South Beveland
peninsula to reinforce the German defence of the lower Rhine
just as the Allies planned to cross it on the run. Williams's
Twenty-First
Army
Group Intelligence
Summary of
18
September reads: 'Three German Corps - 67, 86 and 89 - with
probably over 100,000 men have crossed into the Scheldt
peninsula since Antwerp was captured."
As we have seen, Montgomery had written to the CIGS that
he intended to advance upon Wesel and Arnhem, and that he
wanted a
drop of Ist Airborne Division and the Polish
Parachute Brigade on the evening of 8 September to secure a
bridge over the Rhine between the two towns. The increased
German
resistance
made the timing of such an operation
impossible, and instead Montgomery opted for a better-prepared
plan for the Airborne Army to put down a carpet through
hostile territory, providing a safe corridor for Second Army
tanks to drive at great speed to the Rhine.
According to Williams, Montgomery felt that if he could use
the airborne troops to force a crossing of the Rhine, Eisenhower
would be bound to reinforce success and that this
would tilt the centre of gravity and give the British priority of
supplies before the US armies. Probably Monty thought then
it was just a question of who put in the final punch against a
defeated enemy before a final victory. If this airborne drop
succeeded in front of his Second Army drive his punch, not
Patton's, would be the triumphal road to final victory.
For Montgomery, the choice quickly became not whether to
The Fatal Wrong Decision
213
refuse the Airborne Army and instead concentrate on clearing
the port of Antwerp, but only whether he preferred Arnhem or
Wesel as dropping zones for a Rhine crossing. To clear the low-
lying Breskens area, with all its hundreds of drainage canals and
ditches, and then make an amphibious assault on the island of
Walcheren was bound to
be a long,
unglamorous campaign.
Originally he had suggested that First Airborne Army should
plan a drop on Walcheren Island, and Eisenhower had backed
Brereton, however,
had refused, saying
that such an
operation would not be suitable for airborne troops? - at this
date Eisenhower had not yet definitely put the Airborne Army at
Montgomery's disposal. Now, on 4 September, the
Supreme
Commander ordered Brereton to support Twenty-First Army
Group with his airborne forces. Montgomery was going to make
full use of them.
Ever since he had crossed the Seine, Montgomery had been
considering plans for airborne assaults, but had discarded them
as his chosen dropping zones were overrun too quickly by his
armour. Eisenhower had suggested to Bradley that the Airborne
Army should instead be dropped in the Maastricht-Aachen area
to help US First Army through the Siegfried Line, but Bradley
refused. He was never enthusiastic
about airborne
operations, and in any case he had blind faith that Patton could
win
his
battles provided he
had enough petrol.
So
Eisenhower's directive of 4 September definitely placed the
Airborne Army
at Montgomery's disposal,
and the latter
embarked upon his plan of dropping three airborne divisions in
front of Second Army to clear the way for a swift armoured
advance over the Maas and the Rhine. He would then have
outflanked the defences of the Siegfried Line, which ended at
Aachen, and would be poised to end the war with a thrust into
the north German plain.
In the end, Montgomery decided on Arnhem, not Wesel, for
his air landings on the banks of the Rhine. The Allied air forces
also favoured
Arnhem because there seemed to be fewer
German
anti-aircraft defences
there
than
at Wesel.
This
argument had, however, been heard before in connection with
the US air landings in the Cherbourg peninsula, when Leigh-
Mallory
had been
overruled to
good purpose. Brigadier
Williams, however, considers that Montgomery was against
landing at Wesel because he would have had to share the follow-
