Eisenhower Takes Command
The American Government had always made it clear that
Eisenhower, the Supreme Commander, must take over personal
charge of the land operations in Europe once the assault and
break-out phases were over; in this, Churchill had acquiesced. In
the Mediterranean theatre in 1943, Alexander had been in sole
charge of land operations as Deputy Supreme Commander
under
Eisenhower, but once Montgomery was chosen, in
preference to Alexander, to command the Normandy assault,
there was no chance of there being a British commander for the
whole European campaign.
Both Marshall and Eisenhower
knew too well that Montgomery's personality would only be
acceptable to the American generals for a short period-
-sooner
or later there would be friction and, since Germany could not be
conquered without the US Army, it was vital that the Supreme
Commander should be acceptable to that army's generals. By
way of consolation, Churchill promoted Montgomery Field-
Marshal with effect from 1 September.
At the 12 January
"Overlord'
St Paul's Conference to co-ordinate
plans,
Bradley
had, as we have
seen, queried
Montgomery's 'commanding' both armies for the invasion;
according
to
the
American
Maj-Gen
Lewis
Brereton,
Montgomery had replied: 'I will command the British and
Canadian troops but I will suggest to Bradley the scheme of
manoeuvre for American troops." In practice however, he had
gone much further and Bradley, appreciating both the clarity of
his mind and his confidence in the plan to draw Rommel's armour
to the east in order to allow an American break-out in the west,
had accepted Montgomery's orders up to the time of the break-
out.
Eisenhower Takes Command
181
The agreement was that once US Twelfth Army Group
became operational under Bradley, Eisenhower would be in
direct control of the land forces and Montgomery and Bradley
would be equals. Eisenhower was reluctant to take over direct
command too soon, mainly because of the difficulty of setting up
his HQ in the constricted, battle-torn part of France available.
He therefore decided to make US
Twelfth
Army Group
operational before he moved to France and took over the reins;
Montgomery remained in overall command of the land forces;
however, and would do so until Eisenhower arrived.
Since the failure of 'Goodwood', there had been so much
gossip about the likelihood
of Montgomery being
sacked
amongst senior officers at SHAEF and amongst the American
field commanders that the war correspondents got wind of it.
When, on 14 August, Eisenhower announced that Bradley was
to command US Twelfth Army Group in accordance with the
prearranged plan, inaccurate messages from journalists stating
that Bradley would in future be taking orders
direct from
Eisenhower, and that Montgomery had been superseded, slipped
past the censors. These reports originated on 15 August with a
telegram from an American journalist in France, Wes Gallaher,
saying that Montgomery and Bradley now had equal status.
Gallaher later said that he obtained his information from staff
officers at Patton's Third Army HQ, though here the wish may
have been father to the thought, for Patton and his staff were the
most hostile to Montgomery. Gallaher sent his message to the
Associated Press news agency in London, and from there it was
both relayed to America and put out on the nine o'clock BBC
news. The BBC corrected it on the midnight news, but the early
editions of the London nationals carried the story. On 16
August Stars and Stripes, the American servicemen's paper,
carried the headline: 'Bradley Heads Army Group. Status Equal
to Monty'?
The confusion arising from these
misapprehensions was
disconcerting to Montgomery, just at the moment when the
creation of Twelfth Army Group meant that he had less overall
control of the battle.
The
Daily
Mirror's leader on 18 August was vicious.
Although it insisted that
Montgomery
was entitled to an
apology, it made it clear that there was controversy about his
leadership:
