278
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
With such influential backing from home, Montgomery
should perhaps be excused some of the arrogance and lack of
tact which he displayed in his dealings with Eisenhower during
the controversies over strategy that ensued.
When all the surviving British troops over the Rhine had been
withdrawn, Montgomery, bluffing that 'Market-Garden' had
been '90% successful', continued his attacks towards Arnhem in
a futile effort to salvage his Ruhr plan. Eisenhower at first
endorsed his efforts, and Montgomery gave Second Army
complete priority in supplies, starving the Canadians for their
attack along the Scheldt, and even ordering them at one point to
cover Second Army's left flank.
For a few days more Eisenhower blithely continued to believe
that Twenty-First Army Group could both force a Rhine
crossing and clear the port of Antwerp. He ordered Bradley to
take over even more of Twenty-First Army Group's front, and
as late as 8 October declared that the Allies 'must retain as first
mission the gaining of the line north of Bonn as quickly as
humanly possible,"
a view to which Montgomery undoubtedly
subscribed. Brigadier Williams told me that:
Monty was reluctant to start the Battle of the Scheldt.
ne
Antwerp was fifty-five miles inland, and he knew that one fine
day he must clear the banks of the estuary, which could so
easily have been taken immediately after Antwerp fell. To him
it was not an interesting military operation
...it lacked
glamour from his point of view and so did not appeal to his
vanity. He knew it would be a battle of attrition with very
heavy
casualties lin the
end
nearly
13,000,
mainly
Canadians| and whatever the result the Scheldt attack could
not fit into the series of victories on which his reputation was
based at that moment. His attitude was: 'If you finished the
war, the Scheldt operation would be unnecessary since the
Germans would soon capitulate without further casualties' It
wasn't just vanity - it was because of the feeling that the war
was nearly over and it would be a pity to get any more people
killed in the doing of it — all part of his 'economical'
generalship psychology.
In September,
Montgomery's judgement may have been
clouded by euphoria, given the extent of the Normandy victory.
After Arnhem
279
If that was the case, however, the scales quickly fell from his
eyes during the first few days of October. Williams's intelligence
reports showed Montgomery the extent of the German recovery,
and he was too
intelligent and
too clear-minded
not
to
understand that he had insufficient troops both to clear Antwerp
and to continue with offensive operations from the Nijmegen
salient. Dempsey recorded that on the morning of 7 October, at
a conference at Second Army HQ, he gave Montgomery the
unwelcome news:
I have not enough divisions to carry out at one and the
same time
(a) a successful defence of the Nijmegen bridgehead.
(b) the elimination of the enemy on my right flank west of
the River Meuse.
(c) an attack south east between River Rhine and River
Meuse.
Montgomery accepted Dempsey's judgement and that afternoon
sent out the following situation report to SHAEF and his army
commanders, revealing a cold professionalism in the face of a
bitter disappointment.
TOP SECRET
1. I am not happy about the overall battle situation in the
northern part of the Allied front. The enemy has re-acted
very violently to our threat to the RUHR
and has
concentrated strong forces against Second Army. I have
three commitments which could become very awkward
and unbalance the whole business in the north:
A.
The opening of ANTWERP
We must get that place going and I must have reserves
of ammunition ready to throw in; I may need fresh
divisions.
B.
The bridgehead north of NIJMEGEN
This is daily threatened by the enemy and is none too
strong. The US Airborne Divisions alone cannot hold
it; I must reinforce them by two Inf divisions.
C.
The enemy situation west of the MEUSE
There is considerable enemy strength south of the line
MAASHEES-DEURNE. It was thought that 7 US
