408
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
ideals. Thank heaven I had him. as S of S during all my difficult
times with the P.M.' Grigg admired Montgomery (they became
such firm friends that after the war he advised Montgomery on
his personal finances), but
although he gave his friend
unstinted support in the controversies, this signal, dated 31 May
1945, demonstrates that he understood the Field-Marshal's
failings: 'I beseech you in the bowels of Christ to watch your
step or at any rate your loud speaker so long as SHAEF exists. I
have quite enough quarrels to cope with.'8
As the Normandy campaign proceeded SHAEF became
more and more hostile to the War Office and to Twenty-First
Army Group. As Eisenhower began to express concern at this
rift, Brooke sent the ever-tactful Simpson several times to
SHAEF to try and pour oil on the troubled waters. But anti-
Montgomery feeling continued
amongst the British senior
officers on Eisenhower's staff, an attitude described graphically
by Williams:
I knew Jock Whiteley well as BGS, Eighth Army and I liked
him very much. He, Kenneth Strong and Freddie Morgan,
who I also liked, developed a tremendous pro-SHAEF bias.
Whiteley's loyalty to Ike started with 'Torch' [the North
African landings], and he became progressively more and
more anti-Monty. Pinky Bull was joint Operations Officer
with Whiteley and, being American, had the lion's share of
the responsibility. Whiteley was frustrated alongside Pinky
Bull because he had no proper role.
Morgan and Whiteley (despite having no satisfactory role)
felt SHAEF was running the war, and they got fed up with 21
Army Group's independence of view. Monty continually
rubbed them up the wrong way.
Morgan and Whiteley
were always under suspicion at
SHAEF, which was dominantly an American HQ, because
they were 'limeys'. Therefore they had to over-work their
passages to be accepted properly, and latterly this meant
being anti-Monty and anti-21 Army Group.
The American historian Forrest C. Pogue has written to me
that Brigadier Williams has 'one of the most balanced views on
the British-American relationship' that he has seen. If, as seems
highly likely, Williams is correct about the prejudices
at
SHAEF, then Montgomery was faced with an impossible task in
trying to keep on the best of terms with such a set-up. Given his
temperament, it is perhaps no wonder that he failed. Pogue also
admits in this letter that Bedell Smith could be 'very nasty and
brutal but also could be very understanding', and the first-
mentioned failings cannot have helped relations between SHAEF
and Twenty-First Army Group and its commander.
In the middle of July 1944 arguments from within SHAEF
that Montgomery should be sacked erupted as the enemy held
firm at Caen. Eisenhower, who still admired his subordinate to a
certain extent, reluctantly yielded to his colleagues and prepared
to ask Churchill to replace Montgomery. At this difficult stage
of the Normandy campaign,
unsatisfactory
performance of Eighth Army in Italy, the Prime Minister was, in
Brooke's words, 'not always too fond of Montgomery', and for a
short period in July the latter's command was in jeopardy. But if
he had been recalled he would have been replaced by Alexander,
and this would undoubtedly have been a setback for the Allied
At the same time Montgomery made a dangerous error in
letting it be known that he did not wish Churchill to visit his HQ
when the latter was to be in France on 20 July. Brooke, at that
anti-Churchill
Montgomery in the nick of time to send the Prime Minister a
warm invitation to come and stay at his Tac HQ. The visit was a
great success,
for Montgomery mended his bridges with the
Prime Minister and kept them in good repair for the rest of the
campaign. This personal success with Churchill is evidence of
Montgomery's considerable charm and personal magnetism.
The campaign in Normandy had at that time the appearance of
having reached a stalemate, yet Montgomery succeeded in
convincing his visitor (who was not without a reputation for
sacking generals) that all was well and that victory was around
Fortunately for Montgomery, it was. Within a few days the
Americans were sweeping all before them towards Brittany and
the
Seine,
although
Twenty-First
Army
Group
made
disappointing progress towards Falaise and Argentan. But it
was a strategic error to permit some of the American divisions
to turn their backs' on the defeated Germans in an effort to
overrun the Brittany ports instead. This was rigid adherence to
