368
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
of operation.
Should this situation actually eventuate, it will likewise
create a change in the command arrangements for the
secondary effort. This burden will be borne principally by the
U.S. Third and Seventh Armies and since Bradley, under this
assumption, will be actively engaged in the north, Devers will
be in command of the southern operations. His forces will be
those that can be spared from the requirements of the north.
A further factor of this particular plan would be the
bringing up of Fifteenth Army on a defensive role on the
RHINE as part of Twelfth Army Group.
One eventuality that must be constantly borne in mind by
the 21st Army Group is that of the possible necessity, on
orders from the Combined Chiefs of Staff, of moving into
Holland before strictly military considerations might dictate
such an operation.
Sincerely,
Ten weeks before this would have evoked a petulant, if well
argued, response from Montgomery. With the showdown with
Eisenhower on 1 January still much in his mind, however, the
Field-Marshal had decided to remain silent, and to concentrate
instead on the Rhine crossing. On 20 March he sent the letter on
to de Guingand, with this terse minute in his own handwriting: 'I
shall make no comment to Ike. The employment of two Army
Groups
north of the
Ruhr is unsound tactically, and is
impossible administratively?21 He knew that Eisenhower had
fired a warning shot across his bows, but he had decided, for the
time being at least, to ignore it.
At Twenty-First Army
Group Tac HQ on
Eisenhower had shown Montgomery a draft report prepared by
the SHAEF planners for the Combined Chiefs of Staff - this
was the document in preparation the previous week which had
so alarmed Simpson after his talks with Whiteley and Morgan.
The Supreme Commander had pointed out to Montgomery that
the planners considered an advance north of the Ruhr only had
limited possibilities until railway bridges had been built over the
Rhine,'
and that this would take two months. Instead the
SHAEF document recommended that the Allies should widen
the base of the operations to isolate the Ruhr by also advancing
Eisenhower's Revenge
369
in force from the
south the old broad-front pincer plan to
envelop the Ruhrl', which, according to the planners, would
greatly increase the speed of deployment of offensive forces
against the enemy? Eisenhower said that in principle he agreed
with the plan, but that he wanted to hear Montgomery's reaction
to it. 22
Montgomery read the document. He did not like the tone, for
it implied what he considered was a vague, rather than an
immediate, threat to his retaining US Ninth Army under his
command.
Eisenhower deceitfully
promised that he
would
'broaden the report' so that it could still be read as meaning that
the Twenty-First Army Group attack would be the major one,
but in
fact
this
was most definitely
not
the Supreme
Commander's intention,
though
he
flinched from
telling
Montgomery so. Eisenhower decided to use the lack of a railway
bridge over the Rhine at Wesel as an excuse for revenging
himself on
Montgomery
for
his
arrogance and
lack
consultation in the earlier stages of the campaign, and to carry
out Marshall's and Roosevelt's wishes for the American armies
to win the greatest glory in the final victory. That night SHAEF
wired the document to Washington but not to London, and
Eisenhower added to it: 'The enemy strength on the western
front is becoming so stretched that penetrations and advances
will soon only be limited by our own maintenance. I intend to
reinforce every success with utmost speed. *23
After his visit to Montgomery, Eisenhower went on to stay
with Bradley. The two American generals made firm plans to
withdraw US Ninth Army from Twenty-First Army Group as
soon as the latter had linked up with Hodges's US First Army
coming up to
encircle the
Ruhr from the
south.24 On the
where US XV Corps had its HQ. Churchill and Brooke were
also present. Much of the time was taken up with Churchill
explaining to Eisenhower the enormity of a signal from
the
Soviet Foreign Minister, V.M. Molotov, in which the Russian
complained
bitterly
and
unreasonably
about
Alexander's
handling of the possible surrender of the German army in Italy.
Eisenhower
too
waxed
hot
about Molotov's
Churchill formed the impression that the Supreme Commander
was as keen as himself to take Berlin before the Russians; that
