238
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
By 1500 three battalions of 1 Parachute Brigade were ready
to move off from Renkum Heath, each following a different
route into Arnhem. Lt-Col John
Frost's 2nd Battalion, the
Parachute Regiment, left first, meeting little opposition in
Oosterbeek, where it turned immediately right for Arnhem,
following the most southerly road.
The streets were deserted
except for a few exultant Dutch policemen. By dark Frost and
600 men had reached the north end of the road bridge at
Arnhem, and had thus sealed off the shortest route to Nijmegen
from German Panzer reinforcements. Without Frost's success
Nijmegen bridge could not have been taken.
Lt-Col J.A.C. Fitch's 3rd Battalion and Lt-Col David Dobie's
Ist Battalion were brought to a standstill within a few hours of
leaving the landing zone. Dobie was stopped on the railway line
by German infantry, and on the Ede-Arnhem road by armoured
vehicles. B Company of the Ist Battalion suffered 50 per cent
casualties fighting in a wood, and at 1930 Dobie went to ground
for the night. They had run against the formidable strength of
Harzer's 9th SS Panzer.
Fitch's 3rd Battalion also failed to reach Arnhem bridge, and
again it was Harzer's tanks that kept them out-neither Fitch
nor Dobie had expected, or been led to expect, armour. Only C
Company of Fitch's battalion reached the Arnhem bridge to link
up with Frost's men.
Meanwhile, the air-landing zone at Renkum Heath was being
guarded by the Ist Battalion, the Border Regiment, in order to
protect the landings planned for 18 September.
The Dutch
Resistance lent them as many vehicles as possible and collected
the scattered ammunition containers. The leader of the Renkum
Resistance acted
as
guide to the British and set up his
headquarters in a café opposite the British forward position in
Renkum. The people of the village thought that liberation had
arrived. They flew forbidden Dutch flags, and the members of
the Resistance movement put on their official armbands. When
a Border patrol went out on reconnaisance half the population
of Renkum marched with them. The Resistance also sent out
patrols, but after dusk the British company commander forbade
them to do so. For the rest of the night, whenever British patrols
appeared in the café where the Resistance group had its HQ
they were given beer and the latest telephoned news about
German troop movements. To the east, pilots from the Glider
Arnhem
239
Pilot Regiment formed themselves into a battalion under Lt-Col
J.W. Place and tried to occupy Wolfhezen, which became a no-
man's-land.
During the night, German Panzers sealed off the southern end
of the Arnhem bridge, and Frost's position became precarious.
Neither Fitch's nor
Dobie's
battalions could reach
him
because the town was full of élite German troops, and XXX
Corps' tanks were still far away at Valkenswaard. All that Frost
could do was to fortify the northern end of the bridge and
occupy the buildings around it. He ordered two infantry attacks
towards the southern end of the bridge, carried out with great
courage, but these were easily beaten back by Harzer's Panzers.
For two days Dobie and Fitch tried to break through to the
bridge, but by the 20th they had run up against an impenetrable
wall of mortars, armoured cars and tanks near the railway
station: 'The Germans had hundreds of tanks, said one British
soldier.
On the evening of 17 September, Urquhart became detached
from his HQ, and was forced to hide from the Germans for
several vital hours.
To
make
matters worse,
most of the
Division's wirelesses had failed; without its commander, and
with only limited communications, Ist Airborne strove in vain to
control
the
battle.
Reinforcements duly
arrived
on
18
September, however. The landings took place in comparative
quietness, although elements of an SS battalion had tried an
attack on the landing grounds. Brigadier J.W. (Shan) Hackett,
commanding 4 Parachute Brigade, found what he called 'a
grossly
untidy
situation' as he sorted out the inevitable
confusions of landing.
Brigadier P.H.W.
(Pip) Hicks, commanding
1 Airlanding
Brigade,
took over as divisional commander in Urquhart's
absence, and immediately had a flaming row with Hackett. After
a nasty argument Hicks instructed Hackett to capture the high
ground to the north of Arnhem. Within an hour and a half of
landing on the 18th, the 10th Battalion was ready to march off,
and was quickly followed by the 156th Parachute Battalion, 2nd
Battalion,
South Staffordshires, and the
7th
King's Own
Scottish Borderers; the last two had landed the previous day and
were now attached to 4 Parachute Brigade.
