100
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
All still quite OK and I am very happy about the situation. I
had to think again when 2nd Panzer suddenly appeared last
night. I think it had been intended for offensive action against
Ist Corps. But it had to be used to plug the hole through
which we had broken in the area Caumont-Villers Bocage. As
long as Rommel uses his strategic reserves to plug holes that
is good.
A third letter to Simpson, dated 18 June, stated that 'My own
view is that we have got the Germans in a very awkward
situation, and if we rub in our advantage heavily in the next two
weeks we will be very well pleased. I am sending this letter over
by P.J. Grigg.8 Montgomery knew that, by his writing to
Simpson, Brooke would see the letter, and could thus brief
Churchill on the situation if necessary.
These letters from the battlefront illuminate many aspects of
Montgomery's character. On 12 June he wrote to de Guingand:
I am enjoying life greatly and it is great fun fighting battles
again after five months in England.'' At least this was frank, but
admitting enjoyment in battles that were causing such enormous
loss of life to the youth of England and of America was not an
endearing trait - especially to those whose families suffered. It
can be excused by looking on Montgomery
as someone so
dedicated and so anxious to win the war for Britain that he could
only be happy when his talents were being used to the full;
furthermore, he was never callous about the loss of his men.
Later critics have, however, taken such comments as examples
of hard-heartedness.
In the same letter Montgomery wrote:
My views about accommodation, messes, etc. I have decided
that the only Major-Generals to be members of my mess will
be yourself and Miles [Graham]; the others are all to be
elsewhere. I will not have a crowd in my mess; my personal
staff, Chief of Staff - and no more. You must set up another
mess down the road. I cannot have B Mess at Tac
overcrowded. In fact Tac HQ has got to remain small and self
contained. We cannot supply vehicles to officers from Main.
(Main HQ was still in England.]
The fact that Montgomery was able to write like this during
Normandy Assault
101
the anxious early stages of the invasion shows his determination
to keep anyone of his own age group out of his mess, so that he
and unworried by
criticisms and
complaints
from
his
contemporaries. De Guingand replied obligingly: 'I will bring
plenty of jeeps and tents.'10
On 13 June Montgomery wrote, in his own handwriting, as he
seeing; I have made this clear to the PM. My
Corps and
their eyes taken off the battle. Have lunch with me and depart in
about people in high places.
By now, Tac HQ had turned out to be too close to the
Germans. John Henderson told me: 'The odd shell did land
round about and one was pretty close to the tent. What is more,
came out from England. Thus we find Montgomery writing to
Grigg on 25 June: 'I have been shelled out of the HQ you came
live in a very pleasant forest. You will find it most restful.?"*
Churchill's remarks before the invasion
proved.
Even on D-Day, it was clear that the German tanks were
