112
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
re-equip, reorganise and train, then it should be disbanded
and split among other units.
If it is not possible to do either of the above and if it is
essential that the bn should return to the line, I request that I
may be relieved of my command and I suggest that a CO
with 2 or 3 years experience should relieve me, and that he
should bring his Adjutant and a signal officer with him.
Being a regular officer I realise the seriousness of this
request and its effect on my career. On the other hand I have
the lives of the new officer personnel (which is excellent) to
consider. Three days running a Major has been killed or
seriously wounded because I have ordered him to help me to
"in effect' stop them running during mortar concentrations.
Unless withdrawn from the Div I do not think I can get the bn
fit to fight normally and this waste of life would continue. My
honest opinion is that if you continue to throw new officer
and other rank replacements into
- as casualties occur,
you are throwing good money after bad.
I know my opinion is shared by two other commanding
officers who know the full circumstances.
In the Field.
(Sgd)
-, Lt-Col,
30 Jun 44.
Commanding, -
_24
While this incident may have been the worst case of collapse
of morale, I fear that it was not unknown for other COs, 2 1/Cs
and company commanders to draw their revolvers to stop men
running away. Montgomery's bombast was all designed to keep
up his troops' courage and to prevent such instances, and he did
a job in this respect which no other British general could have
equalled.
Having failed to take Caen on D-Day, General Dempsey's
British Second Army continued with fruitless direct assaults on
the town. These met with so little success that, on 9 June,
Montgomery decided to send XXX Corps in an encircling
movement on his right through Bayeux and Tilly-sur-Seulles to
Villers Bocage on the Caen-Avranches main road; this would be
followed up by dropping Ist Airborne Division south of Caen to
link up with the Villers Bocage force around Evrecy, thus
enveloping Caen.
Americans holding
the high ground at
Caumont would help the advance on the British right flank.
7th Armoured Division (the famous 'Desert Rats') led the
113
Normandy Assault
drive, and took Villers Bocage by 13 June. The division was
mostly equipped with Cromwell tanks designed for speed, and
had only a few Shermans with 17-pounders. These Cromwells
were not entirely suitable for action in the bocage because they
were under-gunned, having only
75-mm and not 17-pounder
guns. When they met Panther and Tiger tanks of 2nd Panzer
and Panzer Lehr on the morning of 13 June, one kilometre
north-east of Villers Bocage, they suffered severe losses and had
to withdraw, abandoning the recently occupied town. The XXX
Corps Commander, Bucknall, had both of his escort tanks
knocked out by Tigers when he visited 7th Armoured and, to the
disappointment of the Americans, called off the attack on the
next day after 50th Division failed to advance against Panzer
Lehr. The American Lt-Gen Leonard Gerow, commanding US
V Corps on XXX Corps' right, considered Bucknall to be
overcautious; 50th Division's failure had exposed Gerow's left
flank to counter-attacks.
The Americans had done their best to help XXX Corps on
the west flank, but this battle, known as Caumont Gap, was
Montgomery's first real failure
in
France. He was bitterly
disappointed at the poor showing of the Cromwells against the
Tigers and Panthers, and was displeased with Bucknall who, he
thought, had almost panicked. It was six weeks before Villers
Bocage was retaken. Montgomery's opportunity of encircling
Caen from the north-west was lost, and the battle for that town
went on
to become
his most
expensive
and
controversial
encounter with the Germans in Normandy. From this point on
the Americans began to criticise Montgomery for lack of drive.
On 9 June Montgomery
had
written
to
de Guingand
suggesting that one airborne division
should drop south of
Caen, and that the ground troops would move on Cagny and
Evrecy, respectively to the south-east and south-west of the
town.
Leigh-Mallory vetoed this plan to
land
1st Airborne
Division, although its dropping ground would have been within
range of 7th
Armoured
Division's
artillery beyond
Bocage. Montgomery was furious, and on 12 June wrote to de
Guingand:
... If we ... drop the Airborne DIV in Evrecy area we would
be well placed and might get a big 'scoop' ... [Leigh-Mallory]
cannot possibly know the local battle form here, and therefore
