426
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
optimism and enthusiasm. I would not be at all surprised to
see you gaining a victory that will make some of the 'old
classics' look like a skirmish between patrols.
I saw your message today to Arthur [Tedder], sent in
response to mine of yesterday. My only thought in suggesting
that he or I come over
was that there might be some
particular point in which you wanted assurance from your
rear. I know that the Air will be full out for you, day and
night. I am sure, also, that when this thing is started you can
count on Bradley to keep his troops fighting like the very
devil, twenty-four hours a day, to provide the opportunity
your armored corps will need, and to make the victory
complete.
I have been going after the Cherbourg thing for the last two
weeks. Prospects are some better, and Ramsay is over there
today. You may be sure that we are using every facility and
every talent on which we can lay our hands.
May good fortune attend you: I am looking forward to the
happy chore of telling about your accomplishments as soon
as we have put this one over. I hope you will forgive me if I
grow a bit exuberant.
Warm regards.
As ever,
Ikes
On 20 July Eisenhower visited Montgomery, who was in a very
confident
mood having had a satisfactory interview with
Churchill in the morning. The Supreme Commander was still
unhappy about Montgomery's failure to risk heavy casualties in
an all-out attack in the east, and he disliked the idea that it
would be left to the Americans to make the main breakthrough in
the difficult bocage country in the west. On the 21st he wrote of
his misgivings, in a letter that also shows how firm both he and
Montgomery were on the need to take the Brittany ports. When
Tedder saw the letter he remarked: 'It is not strong enough.
Monty can evade it. It contains no order?6
Dear Montv:
21 July, 1944
Since returning from your Headquarters yesterday I have
been going over the major considerations that, in my mind,
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 427
must guide our future actions. This letter is to assure myself
that we see eye to eye on the big problems.
I think that from the military side the case
was well
summed up in your letter of 8th July. There are also serious
political questions involved, but in my mind they parallel, for
the moment at least, the military factors. You said:
'1. We
must
get the
Brittany
Peninsula.
From an
administrative point of view this is essential.
2. We do not want to get hemmed into a relatively small
area.
We
must have
space for
maneuver, for
administration and for airfields.
3. We want to engage the enemy in battle to write off his
troops and generally to kill Germans.'
(To this last one you might well have added "We should
like to kill them in big packets by means of breaking
through his positions and cutting him off in sizeable
elements.')
You stated this last thought in clear language in your M-
510 of 10th July in Paragraph 5. You said:
'We are now so strong and are so well situated that we can
attack the Germans hard and continuously in the relentless
pursuit of our objectives. This will be done by both First
and Second Armies.'
This is my view exactly. I think that so far as we can
foresee we are at this moment relatively stronger than we can
probably hope to be at any time of the near future. Time is
vital. We must not only have the Brittany Peninsula - we
must have it quickly. So we must hit with everything.
In late June, when First Army
was
cleaning up
the
Cherbourg Harbor area,
Second Army was attempting to
prevent any movement of German troops from the Eastern to
the Western flank, in order that when First Army turned
southward it would have the best possible conditions for a
rapid advance to the base of the Peninsula. But because it had
also to hold a firm defensive line, Second Army
was not
entirely successful in this - it could not have been done except
by a definite, continuing, offensive. In any
event, Bradley's
advance to the southward has been disappointingly slow even
though he has kept everlastingly on the attack with everything
he can bring into action.
Then, a few days ago, when Armored Divisions of Second
