14
Eisenhower's Revenge
The two operations begun in February 1945, 'Veritable' and
*Grenade', had by early March pushed the Germans back to the
east bank of the Rhine. Montgomery's plan had been for a
double envelopment of the Germans once the 'bulge' in the
Ardennes had been eliminated, with Canadian First Army
conducting 'Veritable' from the north and linking up on the
Rhine with US Ninth Army executing 'Grenade'; this was
achieved by 3 March. Unfortunately the Germans opened the
dams in the River Roer, with the result that 'Grenade' could not
be begun until 23 February ("Veritable' had jumped off on
schedule on 10 February); both operations, however, proved to
be long and hard, and Allied casualties were high, although
'Grenade', once started, produced surprisingly swift results. On
10 March the Germans finally withdrew, in remarkably good
order, from their last bridgehead over the Rhine at
Wesel,
blowing both the bridges there - the battle for the Rhineland was
at last over, and Montgomery could now prepare for his set-
piece crossing. In 'Veritable', a month's fighting had cost 15,500
British and Canadian casualties XXX Corps had been placed
under Canadian First Army for the duration of the operation),
against 44,000 German casualties, of which about half were
taken as prisoners. During the seventeen days of 'Grenade' the
US Army had suffered 7,300 casualties, taking 29,000 German
POWs and killing or seriously wounding another 16,000. But
Hitler's efforts to save the Fatherland were daily becoming more
apparent, for the Allies had encountered battalion after battalion
of fanatical young Nazis, including schoolboys in uniforms.
German resistance during 'Veritable'
was
stronger
than
Eisenhower's Revenge
353
Montgomery had expected. On 13
February 1945 he had
written to Grigg that:
The battle up in the Reichswald goes well; the problem is the
mud and the floods and not the enemy. The German soldiers
are not fighting well; they surrender freely given a suitable
opportunity. Yesterday all that was left of a Para Bn - six
officers and 200 men surrendered en masse without firing a
shot; they walked over to our lines south of Gleve.
Three and a half weeks later, however, he admitted, again to
Grigg, that The Germans seem determined to hold on in the
Wesel area to the last and are causing us some trouble." As in
September, Montgomery had underestimated enemy morale.
The German soldiers' devotion to Hitler, and their will to defend
their homeland, made them formidable opponents still, despite
the Allied supremacy in the air and superiority in equipment and
supplies. On 7 March, as the Germans prepared to give up their
last foothold in the Rhineland, Hitler retired von Rundstedt, and
on the 10th brought in Field-Marshal Albert Kesselring from
Italy to take over command of the last, desperate, defence in the
west. To the south, however, in an operation code-named
'Lumberjack' and begun on 5 March, US First and Third
Armies were closing up to the Rhine, with Devers's Sixth Army
Group undertaking an operation ('Undertone') that completed a
froup undetended all the way to the Swiss border.
On 7 March came the dramatic news that US 9th Armoured
Division, part of Hodges's First Army, had captured intact the
Ludendorff railway bridge at Remagen, which the Germans
had mistakenly failed to destroy. In taking the bridge US 9th
Armoured Division's casualties were unbelievably light,
and
almost at once First Army troops poured across the Rhine to
make a consolidated bridgehead. The bridge itself collapsed ten
days later, after repeated German air raids, but by then pontoon
bridges had been built, and the Americans were well established
on the far bank. The capture of the bridge had a decisive impact
on the Germans' power to defend their home territory and on 8
March, after tactfully consulting with Montgomery, Eisenhower
ordered Bradley to put at least six divisions into the bridgehead.
The
capture of
Remagen bridge
and the successful
