80
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
expected another invasion in the Pas de Calais. 10
Selected journalists were briefed about the coming invasion,
and then forbidden to write anything more for their papers
before D-Day, while diplomatic bags to neutral countries
were suspended. Montgomery pointed out that security
arrangements had to be stringent, emphasising that if any of the
participants at the conference betrayed their secrecy vow the
invasion would be in jeopardy.
Slightly discordant notes were struck by Ramsay and Leigh-
Mallory. Ramsay again stressed the difficulties for the Navy, but
redeemed himself by agreeing
with Montgomery that the
combined navies could land the troops in the right places and
afterwards maintain the required supplies.
Leigh-Mallory, for the air forces, emphasised that on D-Day
the German Air Force could be well controlled with relative
ease, but he spotlighted the need for the early seizure of the
"good' airfield area beyond Caen. This was a sore point with
Montgomery, for he knew his difficulty would lie in getting
beyond Caen; privately, he thought that the air forces could
operate efficiently from home bases.
Montgomery made it clear to the conference that he was
worried about the underwater obstacles which the Germans
were planting under the cliffs on the chosen invasion beaches.
He explained that he now planned to land at half-tide, three
hours before high water, to give the engineers time to make
paths through the obstacles. The Americans observed that this
would be expensive in casualties, and Montgomery said that he
would employ armour along with infantry in the first wave,
using new tank 'gadgets'. He then entered into details about
these gadgets, or 'Hobart's funnies' as they were sometimes
known. His brother-in-law, Maj-Gen Percy Hobart (known as
'Hobo') was, like Montgomery, one of the few officers in the
thirties who understood the enormous potential of modern
tanks. Although he had officially retired in 1940, Hobart had,
with Churchill's backing, designed tanks equipped with new
devices which were to be of enormous value in the invasion.
Given, at the Prime Minister's insistence, access to considerable
research and manufacturing capacity, Hobart developed, among
others, the DD amphibious tanks, tanks equipped with flails to
pass through minefields, and the invaluable armoured bulldozer.
The DD tanks were made amphibious by equipping them with
Montgomery and the Invasion
81
floating
detachable canvas 'bloomers' - pleated screens for
buoyancy. These tanks, adapted from standard, had a duplex
drive (hence 'DD') which consisted of twin propellers
for
swimming as well as the normal track-laying drive for land. The
British had ordered 650 DD Valentines and 900 DD Shermans,
and they were to prove invaluable. Eisenhower fell for the DDs,
and found Montgomery's enthusiasm for their use infectious.
Unfortunately, other American generals were more sceptical,
and on D-Day, to their cost, had only three tank battalions
equipped with
DDs against the seven British battalions so
equipped. Marshall had sent General Charles H.
Corlet to
England as a consultant for the invasion plans because he was
expert in amphibious landings after considerable experience in
the Pacific. Corlet had reported that he found senior British
officers appreciative
of his knowledge
and
advice,
but the
Americans not so receptive. After the 21 January conference,
however, Eisenhower insisted on ordering a further 300 DDs, to
be delivered from the USA within two months.
Churchill, on 7 April, looked tired and old. He was worried,
for that week he had suffered his worst Cabinet squabble ever,
over the proposed bombing of the French roads and railways.
However, he wound up the proceedings with a pep talk and as
the conference dispersed
there was
a
friendly
atmosphere
amongst British, Canadians and Americans, and a confidence
that all would go well.
In his diary, Brooke commented on this conference: 'Monty
started with a good speech. Churchill was in a weakly condition
looking old and lacking vitality. In an entry four days earlier he
had written: 'PM aged tired and failing to grasp matters. It is a
depressing sight to see him gradually
deteriorating. I wonder
how long he can last - not long enough to see the war over I
fear.' The CIGS's diary entries provide a telling commentary on
some aspects of these invasion conferences. Maj-Gen Gerard
Bucknall,
GOC,
XXX
Corps,
had
also
spoken
at
the
conference. Brooke
was unimpressed with him and
wrote
prophetically: 'Bucknall very weak and unfit to command a
Corps.'
After the 7 April conference, Montgomery issued important
instructions to British Second Army and US First Army about
the use of armoured groups on D-Day to penetrate inland from
the beaches quickly. He set great store by them, writing:
