66
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Montgomery went on to say that he favoured 1 May for D-
Day. Ramsay contradicted him, saying that 1 May was not
possible, and that the earliest suitable moonlight period (thought
to be necessary for a night approach) would be a month later.
Hitherto Ramsay had
considered the dark period, which
followed the fortnight after
each moonlight period, to be
unsuitable owing to the difficulties of marshalling shipping in the
dark, but now admitted that with further training it might be
possible to accept a dark period. This meant the first possible
dark period would be in the middle of May; more realistically,
the beginning of June.
Montgomery stated that it was essential to put the French
railways out of commission for a radius of 150 miles from D-
Day to D-plus-14, and he wanted no bombing of the area itself
before D-minus-1, but then 'everything possible on area with
daylight bombing at communications and later railways'. By
now his final plan was taking shape, but he became alarmed that
there might be a shortage of landing-craft for a five-division
assault. He wired Eisenhower on 10 January, the day of the
conference, that the 'Anvil' landings proposed for the South of
France at the same time should be reduced to a 'threat', and
asked the Supreme Commander to 'hurl himself into the context
to get us what we want? 4
In his opening remarks, Montgomery emphasised rather too
strongly that he would be commanding the US troops during the
invasion. Some of the Americans became somewhat resentful at
this and in the interval Bradley went up to Montgomery and
asked him to tone down his remarks. In a statesmanlike way
Montgomery then said that he would command the British and
Canadian troops, but that he would suggest to General Bradley
the scheme of manoeuvre for American troops.
On 21 January, at Eisenhower's first meeting with the
invasion commanders, Montgomery opened the proceedings by
declaring that the COSSAC plan to invade Europe with three
divisions was 'just not on'. Once more he insisted five divisions
plus
one airborne
were necessary,
and emphasised that
Cherbourg must be captured quickly. He continued: 'It would
be the task of the US to capture Cherbourg; then drive for the
Loire ports and Brest, while the British and Canadians deal with
the main enemy body approaching from the east and south-
east' This clear-sighted vision of the invasion was the core of his
Montgomery and the Invasion
67
master plan which eventually defeated Hitler.
Eisenhower agreed, and suggested he send a telegram to
Marshall saying that in his view 'Anvil', which would draw men
and resources away from the assault on North-West Europe,
was impossible, though Bedell Smith feared this would give the
impression that they had changed their minds too quickly.
Montgomery insisted, however,
that a ten-division 'Anvil', as
originally proposed, was out of the question, saying: 'We must
plan for a real and proper Overlord. Leave in the Mediterranean
enough lift for one division.'
Upgrading the mass of the invasion forces meant that the
original date, 1 May, was also 'not on' because there would be
insufficient landing-craft available by then. Ramsay told this
conference that he believed early June was the right date, but
that the number of landing-craft required was still daunting -
one million soldiers, he emphasised, had to be delivered to the
beaches with their equipment. The conference reluctantly agreed
to postpone D-Day until June, although this meant a shorter
campaigning season. And now the folly of the heads of state in
not appointing the invasion commander in August 1943 became
apparent: there was little time in which to alter the plan to suit
the invasion commander's wishes.
Montgomery was a great success with those present at the 21
January meeting,
while the American generals appreciated the
clarity and force of his arguments. Above all, Eisenhower made
it clear at the conference that he was relying on Montgomery,
and blessed all his proposals. At the lunch following the meeting
all was harmony between the British and the Americans.
Twenty-First Army Group had been closely controlled by the
War Office. This did not suit its new commander, who was not
prepared to refer his decisions to higher authority, and anyway
was convinced that such
a course
would be
both time-
consuming and inefficient. He immediately began to make
changes, without, in his own words, 'waiting for War Office
approval'. The Secretary of State for War, Grigg, soon received
complaints from several Heads of Departments, and he himself
expressed strong disapproval. Montgomery lunched with Grigg,
explained that there was much to be done in a short time, and
apologised if he had 'gone too fast'. Grigg fell for Montgomery's
almost mesmeric charm, and all was well. The two men became
firm friends, and Grigg endorsed the general's short-circuiting of
