158
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
On 1 August armoured cars of 11th Armoured Division,
exploring undefended country to the south, had got to within
two miles of Vire and could have captured the town. Dempsey,
however, ordered VIII Corps
not
to
press
the
attack
in that
direction because a modification
of the inter-army
boundaries had left Vire to the Americans. Unfortunately, the
Germans quickly built up strong resistance round the town, and
because of the rigid army boundaries the prize of Vire was not
seized — a foretaste of what was to occur at Argentan fourteen
days later.
Montgomery missed a tremendous opportunity in not taking
Vire, for it lay on the line of German retreat from the American
front to the key town of Mortain, thirteen miles further south.
His set-back at Vire is evidence that, as a commander,
sometimes failed to take immediate advantage of unexpected
opportunities thrown up in fighting, and this was especially so
when the situation was complicated by the presence of defined
battle zones for different, allied, armies. General Roberts holds
this opinion, and told me:
My armoured cars got into Vire on 31 July, and we could
have taken the town immediately and occupied it in strength
because we had broken
out to the south-west and were
beyond the German lines. We would have been in the tip of
an apex without anyone to back us up. Von Kluge definitely
thought 'Bluecoat'
was more menacing at first than the
American break-out ... As a result hel refused to shift any of
his Panzers to the American front.
Once
we had
Vire we could have interfered very
considerably with the German withdrawal from the St Lô
front. Unfortunately the Americans complained heavily as
soon as we got into their battle zone and used their roads.
The Americans in that sector were very slow. Monty could
have changed the plan on the Vire front if he had wanted to.
We sent back frequent and accurate sitreps so that those
higher up knew exactly where we were and what was the
opposition. Vire was a missed opportunity, and one of the
reasons why I consider Monty was much better at set-piece
battles than seizing opportunities. The good point about him
was that he always stuck to his original intention, but when it
became loose he never took advantage of the situation. Even
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
159
at Alamein when it became loose he let it go haywire.
With 'Bluecoat' Montgomery felt that he was at last on the
brink of a brilliant victory on the US flank which would put an
end to the carping of his critics, and to the American newspaper
stories that the British were not pulling their weight. Alas for his
hopes, he was let down by XXX Corps, which made such slow
progress between Villers
Bocage and Mont Pinçon that VIII
Corps' left flank became
dangerously exposed.
Even so, the
extent of the VIII Corps advance had drawn to the Caumont
front two
German
armoured
divisions
-
9th
and
10th
Panzer - which otherwise
would certainly have gone to the
American front; indeed
Eberbach told von Kluge that the
Caumont sector was the crucial one at that moment.
The commander of XXX Corps,
Bucknall, had objected
and had asked
Dempsey if he could rewrite the plan; the latter, however, had
43rd Division had only come under
command thirty-six hours before the attack began, and he had
complained that, since this division had never met 7th Armoured
before, it was hard for the infantry and tank units to co-operate;
he added that he considered that he had such a difficult axis of
advance that it would not be easy to keep pace with VIII Corps.
On 31 July Bucknall sent back a complacent situation report,
stating that he had captured the feature Bois du Homme and the
north-west of Aunay, his
objectives. This, however, was not
good enough for either
Dempsey or Montgomery, who were determined that XXX
Corps should take the road and rail junction at Aunay-sur-
Odon, so that VIII Corps could continue a spectacular advance
on the flank of the Americans.
Dempsey went forward to confer with Bucknali
afternoon of 1 August, having heard that 43rd Division was held
up by newly arrived troops
Panzer, and that
Armoured had made no
progress towards capturing Aunay,
although Bucknall had told them 'to speed up action by taking
any risks and by all means'. Montgomery had told Dempsey to
The 7th Armoured Division War Diary records that after the
conference the BGS. XXX Corps sent this dramatic message to
Maj-Gen Erskine, commanding 7th Armoured: 'You may lose
