Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
By dark on the 3rd the line San Stefano-Scilla had been reached,
and commandos landing at Bagnara that night found they were
cutting off the withdrawal of light German rearguards. The
leading infantry of 5th Division soon linked up with the
commandos, and the remaining Germans retired. By noon on 6
September Gioia Tauro was reached after
resistance'; at 1425 there was contact with the enemy at
Rosarno, but by 2330 leading troops of 13 Brigade were beyond
Rosarno. Demolitions caused some delays, and it took 5th
Division HQ nine hours to travel eighteen miles. 28
In an effort to pinch off the German retreat the XIII Corps
commander, Lt-Gen Miles Dempsey, ordered 231 Independent
Brigade Group, consisting of 2nd Devons, Ist Hampshires and
1st Dorsets, with 3 and 40 Commandos, to land at Santa Venere
just south of Pizzo early on 8 September. Their arrival on the
beach coincided with the withdrawal of the German 29th Panzer
Grenadiers along the coast road. The Germans took up
positions in and around Pizzo, which stands on a bold sandstone
promontory, and their mortar and artillery fire caused casualties
on the beach soon after dawn; one LCT was knocked out,
though it managed to unload its lorries. There was fighting
around Pizzo for most of the day, during which a German
counter-attack was repelled with the help of naval guns. A war
correspondent who landed with 231 Brigade at Santa Venere
The Brigade's landing showed remarkable conservativeness
..and was not used as boldly as they might have been ...
early in the morning, had its orders permitted, the Brigade
might have established itself at Pizzo securing more far
reaching results. As it was assigned a semi-passive role, the
enemy later in the afternoon got additional troops to Pizzo by
way of the secondary road. Our failure to attempt to capture
Pizzo which was at no stage strongly held and get us to the
important road junction beyond it is less apparent.29
There was similar criticism from other observers.
The 231 Brigade convoy had left Messina on the evening of 7
September but lost its bearings and landed at San Venere in
considerable confusion, with the Dorsets on the right and the
Hampshires on the left. The Dorsets, once off the beach, ran
39
into German half-tracks carrying four-barrelled 20-mm guns,
and one Mark IV tank. Their 6-pdr anti-tank guns knocked out
the tank, and in a well known incident (the subject of a painting),
Sgt Evans threw a grenade into a half-track, for which he was
later awarded the Military Medal. On the evening of the 8th 5th
Division infantry arrived from the south through Vibo Valentia,
and the Germans abandoned Pizzo. On the 9th 231 Brigade,
with the Devons in the lead, advanced quickly for twenty miles
to the Amato River. They met little opposition, although the
brigade commander, rashly motoring ahead in his jeep, was
wounded in an encounter with a mobile detachment of Germans.
On the 10th the Devons crossed the Amato followed by the 5th
Division infantry; the Dorsets were ordered to drop out and
remained
for
three days near Nicastro for rest
reorganisation.
and
Montgomery sent no orders to push on urgently, so
Division
and 231 Brigade enioved the beautiful
countryside in fine weather. The local people were friendly and
showered gifts of grapes and other fruit on the British soldiers,
while chickens and even sheep could be bought to supplement
the army rations. It was like a holiday picnic after Sicily and
Africa. The mainland of Italy, even in the toe, is softer and more
attractive than Sicily, and the troops bivouacked beneath olive or
pine trees or in the thick scrub, and the nights were cool
although the days were warm. At last Eighth Army's soldiers
were enjoying the fruits of their African and Sicilian victories,
and the cheers of the civilian population in the villages and
towns
was
warming.
The Italian
Army in the area had
unofficially surrendered and thousands of its soldiers worked as
labourers to repair the roads
and bridges damaged by the
Germans, although the indiscreet use of radio links by Italian
generals caused Montgomery to take away all radio sets from
Italian headquarters.
After the battle
at Pizzo on 8 September, 5th Division
reported the 9th as a quiet day with very slight opposition', and
on the 10th patrols of 5th Reconnaissance Regiment were near
Nicastro and Tiriolo, where they contacted the left wing of the
Canadians in the narrowest part of the 'neck', 30
Then the incredible happened. On 11 September, just as the
Salerno landings
ran
into
desperate trouble,
Montgomery
ordered Sth Division to rest for two days in the area of Nicastro,
