Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
to send the French division in pursuit of the fleeing Germans.
Leclerc refused to obey Gerow, however, and the parade was
duly held. De Gaulle led the ceremony, rekindling the flame at
the tomb of the Unknown Warrior, marching, after a four-year
exile, in front of two million Frenchmen. It was both an historic
and an emotional occasion, despite sporadic fire from German
snipers which de Gaulle ignored completely.
Montgomery had
been invited to attend the parade,
sensibly had refused.* Eisenhower, however, could not resist the
temptation to have a look at the city, and asked Montgomery to
meet him there on 26 August. Montgomery again refused - he
had no interest in the liberation, in the architectural splendour,
or in the fleshpots of Paris. The last soon became a paradise for
rear echelon formations, and British and US supply service
troops entered the black market in a big way. Montgomery's
writ, however, no longer ran outside Twenty-First Army Group,
which was unfortunate, since he would certainly have put a stop
to the waste and corruption which sprang up among the Allied
soldiers based in the city.
On 25 August, as Paris was liberated, Horrocks's XXX
Corps began the British attack on the
Seine at
Vernon.
Horrocks had been ill and out of action for nearly a week, and
only resumed command a few hours after 43rd Division from
his Corps
crossed
the Seine. Montgomery
had
been
SO
concerned about Horrocks that he personally issued Maj-Gen
Ivor Thomas, commanding 43rd Division, with his Seine attack
orders, and had insisted that Horrocks should rest in a caravan
placed next to his own at Tac HQ until the last possible moment
before the attack. This is evidence of the faith Montgomery had
in Horrocks, for he could have had the junior man invalided
home. XXX Corps had been the laggards under Bucknall, but
now Montgomery had chosen them to be the spearhead of a
lightning
advance,
convinced that Horrocks's dash
and
charisma would produce the required results. In fact, it is
arguable that Montgomery had made a mistake in bringing back
*Kit Dawnay told me that Eisenhower only invited Montgomery to Paris
in a 'backhanded way which I [Dawnay] thought was rude and off-hand.'
Montgomery, however, did not mind at all, for his thoughts were on other
things. But he did instruct Dawnay to comment in the Log that 'the decision
to enter Paris was undoubtedly premature and proved an embarrassment to
the Allies for several days.'
Over the Seine
199
Horrocks, because the latter's health broke down again in the
crucial moments of the Arnhem battle.
For the crossing of the Seine, Montgomery had
grounded
VIII Corps at Vire and added all its transport to his general
pool, so that Dempsey's Second Army now consisted of two
corps, XII and XXX.
Canadian
First Army under
Crerar,
consisting of Canadian II Corps and British I Corps, was to
cross the Seine west of Rouen and then attack along the coast,
while Second Army made a dash for Brussels and Antwerp.
General Horrocks wrote in his memoirs:
we burst out of the bridgehead on the Seine
and set off on our chase northwards. This was the type of
warfare I thoroughly enjoyed. I had upwards of 600 tanks ...
.... a frontage of fifty miles.
Guards Armoured, 11th
passages through
rear areas, like a
combine-harvester going through a field of corn, with ... SOth
Division clearing up the mess behind them.
In order to keep up with the battle, Horrocks took to a
command tank, accompanied by three young officers; he did not
see his Main Corps HQ for a week.
On that first day XXX
Corps advanced only twenty-nine miles, having started at dawn
in torrential rain, but progress was faster on the 30th, and that
evening Horrocks went to 11th Armoured Division HQ and
ordered Pip Roberts to drive his division on through the night to
capture the bridges over the Somme at Amiens,
thirty miles
further on, by first light on 1 September. 11th Armoured had
already been on the move for thirty-six hours, but Horrocks's
enthusiasm was infectious.
By
0600 on 1 September Amiens
was taken with some of its bridges unblown.
During 11th
Armoured's night advance the Nazi General Eberbach, now
commanding Seventh Army,
was captured with his Tac HQ,
and SS
General Sepp Dietrich,
commanding
Fifth Panzer
Army, only narrowly escaped being taken. Horrocks described
Eberbach
as a 'scowling,
unshaven and
very ugly
German
officer dressed in black uniform', having been introduced to him
at 11th Armoured HQ early in the morning - even a British
general would not perhaps have been looking his best under the
same circumstances.
Eberbach gave valuable information to his
