284
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the Versailles conference, Eisenhower had ordered Hodges to
send part of US First Army to help Montgomery east of
Eindhoven, where Student's
Parachute
Army
was both
uncomfortably close and unexpectedly strong. Instead of there
being 3,000 Germans, as Allied intelligence had supposed,
Student had deployed over 20,000 in the Peel marshes west of
Eindhoven. Accordingly Eisenhower lent Montgomery
two
American divisions, hoping that once the British general had this
help he would detach part of Second Army for the clearance of
Antwerp.
Unfortunately, Montgomery's impression of what had been
agreed did not tally with Eisenhower's, and the breaking point
came on 9 October, when Montgomery issued his General
Operational Situation and Directive M530, which emphasised
the stronger-than-expected German reaction' and contained the
words: The use of Antwerp is vital ... operations to open the
port must have priority as regards troops, ammunition and so
on? At the same time, he wanted the Peel marshes swept clear of
Germans in preparation for a new attack, writing:
'Second
Army will immediately develop operations designed to drive the
enemy back to the east side of the Meuse between Gennep and
Roermond with a view to an offensive towards Krefeld.' The
directive promised no help to the badly overtaxed Canadians.
At SHAEF, this was correctly held to be paying 'only lip
the arrival of the directive coincided with reports from impatient
service to Ike's insistence that Antwerp must be lying : indeed
Royal Navy officers that the Canadians would not be able to
launch their main attack on the Scheldt until 1 November,
because of shortage of ammunition. Eisenhower at last braced
himself to take a really strong line with his unruly subordinate.
During the afternoon of 9 October, angry and frustrated, he sent
Montgomery the most imperative order, and snub, of the whole
campaign:
Unless
we have Antwerp producing by the middle of
November our entire operations will come to a standstill. I
must emphasise that of all our operations on the entire front
from Switzerland to the Channel I consider Antwerp of first
importance, and I believe that the operations designed to clear
up the entrance require your personal attention. 16
After Arnhem
285
Receiving this, Montgomery was angry in his turn. He felt
that Ramsay had gone behind his back* in telling Eisenhower
about the
Canadians' ammunition shortage, and wired back
indignantly: 'Request you will ask Ramsay from me by what
authority he makes
wild statements to you concerning my
operations about which he can know nothing repeat nothing.
Canadians already attacking; there is no repeat no shortage of
ammunition.'"7
He continued by reminding
Eisenhower that the Versailles
conference had made the attack against the Ruhr the 'main
effort', although he promised to open Antwerp as early as
possible, concluding
'The operations are receiving my personal
attention. Eisenhower replied on the 10th, saying that he was
glad that the news about an ammunition shortage was false, and
reminding Montgomery that 'the possession of the approaches
to Antwerp remains with us an objective of vital importance ...
Nothing I may ever say or write with respect to future plans in
our advance eastward is meant to indicate any lessening of the
need for Antwerp.'18
Shortly after Eisenhower's reply was sent, Bedell Smith called
Montgomery on the telephone and demanded to know when
SHAEF could expect some action around Antwerp.
Heated
words followed, until finally Smith, 'purple with rage,
turned to
Morgan and thrust the telephone into his hand - 'Here,' he said,
you tell your countryman what to do.' Morgan, convinced that
Montgomery would be CIGS after the war, immediately thought
to himself,
"Well, that's the end of my career? He then told
Montgomery that unless Antwerp was opened soon his supplies
would be cut off. 19
When Eisenhower's abrupt
and
categorical order to
concentrate on Antwerp arrived, Montgomery's thoughts were
still focused upon the Peel marshes, so vital to his east flank if
ever he was to launch an offensive over the Rhine into the
Ruhr. But Lt-Gen Sir Richard O'Connor's VIII Corps, helped
by US 7th Armoured Division, was finding Student's army in
the marshes a hard nut to crack. Reluctantly, Montgomery
decided that he must temporarily give up his ambitions to cross
* In fact, the report, made to Eisenhower by the Navy on 9 October, came
not from Ramsay but as a result of a Royal Navy/Canadian Army Planning
Conference, although it may well have been inspired by him.
