42
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
to risk disaster, therefore he decided to be cautious.
Montgomery, with his tidy and cautious mind, acutely
disliked having his forces 'strung out', and the enemy out of
sight. He liked to know the exact position of the enemy and their
strength. He wanted, too, to be able each day to visit any of his
units and still be back in time for an evening conference with his
liaison officers at his Tac HQ; when he was unable to visit his
forward units he had no wish to give authority to divisional
commanders to seize opportunities for a spectacular advance.
Worried by the
potential German strength on the Italian
mainland, he found 3-16 September a type of battle which did
not suit his temperament and for which he had little appetite.
On S September Alexander had flown to Reggio, and
Montgomery met him on the airfield there. The senior man
confirmed that the Italian Government, who had signed the
armistice on 3 September, would announce it on 8 September
and immediately commence fighting on the Allied side. He also
confirmed that 'Avalanche' would take place at Salerno at 0430
on 9 September; one airborne division would land at Taranto
simultaneously and it was hoped the Italian Army would seize
Taranto, Brindisi, Bari and Naples. According to Montgomery,
Alexander was over-optimistic; he asked him to move away out
of the hearing of the other officers. Once out of earshot he told
Alexander: Italian morale is so low that they will never fight the
Germans. The Germans are in great strength in Italy, while we
are very weak. Therefore we must not dissipate our resources by
opening up too many fronts.34 Montgomery also claimed that
he forecast, in the course of the conversation, that the Germans
would concentrate against 'Avalanche'; yet if he was so sure
that 'Avalanche' would run into strong opposition it is strange
that he was so dilatory in pushing up the west coast to join the
embattled forces at Salerno.
Montgomery continued to Alexander: 'Before we embark on
a major operation on the mainland of Europe we must have a
master plan and not being told of any master plan, I must
therefore
assume
there
is none?
Again
according to
Montgomery, Alexander listened but obviously disagreed. This
demand for a master plan was really a request for himself to be
in sole charge - a forerunner of similar requests to Eisenhower
in 1944 and 1945.
Sicily and After
43
In his
progress
towards Salerno, writing 'We marched and fought 300 miles in
seventeen days in good delaying
whose use of demolition caused us bridging problems of the first
magnitude.' Now that the official War Diaries in the Public
Record Office are available his statement does not hold water;
the inevitable conclusion is that Montgomery made little effort
to reach the southern flank of the Salerno beach-head in as short
a time as possible. He wanted to take no risks in face of the
potential strength of German divisions in Italy and concentrated
instead on a slow, massive build-up.
It is true that there were narrow hairpin bends on many of the
roads, slowing transport, but most were passable. There had
been also a good number of demolitions, chiefly on road bridges,
but in that part of Italy in the summer the river beds are level
and dry and the sappers reported it was easy to bypass damaged
sections. For example, on 11 September the CRE (Commander,
Royal Engineers), 5th Division reported 'No bridge blown on
the road Gioia-Cittanuava', and on 12 September 'A few bridges
blown on coast road towards Belvedere'. But a typical report
from CRE 5th Division reads: 'Two bridges blown at Corali are
passable and bulldozer will take one hour to repair another. '35
Two parties of Eighth Army war correspondents were able to
motor the 120 miles from Nicastro to the Salerno bridgehead in
forty-eight hours; they met no opposition. Christopher Buckley
with four other journalists set out at 0630 on
Tuesday, 14
September,
and
soon
passed
the forward elements of
5th
Division at Scalea and Maratea, to find another party of war
correspondents had preceded
them.
They sped
beyond
Maratea, everywhere receiving an enthusiastic welcome from
the Italians with flowers, fruit and eggs, so that their car began
to resemble 'a church at harvest festival'.
When they reached Policastro, where the main road crosses a
river
and turns
inland,
they found the bridge had been
thoroughly destroyed, but some small boys quickly guided them
to a ford where, as usual, the bed of the river was composed of
firm gravel and they were able to cross in their staff car. Hearing
that the main road had been mined, they turned off to the left
through side roads towards Agropoli. At Bugheria they found
the
other
party
correspondents,
led
by
Evelyn
Montague of the Manchester Guardian, supported by Eighth
