116
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
have a show-down with the enemy in my eastern flank as long as
he likes.29 Yet Dempsey's attack was stopped along the line
from Villers Bocage to Caen with heavy losses to the British,
and a simultaneous 3rd Division attack north of Caen was also
stopped by 27 June.
Into 'Epsom' Montgomery had sent 60,000 troops, many of
them fresh from the UK. They achieved some initial success,
and took the northern slopes of Hill 112, from where they would
have been able to observe all German movement around Caen.
But on 29 June German Panzers counter-attacked in strength
with over 200 tanks, and the British had to evacuate the hill. By
the 30th both sides were exhausted, but the British had won a
tiny but important wedge into the German positions. Casualties
on both sides were horrific; in more than one place the Odon
stream had been dammed by corpses.
For Montgomery the result was disappointing. He needed a
large-scale map to point out the territory he had gained, and he
had claimed too much before the offensive started. In fact
'Epsom' was a success, for it had compelled Rommel to switch
the bulk of his tanks from the American (western) sector to halt
the British threat to Caen. But the newspapers in London and
the USA were clamouring for Caen to fall; they could not know
that by 29 June there were only 140 German tanks facing the
Americans in the western sector, against 725 facing the British
and with virtually none in reserve. Critics hailed 'Epsom' as
another failure due to over-caution and to not risking enough
troops.
Montgomery confidently went on telling everybody that the
battle was going well and according to his plan, since he had
drawn off so much armour from the US front. But he had
promised airfields to the air marshals, and an advance well
beyond Caen, which he could not deliver. Another valid
criticism is that he overlooked how much easier it was for
German tanks to fight in the open country in front of the British
than in the bocage in which the Americans were operating.
On 4 July 3rd Canadian Division attacked Carpiquet. They
were not entirely successful, and Dempsey recorded in his log:
They secured and held the village of Carpiquet but on the right
the operation was not well handled and the airfield remained in
enemy hands.'
Meanwhile, Cherbourg had fallen to the Americans on 27
Normandy Assault
117
June, and although Bradley's army was technically
under
Montgomery's control this was strictly an American victory.
Montgomery had hoped that the Americans would strike south
simultaneously
with their attack on Cherbourg - he was
desperately anxious for them to form up on the start line for the
decisive attack planned from the beginning to produce a
break-out into Brittany. On 29 June he wrote to the CIGS: 'T
tried very hard to get First US Army to develop its thrust
southwards towards Coutances at the
same time as it was
completing the capture of Cherbourg ... but Bradley did not
want to take the risk; there was no risk really; quick and skilful
regrouping was all that was wanted.'
On 6 July Patton arrived in France, ready to take command
of the US Third Army which he was to lead after the planned
break-out into Brittany and Normandy. On the 7th Patton and
Bradley lunched with Montgomery; Patton
commented
afterwards that 'Monty went to great length to explain why the
British had done nothing, and noted that Bradley was frightened
of Montgomery.
At SHAEF,
Eisenhower and Tedder became increasingly
worried about the failure to take Caen, knowing that the planned
break-out would have to be attempted by the US Army on the
west front in the bocage, with its attendant problems for tanks.
On 1 July Eisenhower told Tedder that he was worried by
'Monty's dilatory behaviour outside Caen, and emphasised that
Montgomery's 18 June Directive M 502 to
Bradley
and
Dempsey had been over-optimistic. Part of the Directive read:
We have gained a good lodgement, kept the
initiative,
replaced our casualties in personnel, tanks etc. After the very
great intensity of the first few days we had to slow down the
strength
reap
the
harvest
enemy mobile
reserves
exhausted
Divisions for a full blooded counter-attack ...
and Cherbourg captured by 27 June.
Neither was Eisenhower pleased by Directive M 505 of 30
June, which said:
