414
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
policies of unconditional surrender, indiscriminate bombing, and
the threat of wholesale trials of German military leaders as war
criminals. The formulation of this policy had been nothing to do
with Montgomery and when, towards the end of the war, he was
consulted by Eisenhower as to whether German generals willing
to surrender* should be offered immunity from war crimes trials,
he sensibly favoured immunity. 14
Unperturbed by his failures
at
Antwerp
and
Arnhem,
Montgomery conducted the rest of a difficult campaign skilfully.
Unhappily, however, his intelligent and restrained command of
American troops during the Ardennes crisis was overshadowed
by his unfortunate press conference, which intensified sharply
Eisenhower's hostility. Montgomery
displayed considerable
naivety over this press conference, telling Dawnay to write in the
Log: 'These remarks had a very good reception in the press in
America and did a great deal towards calming the anti-British
campaign in the country?' In fact, they had precisely the
opposite effect.
Early in 1945, Eisenhower was much disturbed at Churchill's
suggestion - virtually a decision - that Alexander should replace
Tedder as Deputy Commander, SHAEF. With Alexander at his
side, the Supreme Commander would have found it considerably
more difficult to refuse Montgomery's demands, which were
almost invariably backed by the British Chiefs of Staff.
know from Eisenhower's papers that Marshall had told him to
withdraw US Ninth Army from Twenty-First Army Group for
the final victory; this, Eisenhower knew, would be bound to
infuriate Montgomery - who would have the full support of
Churchill - so he did not want to have Alexander breathing
down his
Montgomery so much the harder.
thus making his task in dealing with
Eisenhower visited Montgomery twice in February 1945, at
Namur and Zondhoven, and on each
occasion
the latter
instructed Dawnay to put detailed accounts of the conversations
in the Log. From these it is clear that Eisenhower gave the
impression
that US
Ninth
Army
would
stay
under
Montgomery's command until the end of the war; furthermore,
* The German
Generals Westphal, Blaskowitz and von
Zangen
(respectively Chief of Staff to von Rundstedt; GOC, Army Group H; and
GOC, Fifteenth Army) had by then made surrender approaches to the Allies.
Conclusion
415
he sought the Field-Marshal's help in persuading Churchill not
to bring
Alexander to France,
arguing
that
the
existing
command
arrangements
were
satisfactory.
Accordingly
Montgomery, in contradiction of his earlier views, firmly told the
Prime Minister that he did not think it would be a good idea for
Alexander to come to SHAEF in place of Tedder. Churchill,
although extremely
annoyed,
was compelled to accept this,
much to Eisenhower's relief. Plainly Montgomery was utterly
unaware
that the Americans intended to remove US Ninth
Army from his command, and that Eisenhower was, even then,
already contemplating not attacking Berlin.
If
Alexander
had
been
appointed
Deputy
Commander,
SHAEF, then
Eisenhower
would have been
forced to
give
Twenty-First Army Group a much more important (and thus
more glamorous) role in the final advance.
The only possible
conclusion
is
that
the
Supreme
Commander
used
his
considerable charm to fool Montgomery into thinking that their
past differences were forgotten, and that the allotted American
troops would stay under Twenty-First Army Group command
for the final drive on Berlin.
Eisenhower's true intentions were revealed at the
end of
March 1945. Irritated by the somewhat overblown publicity for
the British
crossing of the Rhine, the Supreme Commander
shocked Montgomery by peremptorily withdrawing US Ninth
Army from Twenty-First Army Group, and by forbidding the
British force to push on to Berlin, relegating it instead to the role
of occupying
Holland and sealing off
Denmark from the
Russians. Brigadier Williams's view is that:
Ike felt he had given Monty full rein, and the time had come
to give firm orders to him. Ike's colleagues at SHAEF wanted
him to clobber Monty and told him: 'Give him orders instead
of arguing; never get into an argument with Monty because
you are likely to lose it.' Ike was also fed up with Winston
who was continually telling him what to do. He decided he
was tired of Winston and now the war was almost won he
would get on with it in his own way.
Despite the confusion and wrath of his allies, the Supreme
Commander
was set in his course, and would not alter his
decisions.
Marshall and the other US commanders, as well as
