76
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
The order of battle can be seen on the diagrams. The tasks
given to the armies are as follows:
(a) To assault astride the CARENTAN estuary.
(b) To capture CHERBOURG as quickly as possible.
CARENTAN, to
southwards towards ST LO in conformity with the
advance of Second British Army.
CHERBOURG-CAUMONT-VIRE-
AVRANCHES has been captured, the Army will be directed
southwards with the object of capturing RENNES and then
establishing our flank on the R. LOIRE and capture
QUIBERON BAY.
Second British Army
To assault to the west of the R. ORNE and to develop
operations to the south and south-east, in order to secure
airfield sites and to protect the eastern flank of First U.S. Army
while the latter is capturing CHERBOURG.
In its subsequent operations the Army will pivot on its left
and offer a strong front against enemy movement towards the
lodgement area from the east.
First Canadian Army
This Army will land after the Second British Army and will
take over from it the left or northern sector of the lodgement
area. The troops of Second British Army in the area so taken
over, probably one Corps, will come under command First
This Army will land after First U.S. Army and will have
(a) of clearing the BRITTANY peninsula and capturing
the BRITTANY ports.
(b) as soon as the BRITTANY and LOIRE ports have
been captured, of covering the south flank of the
lodgement area while the First U.S. Army is directed
N.E. with a view to operations towards PARIS ...
Montgomery and the Invasion
77
The Sea-borne Assault
17. The existing resources in landing ships and craft are
contained in five Naval Assault Forces, and two
Naval
Follow-up Forces. These forces have been allotted in support
of Armies as follows:
First U.S. Army
Two Assault Forces
One Follow-up Force
Lift of approximately
8.700 vehicles.
Second British Army
Three Assault Forces
Lift of approximately
One Follow-up Force
10.900 vehicles.
The total lift is some 20,000 vehicles, all of which will be
landed on the first, second, or third tides.
18. The forces to be carried in the initial lift are as follows:
First U.S. Army
Three Infantry Divisions (Assault)
Five Tank Battalions (Assault)
Two Ranger Battalions
Army and Corps Tps and Naval and Air overheads.
Second British Army
Three Infantry Divisions (Assault)
Three Tank Brigades (Assault)
One Armoured Brigade
One Infantry Division (less two Inf Bde Groups)
Two S.S. Bdes
Army and Corps Tps. and Naval and Air overheads.
19. The assault will take place on D day on an eight Brigades,
Regimental Combat Team, front.
H hour will be nautical twilight + 90 minutes, but this time
may change.
First U.S. Army
Assaults on a front of three Regimental Combat Teams.
Second British Army
Assaults on a front of five Infantry Brigades.
Details are shown on the diagram, and Army Comds will
explain the plans later.
