120
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
in a dilemma. While Eisenhower always doubted the certainty of
a breakthrough by the American First Army in the bocage, and
kept on insisting on the need for an all-British attack in the east,
the War Office continued to emphasise to Montgomery that he
must not risk excessive casualties because there were no reserves
of manpower for the British and Canadian armies.
Even on D-Day, the British Expeditionary Force had not
been up to strength. On 12 June a Twenty-First Army Group
appreciation stated that 'The army manpower situation is acute.
Probable wastage exceeds probable reinforcements. The War
Office have not been able to meet our full order of battle
entitlements in unit establishments plus first reinforcements.' In
May the War Office had forecast that, given the expected
casualty rate during the invasion, the infantry position would be
'particularly unsatisfactory at the end of June and there would
be a need for cannibalisation' on a large scale; one whole
infantry division, the forecast continued, would have to be
cannibalised by the second half of July, and another by the first
half of September. In fact, by the end of July two tank brigades
had been cannibalised, and by the end of August Twenty-First
Army Group had, since D-Day, broken up twenty infantry
battalions and five Royal Armoured Corps regiments, as well as
making substantial cuts in anti-aircraft personnel, but it was still
unable to keep infantry
and airborne troops up to war
establishment. On 10 August de Guingand ordered that all A 1-
classed men should be drafted from defence companies to
infantry battalions, and that a reduction should be made in the
strength of reconnaissance regiments by 100 men each; even
after all these measures, he warned that there would still be
deficiencies in infantry battalions.32 Critics of Montgomery's
caution following D-Day should take this serious manpower
situation into account. The US Army at that stage had ample
reserves available, and once British troops had run into heavier-
than-expected opposition around Caen, Montgomery inclined
more and more to the view that the Americans must incur the
major part of the very heavy casualties inseparable from a
successful break-out from the beach-head.
By now, Montgomery
was aware that Eisenhower
was
becoming more and more critical, and he was warned by Brooke
that the American Supreme Commander had complained in
London to Churchill (on 5 July) that 'Monty was bogged down'
Normandy Assault
121
and 'over-cautious'. Churchill, according to Brooke, had listened
sympathetically to these complaints, which led to a furious, four-
hour quarrel between the Prime Minister and the CIGS on the
evening of 6 July. Churchill abused Montgomery because
operations were not going faster, at which Brooke flared up and
asked the Prime Minister 'why he could not trust his General for
minutes'.
Brooke immediately
told Montgomery
Churchill's attitude, and this was undoubtedly weighing heavily
upon him on 10 July.
Eisenhower's letter of 7 July had not given firm and clear
orders for an all-out attack although, according to his ADC, the
Supreme
Commander
was smouldering with rage
against
Montgomery. Tedder, who thought the letter weak, and Bedell
Smith urged Eisenhower to force an attack, saying that the letter
was more of a "nudge forward" than "an ultimatum" ?33 Portal
had
visited Montgomery on 9 July and,
on
his return to
SHAEF, had told Tedder that: 'The problem is with Monty he
can't either be removed or sacked. But with Brooke and the
War Office continually underlining that British reserves of
manpower were in serious danger of exhaustion, Montgomery
must be excused for hoping that the US Army, and not the
British, would undertake the vital major break-out.
when on 10 July he held the conference with Bradley
Eisenhower. Bradley agreed to plan a major offensive on his
front, but expressed doubts about the outcome because of the
difficulties
of the bocage country and of flooded
marshes.
Dempsey, on the other hand, felt strongly that, instead of an
American assault, Second Army should undertake an all-out
armoured offensive in the favourable country around Caen, as
signal was sent to Eisenhower, who replied enthusiastically on
13 July
and promised all possible air support.
Everyone at
