208
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
must be made at once and para. 3 above will then apply.
7. If
we attempt a compromise
solution
and
split our
maintenance resources so that neither thrust is full-blooded
we will prolong the war.
8.
I consider the problem viewed as above is very simple and
clear cut.
9. The matter is of such vital importance that I feel sure you
will agree that a decision on the above lines is required at
once. If you are coming this way perhaps you would look in
and discuss it. If so delighted to see you lunch tomorrow.
Do not feel I can leave this battle just at present.
This message was constructive, succinct and strong, if arrogant,
but Eisenhower was determined to compromise, regardless of
Montgomery's warning in paragraph 7 that this would prolong
the war. Like many others, Eisenhower believed at the time that
Hitler was beaten - he had no idea that new German armies were
being created. In an office memorandum dated 5 September,
written before Montgomery's signal arrived, Eisenhower wrote:
The defeat of the German armies is now complete and the only
thing needed to realise the conception is speed
... I deem it
important to get Patton moving once again so that we may be
fully prepared to carry out the original conception for the final
stages of this campaign' Such a course was the last thing that
Montgomery wanted.
Significantly, the Supreme Commander added:
Two weeks ago when General Montgomery insisted upon a
whole American Army moving to the north east on his right
flank I told him he did not need that much strength to destroy
the Germans still on his front. With his usual caution he felt it
imperative that we make certain of no halt in operations
towards Antwerp and Brussels ... I directed the First Army to
advance closely along the boundary of the 21 Army Group.
This forced Patton to stand still to the south east of Paris with
his main bodies pushing only reconnaissances to the front.
This is clear evidence of Eisenhower's resentment at having to
pander to Montgomery and thus hold up the American advance.
Note that he forgot to write 'Field-Marshal'.
Because communications with SHAEF at Granville were so
Over the Seine
209
bad, Montgomery did not receive a full reply to his signal of 4
September until the morning of the 7th, by which time he felt
that he had built up sufficient supplies to start his troops moving
on from Antwerp. On 5 September Eisenhower had signalled
that it was essential to open the ports of Le Havre and Antwerp
'to sustain a powerful thrust into Germany', and that, while the
offensive towards the Ruhr would always have priority, it was
his intention 'initially to occupy the Saar and the Ruhr and by
the time we have done this Havre and Antwerp should be
available to maintain a deeper thrust into
Germany. This
message
incensed Montgomery, who considered
that his
lightning advance had so disorganised the Germans that he
could push on to Berlin, if only Patton's transport and petrol
were diverted to Twenty-First Army Group.
His reply was dated 7 September:
Have just received paras. 3 and 4 of your message of 5
September. First part of message has not arrived yet so do
not know what it contains. My maintenance is stretched to
the limit. First instalment of 18 locomotives only just released
to me and balance still seems uncertain. I require an air lift of
1000 tons a day at Douai or Brussels and in last two days
only 750 tons total. My transport is based on
operating 150 miles from my ports and at present I am over
300 miles from Bayeux. In order to save transport I have cut
down my intake into France to 6000 tons a day which is half
what I consume and I cannot go on for long like this. It is
clear therefore that based as I am at present on Bayeux I
cannot capture the Ruhr. As soon as I have a Pas de Calais
port working I would then require about 2500 additional 3-
ton lorries plus an assured air lift averaging minimum 1000
tons a day to enable me to get to the Ruhr and finally
submit with all respect to your para. 3 labout Le Havre and
Antwerp as essentiall that a reallocation of our present
resources of every description would be adequate to get one
thrust to Berlin. It is very difficult to explain things in
message like this. Would it be possible for you to come and
It was not only tactless but inconsiderate of Montgomery to ask
Eisenhower to come and see him, for the latter had severely
