104
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
information as to the relative performance of guns and tanks
were made known to all troops over Overlord
... Only a
proportion of enemy tanks are Tigers and Panthers. We
estimate they have:
Tigers
80
Panthers
250
Mark IV
350
French tanks
100
There are, of course, others outside the Neptune* area.
We have around 250 17 pdr tanks in France plus large
numbers of 17 pdrs (trailed), around 800. If we are not
careful there will be a danger of the troops developing a Tiger
and Panther complex ... Grigg rang last night and said there
might be trouble in the Guards Armoured Division re the
inadequacy of our tanks. He suspects the MP Anstruther-
Grayt in the 6th Coldstreams.14
In the House of Commons, rumours about German tank
superiority were upsetting Churchill.
Montgomery was also angry because General Bucknall,
GOC, XXX corps, (on whom Brooke had commented so
unfavourably after the 7 April St Paul's conference) had sent a
report direct to the War Office about the defects of the 17-
pounder
'Bad show writing direct'
was Montgomery's
comment to Brooke, though he had been known to do the same
thing himself when a divisional commander. On 24 June he
wrote to Grigg: 'Reports are circulating about the value of
British equipment, tanks etc. as compared with Germans ...
anything which undermines confidence must be stamped on
ruthlessly? 15 Twelve days later, however, after further fighting,
Montgomery took a more sombre
view
of British tank
performance. He wrote to the War Office (6 July) with his
considered
views
after
consultation with his responsible
commanders', and declared:
The Tiger has superior armour to any Allied tank ... Panther
has superior frontal armour to British tanks - side and rear
on D-Day.
* The invasion area, 'Neptune' being the code-word for the actual assault
+ Major W.J. (later Sir William) Anstruther-Gray, MP for North Lanark.
Normandy Assault
105
armour is in no way superior. German Mark IV in no way
superior to
Sherman
or
Cromwell.
Sherman
tank
unquestionably more reliable mechanically than any other.
Tiger and Panther have short life and spend a lot of time in
workshops. Cromwell up to date has proved quite reliable.
With introduction of Sabot ammo we have caught up with,
and possibly passed the enemy in ammo design. The 17
pounder tank is most popular. 75mm gun is becoming out of
date. It cannot take a Panther frontally, and crews consider
themselves out matched by the Tiger. Churchill crews have
little experience of battle; they like their tanks but want 17
pounder instead
of 75mm. Sherman and Cromwell tanks
would like more armour on their tanks. Cromwell tanks must
eventually go.16
This report erred on the side of optimism, though there can be
no doubting its author's enormous technical competence..
But
every officer who served at this time in British armoured divisions
that I have questioned replied that Allied tanks were inferior to
those of the Germans. Montgomery knew he was up against a
nasty morale problem, which explains his anger over Anstruther-
Gray and Bucknall.
Further evidence of his sensitivity about rumours of
poor
British equipment is provided by his order to Second Army dated
25 July:
Where adverse comment is made on British equipment such
reports are likely to cause a lowering of morale and lack of
confidence among the troops ... when the equipment at our
disposal is used properly and the tactics are good we have no
difficulty in defeating the Germans. I have therefore decided
that GSO 1 Liaison |Lt-Cols will write no more reports for
the present. You will issue orders at once that further reports
are forbidden until I give permission
Alarmist reports
written by officers with no responsibility and little battle
experience could do a great deal of harm. There will therefore
no
reports
except those
made through
the accepted
channels of command. 17
Montgomery had more problems with the morale of his
infantry. On 20 July a Second Army intelligence summary
