400
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
King or the Prime Minister were staying at Tac HQ - leaving
his visitors to be looked after by his ADCs. If there were no
distinguished guests once 'Master' had gone to his caravan the
aides usually adjourned to the liaison officers' separate mess.
Dempsey was a frequent visitor there, but only de Guingand,
Graham
and Williams were members of the commander's
intimate mess, with its family atmosphere and its pets such as
dogs, and even at one time a peacock. Montgomery always
made his guests welcome, and he was an excellent host once he
had relaxed after finishing his work.
Given this atmosphere of hard work, friendliness and trust, it
seems grotesque that, because of his isolation, there were no
regular conferences between Montgomery and Bradley and
Eisenhower during the crucial moments of the campaign.
Thus we have a picture of a dedicated field commander,
completely absorbed in dealing with the day-to-day problems of
his armies, and reporting back to London and to SHAEF on his
operations and plans. His responsibilities were awesome, yet
working seven days a week over long periods, and continually
having to deal with horrifying and harrowing situations, never
shook his composure nor put him under strain, because each
evening he relaxed in the company of his hand-picked staff,
retiring at 2130 to sleep soundly until the morning. His way of
life in the field resembled that of Napoleon, who also possessed a
gift for relaxing and putting problems out of his head when the
day's work was over, and for sleeping well.
Unfortunately, this picture of a gifted commander, working at
problems and making his decisions unworried by distractions
and distress, has another side. Montgomery had his defects.
He was vain, and could never bear to admit that he had been
wrong. Up to a point he liked opposition to his ideas, as long as
he could overcome it. He would sometimes take an impish
pleasure in making mischief and sailing impudently close to the
wind, although he usually knew when to call a halt to his more
extreme behaviour.* He was ruthless with inefficient officers,
and could suffer neither fools nor muddled thinking.
There can be no doubt that, after his desert victories, the fame
*A good example of this was his effort to get the Canadian General Crerar
sacked in September 1944, because he wanted to replace him with Simonds,
whom he liked and admired.
went to Montgomery's head. He despised the American
generals, who at that time had no battle experience, and he
expected them to bow to his superior expertise. At first they
were ready to do so, but not for long once they had fought and
won their own battles. Montgomery found it hard to realise how
critical the US commanders became of him, since he was so sure
that he was the best Allied general.
Given his strong individualism, the desert campaigns of 1942-
43 had suited him ideally, for there he had been fighting what
amounted to his own private war, with the almost nominal C-in-
C, Alexander, complying with his every demand. Once the US
Army arrived upon the scene, however, there was to be no
possibility of Montgomery exercising sole command in the same
way in subsequent campaigns. He found this hard to accept, and
it galled him further that Eighth Army was relegated to parity
with the Americans for the invasions of Sicily and Italy. He
made a revealing remark in his memoirs about this parity: 'It
was no longer to be a private war.' He knew that he was at his
best in 'private wars', but from then on he was to become part of
a team of commanders, and this exposed his weakness at co-
Once it had become clear that the Axis forces would be
thrown out of North Africa, Montgomery's eyes turned towards
the major task of defeating the German armies in North-West
knowing that
this was essential for final victory.
General Sir Charles Richardson told me that in the spring of
1943 all those with major responsibility for the desert victory
felt that Eighth Army must automatically become the corps
d'élite for the coming cross-Channel invasion.
They could not
believe, after the honours Eighth Army had gained since 1940,
that it would be cut down in size and condemned to the
relatively unimportant and profitless struggle up Sicily and Italy,
a struggle which could never pay worthwhile dividends. At the
time, of course (late 1943), few of those involved had any idea
that the cross-Channel invasion would be delayed until the
At the Casablanca conference in January 1943 Churchill and
Roosevelt decided to invade Sicily and to postpone the cross-
Channel attack until the summer of 1944. As we have seen, the
first Allied plans for the Sicilian attack were poorly conceived,
having been entrusted to staffs in widely separated centres and
