412
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
thrust which was to bedevil Montgomery's relations with his
allies for the rest of the war.
Was Montgomery's plan to use forty divisions in the north
sound? Not in Field-Marshal Lord Carver's opinion. He told me
that:
Montgomery's single pencil-like thrust into Germany was
never on. Montgomery would have run into dead trouble
when he got over the Ijssel River, if not before, no matter how
many divisions Ike had given him. He was dependent on the
road bridges; we could not use railways, and only a few of his
divisions could have been deployed against the reorganised
German armies on the German plain.
De Guingand held the same view.
Liddell Hart felt that Montgomery's single concentrated
thrust was better in principle than Eisenhower's broad-front
advance to the Rhine, but that it foundered because Twenty-
First Army Group did not keep up the pace after Brussels and
Antwerp were taken, and because supplies did not arrive fast
enough. Liddell Hart's view was that in the event 'the best
chance of a quick finish was lost when the gas was turned off
from Patton's tanks in the last week of August, when they were
100 miles nearer to the Rhine than the British.'12 It is doubtful,
however, whether Patton's fuel supplies were actually 'turned
Montgomery, to his credit, given his keenness on the northern
thrust, nevertheless argued with Eisenhower that as long as the
supplies were concentrated on one or other of the advances, it
did not matter if it was an American southern thrust or a British
northern one. What frustrated him was dissipating the Allied
resources on more than one major assault over the German
frontier.
After Brussels and Antwerp had fallen, early in September
1944, Montgomery made a fatal mistake by failing to seal off
immediately the large German army in the South Beveland
peninsula, at the eastern base of which, a bare twenty miles north-
west of Antwerp, there is a bottleneck only a few hundred yards
wide. Through that bottleneck a large part of German Fifteenth
Army escaped. He compounded this mistake, against the strong
advice both of Dempsey and of his own staff, by opting for the
Conclusion
413
disastrous airborne landings at Arnhem.
Eisenhower weakly
accepted Montgomery's Arnhem gamble
against his better
judgement, although he himself was convinced that without the
port of Antwerp in operation the Allies would be in difficulties,
even if the attempt to seize the Rhine bridge at Arnhem had
succeeded.
Three days before the Arnhem drop Eisenhower had written in
a letter to Marshall that 'Montgomery suddenly became obsessed
with the idea that his Army Group could rush right on into Berlin
provided we gave him all the maintenance that was in the theatre
Examination of this scheme exposes is as a fantastic
idea.'13
But if the
Supreme
Commander
thought
SO
strongly that Montgomery's northern thrust through Arnhem
into the plains of north-west Germany could not succeed, then it
is extraordinary that he should have endorsed the risky 'Market-
Garden' operation, which put at risk - and all but destroyed -
virtually
the
entire SHAEF strategic
reserve.
This letter
(reproduced in full in the Appendix) must bring into question
Eisenhower's reputation and performance as a commander.
Euphoria prevailed amongst the Allies in early September.
Like almost everyone else Montgomery believed that the war
was over, that it was merely a matter of inflicting the coup de
gräce. After all, in 1918 the Kaiser had been deposed and the
Germans had surrendered when their armies had suffered a far
less severe defeat in the west. However, none of the planners had
conceived of - nor dared hope for - such a total defeat of the
Germans in Normandy, and in consequence there was no plan
to exploit the opportunities thus afforded.
Montgomery can perhaps be pardoned for mistakes made in
the euphoria of the early days of September 1944, when he
believed that his task was almost accomplished. Few people
could have believed that the German nation could be so blind as
to follow, devotedly, a megalomaniac prepared to devastate his
country
and to squander his nation's
blood,
continuing
hopeless defensive war with the sole object of preserving his
personal
power.
Nor could
anyone have
foreseen
that
schoolboys would take up arms and fight, courageously and
with a fanatical devotion to Hitlerism, so that the new German
armies, hurriedly raised in the autumn of 1944, were almost as
enthusiastic as those raised in the early stages of the war.
The German will to resist was further stiffened by the Allied
