Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
strong in the north. From September, 1944, to January, 1945,
the Allies were never strong enough in the north to achieve
decisive results ...
However, the Field-Marshal considered that it was useless
to continue to argue with the American Generals as to what
the correct strategy should be. They were unable to see his
point of view, and were in any case determined to finish off
the war in their own way.
He therefore decided to make no comments of any kind on
the American plan, and to adopt a policy of complete silence
while he did as much as he could in the north with the
strength available.
The final end of the war was now certain, though the
American strategy would make the war last longer than might
otherwise have been the case; for quick victory could be
achieved only by the concentration of great strength in the
north. But as the end approached, the great point was to
remain good friends with the Americans.
argument with them on their strategy would only exacerbate
relations, and had no chance of achieving any results.
He therefore decided to get on with his own job on the
northern touchline, from which point of vantage many an
international match has been won. 35
It is perhaps surprising that, in all his attempts at this time to
reverse Eisenhower's
decisions about command or strategy,
Montgomery presented a case that was fair, reasonable, and
truthful. His letters, notes and signals imply his bitterness, but
there is no trace of self-pity, only a strong and honest belief in
his own views. Now he decided 'to get on with his own job', as
he put it. Nothing could have been more statesmanlike than the
Twenty-First Army Group commander's reply, dated 9 April,
to Eisenhower's letter of the 8th:
Dear Ike,
Have received your letter dated 8 April. It is quite clear to
me what you want. I will crack along on the northern flank
one hundred per cent and will do all I can to draw the enemy
forces away from the main effort being made by Bradley.
Yours ever,
Monty 36
Eisenhower's Revenge
381
In the meantime, Montgomery's ever loyal friend, Simpson,
was beavering away at Whiteley on the telephone, in the vain
hope that the staff at SHAEF might change their minds about
upe inth Army. Although he had had his suspicions, Simpson
had not realised until then how strong were Whiteley's anti-
Montgomery feelings. Eventually, after several calls, Simpson
said: 'Can you imagine Monty's feeling when he finds out how
his most promising plan has been whittled down? Do you ever
talk to him yourself?' to which Whiteley replied: 'Oh Simbo - be
fair. Bradley has feelings too, and he must be allowed to have
US Ninth Army for a bit.' At that point Simpson finally realised
that Whiteley's loyalties lay entirely with the Americans, and in
a letter to Montgomery he told him of this conversation, adding:
'There you have the whole matter in a nutshell.
comment would be useless.' Montgomery at last understood that
his long battle for command and priority was lost. 37
On 3 April Tedder, in his
as Deputy Supreme
Commander, was summoned to the meeting of the Chiefs of
Staff in London. Churchill was unable to attend on that day, but
Brooke, supported by Ismay and Cunningham, gave the Air
Marshal a difficult time,
although the official record merely
states that there was 'an informal discussion with Air Marshal
Tedder'. Apart from the four officers mentioned everyone else
was turned out of the room, and the CIGS then cross-examined
Tedder about the SHAEF changes to plans and command.
Tedder told the meeting that the SHAEF planners had had to
change the command 'because Monty had suddenly declared he
was going off on his own plans for a thrust to the north,' to
which Brooke replied, referring to the Supreme Commander's
actions on 28 March: 'It is most unsatisfactory when Ike has to
appeal to Stalin to help him to control Monty. Tedder answered
by saying that Eisenhower neither showed him the signal to
Stalin, nor consulted him about sending it. 38
Eisenhower's
deputy
left the meeting feeling
somewhat
aggrieved, but London had not yet done with him. On the next
day Churchill sent for him, and immediately blamed him for
allowing Eisenhower to send the telegram to the Soviet leader.
This was unfair, for not only had Eisenhower acted without
consulting
his Deputy, but the Prime Minister had himself
continually undermined Tedder's position at SHAEF by cutting
him out of decisions, and by dealing directly with Eisenhower.
