336
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
for the JCS illustrate the differences between his views, on the
one hand, and Montgomery's and Brooke's on the other:
The attack north of the Ruhr is definitely the one that we
must hold in front of us as our principal purpose ...
an
advance to the Frankfurt Cassel area would secure the
important industrial area around Frankfurt. we would have
less opposition to our advance than in the north ...
To sum up operations across the Rhine north of the Ruhr
offer the greatest strategic rewards within a short distance but
this area will be most strongly held by the enemy. An advance
to Frankfurt offers less favourable terrain and longer route to
vital strategic objectives. Depending on the degree of enemy
resistance it may be necessary to use either or both of these
The possibility of failure to secure bridgeheads in the north
or in the south cannot be overlooked. I am therefore making
logistical preparations to switch my main effort from the
north to the south should this be forced upon me.3
After a conference with Eisenhower, Brooke told Simpson
that the Supreme Commander had accepted Montgomery's plan
for
'Veritable' and 'Grenade',* but had also given way to
Bradley who, they knew, wanted an offensive in the southern
sector
on the axis Prum-Euskirchen
and
on to Frankfurt.
Brooke commented on Eisenhower's plan: 'It leaves us again
with a confused picture; still hankering after the Frankfurt line
of advance, and in the end backing both and being insufficiently
strong for either.'4
On the same day (22 January), Montgomery wrote to Brooke
about the appreciation:
The old snags of indecision and vacillation and refusal to
consider the military problem fairly and squarely are coming
to the front again. The real trouble is there is no control and
the three Army Groups are each intent on their own affairs.
*'Grenade' was a plan for US Ninth Army, still under Twenty-First Army
Group, to attack in the southern part of the sector, closing up to the Rhine
and completing an encircling movement by joining up with the Canadian
'Veritable' offensive. Both operations were to have begun at the same time,
that is, early in February.
Rows Over Strategy
337
Patton today issued a stirring order to the Third Army saying
the next step would be Cologne... One has to preserve a
sense of humour these days or otherwise one would go mad.
Montgomery also told the CIGS that it was clear that Bradley
was being
allowed to go off on his own,
and that both
Eisenhower and Bradley believed that no one should cross the
Rhine in strength until the Allies were lined up all along its
western bank.
Certainly Eisenhower's appreciation was vague and unclear,
but equally it was plain that the Supreme Commander would
not give up his 'broad front approach'. Montgomery came to
England for a few days' leave and lunched with Brooke on 26
January. The two field-marshals complained about the same old
problems of lack of strong command from Eisenhower and the
failure to concentrate the Allied resources on an all-out attack at
one vital point. Simpson had found out from Lt-Col Milne,
former staff officer of Simpson's at the
War Office and now
Military
Assistant to
shake
Eisenhower's belief in the need for 'an option somewhere south'.
Eisenhower had told his colleagues that he must have 'elasticity'
in case Montgomery's northern thrust failed - plainly the failure
to break
Caen still rankled with the Supreme
Commander.
Briefed by Milne,
Simpson reported to Brooke exactly how
the land lay at SHAEF, and how immovable Eisenhower was
over his alternative southern thrust.' Churchill and Brooke
therefore decided to resist the appreciation, and the Chiefs of
Staff suggested to Washington an alternative directive, coupled
once more with the need for 'one Land Force Commander':
In preparing your plans you should bear in mind our views
as follows:
(a) All the
resources which can be made available for
offensive operations should be concentrated on one main
thrust. This
thrust should be made in the maximum
possible strength with
sufficient fresh formations held
available to keep up the momentum of the advance. Only
such forces as cannot be employed to support this main
thrust should be used for subsidiary operations. Only if
the main thrust is held and the subsidiary operations
