156
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
weed killer; we would then progress rapidly towards the end
of the war.
Here, the broad basic plan, on which we have been
working for so many weeks, is now unfolding in the exact
way in which it was intended. This is very gratifying. There
were some difficult moments; that must always happen in
battle, and it takes a little time to get the enemy where you
want him so that you can hit him a colossal crack somewhere
else.
It was the same at Alamein.
And it is at that time that the commanders in the field want
to be supported and encouraged, and the soldier's morale
kept high. In this case it was at that time that the Press began
a campaign which might have done great harm.
This is one great battle, directed by one commander, and
designed to produce a great dividend. But one cannot tell them
what you are trying to do, or how the battle is being forced to
swing; the need for secrecy is too great. However, we are off
now and I think the Bosche will find it very difficult to stop us
from bringing the full plan into effect i.e. the swing of the right
flank right up to Paris, and pushing the enemy armies up
against the Seine between Paris and the sea. And while this is
going on we open up Brittany.
Do come over and stay a night. That is the best time. I
have to be out by day a good deal. I would send my aeroplane
to Northolt for you any time, and return you to London in the
morning in time for work.
Yrs ever
Monty 18
On 27 July Montgomery held a conference with his army
commanders, Dempsey and Crerar, and issued a new Directive
(M515) on the following day, which stated that 'the main blow
has now been delivered by the First US Army
The attack
was making excellent progress, and everywhere else the object
was to help American progress. The British assaults on the Orne
in the Caen sector had compelled the enemy to bring such
strong forces to oppose them that any further large-scale attack
that area was unlikely to succeed. Six out of the Germans
otal of eight armoured divisions were on the British front and
of Noyers - We must now deal a very heavy blow
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
west of Noyers where there is no German armour at all.' Second
Army was to regroup and attack with not less than six divisions
On 29 July, spurred and excited by signals giving the extent of
the American gains, Montgomery ordered Dempsey to start the
attack on Vire, which he had mentioned to Brooke, on the 30th.
Vire was the junction of seven roads, and the key point on the
left flank of the American attack. On 28 July Eisenhower had
sent a message to Montgomery approving of Directive M515,
but urging more attacks by the British and Canadians and a
speeding up of the main blow at Caumont: 'I feel very strongly
that a three Division attack now on Second Army's flank will be
worth more than a six Division attack in five days' time. Let us
go all out on the lines of M515 and not waste an hour.'l9
In this new operation, codenamed 'Bluecoat', Dempsey was
ordered to attack south from Caumont with VIII and XXX
Corps on 30 July. The plan was to capture the dominating hill of
Mont Pinçon, six miles south of the Caumont-Villers Bocage
line, and then try
and insinuate British divisions behind the
German forces facing Avranches. With so much of the German
armour on the Canadian front south of Caen, Montgomery
decided not to put on any more pressure in the east. He wanted
to prevent Mont Pinçon and Vire from being used by von Kluge
as a hinge for an orderly
withdrawal of his defeated western
divisions from the American sector.
As part of the 'Cobra' offensive, the Americans had been
attacking strongly between Caumont and St Lô since the 26th,
but in three days had only gained three miles. Here the bocage is
at its thickest, and the Germans had laid large minefields and
dug strong entrenchments on the slopes of Mont Pinçon.
Dempsey's right, VIII
an important gain of five miles on 30 July
towards St Martin des Besaces, and took the feature Hill 309.
The next day 11th Armoured advanced again and had the best
of an encounter with a 21st Panzer battle group. Dempsey's
forces had now driven a deep wedge between the German
Seventh Army (General Hausser) and
(formerly Panzer Group
West, now under SS General Sepp
which
produced a gap of six miles between the two German armies.
