90
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
bitterly to Bradley that he had received almost no news on D
Day. All signals had to be decoded at Twenty-First Army Group
HQ at Portsmouth,
and
the Royal Signals had grossly
underestimated the amount of wireless traffic involved. At 0900
Dempsey came aboard HMS Faulkner and briefed Montgomery
on Second Army's situation.
Montgomery had reason to be pleased with the early results
of the invasion, apart from the failure to take Caen, and he was
particularly gratified by the airborne successes. Throughout the
planning he had insisted on using three airborne divisional
drops, and this had aroused considerable opposition from the air
marshals. Bradley and Montgomery had agreed, however, that if
the Utah Beach landing was to be successful and the Cherbourg
peninsula cut in half, both the US 82nd and US 101st Divisions
must land west of the beach near Ste Mère Eglise. This meant
that 915 transport aircraft (most of them towing gliders) had to
cross the Cherbourg peninsula on a moonlit night on a steady
course, their flight path taking them directly over heavy enemy
AA installations which would quickly be alerted.
During the initial airborne planning session at St Paul's,
Leigh-Mallory had agreed to this plan, but later objected
strongly and claimed that 80 per cent casualties in aircraft and
troops would be likely. He stressed that, since the C47s to be
used had not been fitted with self-sealing petrol tanks, many
aircraft would fall in flames, taking the gliders with them, and
that a substantial part of the force would not be available after
the landing'. Montgomery and Bradley refused to yield, and
Leigh-Mallory therefore went over their heads to Eisenhower to
try and persuade him to cancel the plan. Eisenhower, however,
backed his two generals. On the evening of D-Day Leigh-
Mallory had enthusiastically let Eisenhower how
that his
objections had been groundless, and that not more than twenty
aircraft had been lost; indeed, on D-Day itself, the American
fight to take Utah Beach was made considerably easier because
of the successful Ste Mère-Eglise air landings. Leigh-Mallory
also reported that, in the vital period between 2200 on D-minus-
1 and 0400 on D-Day, only fourteen out of ninety-two enemy
radar stations were operating because of jamming and bombing;
on the night of the 5th Luftwaffe night fighters had flown around
Amiens fruitlessly searching for non-existent Allied aircraft.
Montgomery's enthusiasm for Hobart's tank 'gadgets' was
Normandy Assault
91
abundantly justified. According to Dempsey's papers, 129 DD
tanks were launched by the British on D-Day, of which eighty-
four landed and forty-five foundered. The War Office Report
criticised the escape hatch, but in fact most of the crews of the
foundered tanks escaped by dinghy: additionally, aimed fire at
the floating tanks was less then expected. DD tanks floated in
with the first wave of British soldiers and blasted the defences,
providing fire and protection in vivid contrast to the failure at
Dieppe. On the British beaches, fascine, carpet-layer and flail
tanks made ways through the minefields
almost
casualties and with great speed, where it would have taken hours
for sappers on foot to clear them; additionally, the tanks were
immune to small-arms fire, which at Dieppe had almost wiped
out the engineers. On the British Gold and Juno Beaches it was
too rough to float in all the DD tanks which had been carried in
the landing-craft, but flail tanks were a great success. On the
third British beach, Sword, where the water was calmer, twenty-
one out of twenty-five DD tanks landed ahead of the infantry,
together with the mine-clearing tanks, and this helped the troops
enormously. Montgomery had also conceived the idea that some
of the field guns should be able to bombard the coast from the
decks of the landing-craft as they approached the shore, and this
addition to the attackers' fire-power was of considerable help in
silencing the defences. The Germans possessed a massive fire
capability, and the minefields and underwater obstacles were
formidable; the success of the British assaults was therefore a
triumph for the detail Allied planning of which Montgomery had
been chief architect.
On Omaha Beach US 29th and 1st Infantry Divisions faced
near-defeat. Out of thirty-five amphibious tanks only five arrived
safely, because of the high seas. Unfortunately, the American
planners had been unimpressed by other Hobart specialist tanks,
and in consequence had decided not to use flails nor the other
devices, a decision that proved nearly disastrous. For hours the
American troops on Omaha were pinned down by accurate
observed German fire, and at one stage were on the point of
being evacuated. Even by
mid-afternoon, after considerable
naval and air support, troops were crossing the shingle in single
file because of the almost impossible task of clearing wide tracks
through the minefields by hand under observed fire, though with
the Hobart tanks the mines could have been cleared quickly and
