310
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Montgomery's signal of 20 December he began to work himself
up into a
state
of excitement and, according to General
Simpson, started to draft a telegram ordering Montgomery to
take action at once 'with XXX Corps on some thrust line or
other'. Both Simpson and Brooke were appalled to find that the
Prime Minister was in effect attempting to order
about
formations that came under Montgomery. Brooke pointed out to
Churchill that any orders to Montgomery could only come from
Eisenhower, and also that it was impossible for anyone in
London to say at that time how Montgomery could act, because
the circumstances on the ground were not known in London.
Reluctantly, the Prime Minister agreed not to signal orders to
Montgomery, and asked Brooke what he should do instead to
help. The CIGS recommended that Churchill should telephone
Eisenhower and ask him about the situation, and if possible
suggest that the whole of the northern half of the front should be
under one commander, preferably Montgomery.
At 1615 on the 20th Churchill telephoned Eisenhower with
the delicate objective of getting command transferred to
Montgomery.
started tactlessly, telling the
Commander that he ought to work on a pincer nip from the
north and south upon the German offensive bulge', and going on
to say that Montgomery should be put in charge of the northern
effort, to which Eisenhower replied testily that he had already
asked Montgomery to take over. The CIGS, in the Prime
Minister's room at the time, was greatly relieved.
Brooke went back to the War Office and gave Simpson the
good news.
Churchill, a keen
As generals, the two men were worried when
amateur strategist, involved himself in
operations, and the CIGS was moved to remark to Simpson:
Even I never give Monty advice on tactics. All the advice I
send him is on major strategy and especially relations with
the Americans. Monty is my tactical master and again and
again he has been right and I have been wrong. But Monty
never lets you forget this, and my heart bleeds for poor Ike
now because of what Monty will hint at concerning what
Eisenhower ought to have done. It will be 'I told you so??
Within a few hours of Eisenhower's call, Montgomery had
visited Lt-Gen William Simpson, GOC US Ninth Army, and
Ardennes
311
Hodges, GOC US First Army. According to one British officer,
his visit to Chaudfontaine at 1330, where Hodges had his HQ in
a sports field hut, was 'like Christ come to cleanse the temple',
and David Belchem, who accompanied Montgomery, thought
that 'Hodges and his senior staff officers looked as if they had
seen a ghost'. * Montgomery could not believe that Hodges was
correct in saying that two of his divisions had been overwhelmed
so quickly, and decided to send out his own liaison officers, who
crossed no-man's-land to visit the troops in question. They
found the Americans withdrawing successfully, although they
had taken severe casualties.
Brigadier
Williams also accompanied Montgomery, and
commented to me:
After Monty, Belchem and I had talked to him (Hodges!
Monty said He is so shaken he needs a pause to recover his
calm'. So we went to another room to discuss the situation.
Thoughtfully Monty wanted to nurse him back into a state of
resolution.
Hodges looked ashen to me. He looked as if somebody had
punched him in the tummy, or indeed kicked him in the
crutch. Years older than when last I'd seen him; you must
remember he'd only been sitting under
Bradley until the
change of ground-force command
and this was his first
experience of "independent' command. He
wasn't either
intellectually or morally fit for bearing responsibility, which
requires, from my observation, a special sort of guts which
Bradley had, Monty had,
Mike Carver has, Shan Hackett
has, but I haven't, because I've been trained or have grown up
to see both sides of every question and that makes for
hesitation, ie irresolution.
I don't think Hodges knew quite what to do or quite what
had hit him. He was mightily relieved to find a father-figure
showing up to sort it all out for him. The Chief of Staff, Bill
Keen, brought up with Bradley, was, however, resolute and
steady and an excellent soldier. Hodges was an example, even
a victim, of the seniority principle, which to the Americans (like
ourselves earlier) had got to work itself out of the system.
Montgomery immediately placed some British divisions under
Simpson's command, and ordered the latter to take over part of
