Arnhem
On 17 September, as the air armada presaging 'Market-Garden'
flew out from England, Montgomery could only await events.
The detailed
airborne plans had
been made in England in
compliance with his overall directive, but the airborne divisions
would only come under his orders once they had landed in
Holland.
XXX Corps's plan for the link-up had been agreed with
Montgomery and his staff at Twenty-First Army Group, but it
was ambitious to the point of recklessness. Against mounting
German opposition, the Corps would have to fight its way
across water obstacles whose average widths were: Wilhelmina
Canal at Zon - 80 to 100 feet; Willems Canal at Veghel - 80
feet; River
Maas at Grave
-
800 feet;
River
Waal at
Nijmegen - 850 feet; Lower Rhine at Arnhem - 300 feet. Behind
the tanks pushing up the narrow, exposed road were 2,300
lorries carrying a massive amount of bridging equipment,
together with some 9,000 Sappers and battalions of Pioneers.
The road congestion was bound to be appalling.'
XXX Corps' task was to reach Arnhem Bridge in forty-eight
hours; indeed, Montgomery even over-optimistically suggested
to Browning that they might link up on D-plus-1. The whole
operation was a daunting enough task for I Airborne Corps,
particularly since XXX and VIII Corps had taken four days to
cross the defended Albert Canal at Beeringen and win the small
bridgehead over the Meuse-Escaut Canal, only fifteen miles
further on. Of course, the road in front of XXX Corps was to be
cleared by the two American airborne divisions, but it was sixty-
five miles to Arnhem from the start-line.2
On 14 September, three days before D-day, Montgomery's
Arnhem
229
directive had stated that Twenty-First Army Group's objective
was to secure crossings over the Rhine and Maas in the general
area Arnhem-Nijmegen-Grave, by the use of airborne troops
combined with a rapid and violent thrust by British Second
Army. That army was to establish itself on a line between
Zwolle on the Zuider Zee and Arnhem, facing east and with
deep bridgeheads east of the Ijssel River. Then, in conjunction
with US First Army, the entire force would surround the Ruhr.
Browning's I Airborne Corps contained three
airborne
divisions, British lst, and US 82nd and 101st. These were to
land in three areas: US 101st to seize bridges and defiles on
XXX Corps' main axis at Eindhoven, Zon and Veghel; US
82nd to seize and hold the bridges at Nijmegen and Grave and
to 'capture and retain the high ground' around Groesbeek; while
British Ist Airborne Division had to capture the Arnhem
bridges,* and establish sufficient bridgeheads to pass through
formations from XXX Corps on the latter's arrival. In addition,
52nd (Lowland) Division, designated 'airportable', was to be
flown in as soon as Deelen airfield, north of Arnhem, was
captured. (In the event 52nd Division was never used in the
operation, although its commander, Maj-Gen Edmund Hakewill
Smith, volunteered to fly one brigade in.) To comply with
Montgomery's directive, Guards Armoured Division, the XXX
Corps vanguard, would have to advance sixty-five miles in forty-
eight hours and mostly on a single elevated road through boggy
country - thus the advance effectively had a one-tank front.
Horrocks already had a bridgehead over the Meuse-Escaut
Canal. On 10 September the Irish Guards had surprised the
Germans defending the canal and captured a road bridge intact.
The Coldstream and Grenadiers had enlarged the bridgehead
after heavy fighting against counter-attacks on the following
day, and this bridgehead was now the break-out base for XXX
Corps.
XXX Corps was to follow the main road through Eindhoven,
Grave and Niimegen, linking up with the US airborne divisions
On the way. Then, after relieving British Ist Airborne Division at
Arnhem, they would push on to the Zuider Zee, and wait for the
rest of the Second Army to catch up with them before advancing
* There were three bridges over the Lower Rhine at Arnhem - a railway
bridge to the west of the town, a pontoon bridge, and the main road bridge.
