440
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
BERLIN is likely to get there and thus end the German
Para. 2 (.) We have not enough maintenance resources
for two full blooded thrusts. (.)
Para. 3 (.) The selected
thrust must have all the
maintenance resources it needs without any qualification
and any other operations must do the best it [sic] can
with what is left over (.)
Para 4 (.) There are only two possible thrusts one via the
RUHR and the other via METZ and the SAAR (.)
Para. 5 (.) In my opinion the thrust likely to give the best
and quickest results is the northern one via the RUHR (.)
Para. 5 (.) Time is vital and the decision regarding the
selected thrust must be made at once and para. 3 above
will then apply (.)
Para. 7 (.) If we attempt a compromise solution and split
our maintenance resources so that neither thrust is full
blooded we will prolong the war (.)
Para. 8 (.) I consider the problem viewed as above is very
simple and clear cut (.)
Para. 9 (.) The matter is of such vital importance that I
feel sure you will agree that a decision on the above lines
is required at once (.) If you are coming this way perhaps
you would look in and discuss it (.) If so delighted to see
you lunch tomorrow (.) Do not feel I can leave this battle
just at present.
3. Eisenhower's reply to my telegram of 4 Sep. Sent off by
him on 5 Sep.
'While agreeing with your conception of a powerful and
full blooded thrust towards the RUHR and BERLIN, I
do not agree that it should be initiated at this moment to
the exclusion of all other manoeuvres. The bulk of the
German Army that was in the west has now been
destroyed. We must immediately exploit our success by
promptly breaching the
Siegfried Line,
crossing the
RHINE on a wide front, and seizing the SAAR and
the RUHR. This I intend to do with all possible speed.
While we are advancing we will be opening the ports of
HAVRE and ANTWERP.
Accordingly my intention is initially to occupy the
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 441
SAAR and the RUHR; and by the time we have done
this, HAVRE and ANTWERP should be available to
maintain a deeper thrust into Germany.'
4. Extract from Eisenhower's letter to me on 15 Sep.
we shall soon, I hope, have achieved the objectives set
forth in my last directive and shall then be in possession of
the RUHR, the SAAR, and the FRANKFURT area?
5. Extract from my letter to Eisenhower on 18 Sep. in reply
to his letter of 15.
'It is my opinion that a concerted operation in which all
the available land forces move forward to the RHINE
and into Germany on a wide front is not possible. I
consider we should
put all our resources into one full-
blooded thrust, and be defensive elsewhere.'
6. Extract from Eisenhower's letter of 20 Sep. in reply to my
letter of 18 Sep.
'Generally
speaking I find myself
so completely
agreement with your letter of 18 Sep. that I cannot
believe there is any great difference in our concepts.
What I do believe is that we must marshal our strength
up along
the western
borders of Germany, to the
RHINE;
insure
adequate
maintenance
by
getting
ANTWERP working at full blast, and then carry out the
drive you suggest.'
7. My telegram to Eisenhower dated 21 Sep.
" Dear Ike,
I cannot agree that our concepts are the same and I am
sure you would wish me to be quite frank and open in the
matter.
I have always said stop the right and go on with the left,
but the right has been allowed to go on so far that it has
outstripped its maintenance and we have lost flexibility.
In your plan you still want to go further with your right
and to capture the SAAR.
