292
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
By then, however, the damage was done. On 24 September
the essential details of the Morgenthau Plan appeared in the
American press, to Roosevelt's fury, since he now rued his ever
having approved it. Goebbels and Hitler, on the other hand,
were delighted.
Goebbels's propaganda throughout the summer of 1944 had
consistently stated that the Allies 'intend to exterminate us root
and branch as a nation and a people', and on 21 October, for
instance, German national newspapers proclaimed that their
country's enemies want to exterminate 30 to 40 million
Germans'. Unhappily, the published details of the Morgenthau
Plan supported this propaganda, for besides outlining the
intention to destroy German industry, it stated that any people
trying to leave Germany would be shot by armed guards, and
included a long list of categories of officials to be executed.
Goebbels was swift to point out that the author of the plan was a
Jew. Nazi propaganda about the Morgenthau Plan, coupled
with the publicity
given to Roosevelt's and Churchill's
commitments to indiscriminate bombing and unconditional
surrender, produced in Germany a revival of enthusiasm for the
Nazi Party almost unbelievable in the light of the military
collapse in Normandy.
Indiscriminate
area
bombing
undoubtedly stiffened
the
German population's will to resist, for it was widely believed
that the resultant
appalling damage and casualties were an
integral
part
of the Morgenthau
Plan for
'extermination'.
Furthermore, the dislocation and destruction of cities caused the
population to become more and more dependent on the Nazi
Party for even the bare essentials of life. During the autumn any
German
generals
willing to
"stab Hitler in the back'
were
discouraged by the fear that his death would be followed by the
collapse and destruction of Germany. By subtle propaganda
Goebbels convinced the majority of the people that their only
hope of survival lay in complete obedience to the Führer.
There were, of course, desertions and breakdowns of morale
in the German forces, but rabid Nazis predominated more often
than not in most units and, by
dint of threats,
forced the
unwilling to go on fighting. More and more units came under SS
command, and one famous order issued by Heinrich Himmler,
the leader of the SS and one of the chief architects of genocide,
undoubtedly kept many would-be deserters at their posts:
The Dreary Autumn
293
Reichsfuhrer SS
10 September 1944
Certain unreliable elements appear to believe the war will
be over for them as soon as they surrender to the enemy.
I want to contradict this belief and emphasise that every
deserter will be prosecuted and will find his just punishment.
What is more his ignominious conduct will entail the most
severe consequences for his family. Upon exposure of the
circumstances of desertion they will be shot.
Signed: HIMMLER
Reinforced and re-equipped, the German
armies offered
stubborn resistance to the Allied attacks during October, and
Eisenhower felt that it was his duty to make it clear that the war
was far from won. He wrote to an American friend on 20
October: 'We have chased the Hun out of France, but he is
fighting bitterly on his own frontiers and there is a lot of
suffering and sacrificing for thousands of Americans and their
Allies before the thing is finally over. In this same mood he
called a conference with Montgomery and Bradley at Brussels
on 18 October - this time Montgomery, his HQ being so close,
had to come in person. At the conference Eisenhower decided
that as the bulk of Twenty-First Army Group, now backed by
two US divisions, was fully engaged in clearing the Scheldt (a
subsidiary operation), US Twelfth Army Group must take the
main offensive action in November. Accordingly, Bradley was
ordered to drive east and to try and obtain a Rhine bridgehead
south of Cologne. Nettled by the Americans being given the
effort
would switch back to
Twenty-First
Ruhr. 9th US Army will operate north of the Ruhr and Ist US
Army south of the Ruhr.'1
It did not suit Montgomery's temperament to have his army
group mainly confined to the Scheldt, without any involvement
