Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
German hands. Worse, these operations against the Channel
ports consumed valuable time, and tied up troops that might
otherwise have been used to free Antwerp. Montgomery said later
that he regretted that, in his 3 September directive, he had initially
put clearing the channel to Antwerp at the bottom of the agenda
for the Canadian troops, although the Channel ports captured
paid some slow dividends in terms of supplies landed while
Antwerp was closed. Dunkirk, however, held out until after
Hitler's death in April 1945.
The task which Montgomery had given Crerar was beyond
the power of his army. Ostend, Bruges and Ghent fell to the
Canadians and the Poles, but German Fifteenth Army obeyed
Hitler's orders and put up a ferocious resistance behind the two
canals ( the Leopold and the Derivation de Lys) which protect
Breskens and the mouth of the Scheldt. In the middle of
September the Germans still held the coast east from Zeebruge
to the port of Breskens, together with all the southern bank of
the Scheldt estuary. Plainly Montgomery's hopes that Crerar
could open Antwerp on his own were a holles dream, for
General von Zangen, commanding Fifteenth Army, followed
Hitler's instruction literally, obstinately defending his strong
points and turning them into 'fortresses'.
On 27 September, after the failure of Market-Garden' at
Arnhem, Montgomery issued a fresh directive to Crerar to
obtain 'the free use of the Port of Antwerp', while Second Army
was to operate strongly against the Ruhr'. This was merely
reiterating the impossible objective he had given Canadian First
Army on 13 September, for opening Antwerp meant not only
clearing the Germans out of the mainland Breskens pocket on
the south bank of the Scheldt estuary, but would involve a
seaborne assault on Walcheren Island, together
with a land
attack from north of Antwerp westwards against the South
Beveland peninsula.
Obviously Montgomery, even as late as 27 September, still
hoped for a German collapse before Antwerp was open, for on
28 September he declared: 'I cannot see how D-Day for the
Walcheren-South Beveland assault can be before 15 October.' It
is difficult to understand how such a realist could still have been
sufficiently optimistic to believe that he could carry out the
double task of clearing the Scheldt and capturing the Ruhr with
the limited number of troops within Twenty-First Army Group.
The Canadians on the Coast
Certainly Montgomery, with his eyes fixed on the more exciting
target of the Ruhr, grossly underestimated the time and effort
needed to open up the approaches to Antwerp.
To defend the Breskens pocket on the mainland, Model left
his crack 64th Division behind the Leopold Canal - 14,000 men
reinforced by much artillery from Fifteenth Army, which was
being steadily evacuated from the port of Breskens to Flushing
on Walcheren Island.
completely trapped in the
Breskens pocket, around
65,000 men of German
Army crossed the estuary to fight again, reinforcing the German
right flank opposing Montgomery's drive to the Rhine.
Breskens pocket was christened
'Scheldt Fortress South' by
grandiloquent name
he thought,
encourage his soldiers to realise that it had to be held to the last
By the end of September Montgomery
involved in the Nijmegen bridgehead that he just could not spare
enable Crerar to carry
clearance. Some of the blame must also lie with Eisenhower, for
in spite of his acknowledging the paramount importance of the
Scheldt he sent extra supplies and troops to Patton in the south,
requirements. For instance, for a fortnight after the fall of Le
Havre on 12 September 51st (Highland) Division was grounded
for lack of transport, although it was urgently needed by the
Canadians for the attack on the Leopold Canal.
Simonds, originally
thought that he could take the Breskens pocket in three days; it
took three weeks. So stiff was the enemy's resistance that the
German coastal battery near Breskens was not captured until 2
November, although Breskens itself fell on 21 October. In the
end 12.700 German prisoners were taken by the Canadians in
the Breskens pocket. Total Canadian Army casualties from 1
October to 8 November 1944 amounted to 12,813 officers and
men, of whom 6,357 were Canadians.
Eventually, Canadian 2nd Division,
advancing from north-
east of Antwerp on 31 October, reached the causeway from
South Beveland to Walcheren,
and on the following
day a
seaborne assault against Walcheren was made by 4 Commando
Brigade and Royal
Navy
Force
•T'. On 6 November the
German
troops in
Middelburg, the principle town, finally
