234
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
went out to search for the explosives, but German snipers, who
had lashed themselves
to the iron girders, shot
at them.
Eventually, a German POW offered to show the Sappers where
the demolition charges were: they were laid across the whole
width of the bridge, each explosive securely fastened, numbered,
and painted green to merge with the girders. If the bridge had
been blown up there would have been a gap 200 feet long - too
wide for a Bailey bridge.
Why did the Germans not blow the bridge? A citizen of
Nijmegen called van Hoof claimed that on the night of 20
September he swam the river and climbed the pillars to tamper
with the charges and make them safe. Van Hoof was killed the
next day, but his claim can be dismissed because the pillars were
unclimbable. The likely answer is that Field-Marshal Model,
commanding Army Group B, thought that he had sufficient
armour to throw back the Guards and fight on south of the
Waal. For this he needed the bridge intact in order to supply his
Panzers, and when the Grenadiers' surprisingly
successful
attack brought them on to the Valkhof no German officer had
the courage to order the bridge to be blown without authority
from a higher command.
If Nijmegen had been the ultimate target, then Montgomery's
airborne operation was a tremendous success. But, now, after
three days, XXX Corps was still ten miles from Arnhem, and a
steel cordon of the élite Frundsberg Panzer Division, together
with fresh tank reinforcements from Germany, barred the
Corps' advance up the main road, now known as 'Hell's
Highway'.
During the morning of 21 September (D-plus-4) the Irish
Guards formed up in the bridgehead over the Waal at Lent for a
final effort to reach their comrades at Arnhem. Their assault
started at 1330, four and a half hours after the remnants of the
British
2nd Parachute
Regiment at Arnhem
Bridge
had
surrendered. For two miles all went well, but when they reached
Bessen, halfway from Nijmegen to Elst, they ran into severe
trouble. Here the
Germans had prepared strong defensive
positions with machine-guns, anti-tank guns and Tiger tanks.
British tanks had to travel on the main road, elevated some
six feet above the surrounding countryside with deep drainage
ditches on both sides. At Bessen, Frundsberg Division Tigers
brewed up the leading three tanks, and the road which
Arnhem
235
comprised the single-tank front was completely blocked. An
Irish Guardsman later remarked: 'Our tanks were like coconuts
at a cockshy for the Germans to shoot down. We could never
understand why the Tigers did not knock out our remaining
forty-nine tanks in a row? Typhoons were in the air and on call,
but the wireless link failed and they were never called down.
At 1900 the stationary Irish Guards were ordered back to
clear the road, so that the whole of 43rd Infantry Division could
come up to try and resume the advance. They attacked again
and again all the next day, 22 September (D-plus-5), but could
make no progress up the highway to Arnhem. Montgomery's
plan to reach the Zuider Zee via Arnhem had foundered, and 1st
Airborne had now been isolated for five days, far too long.
Luckily, on 23 September 130 Infantry Brigade succeeded,
after heavy fighting, in manoeuvring westwards down side
roads, by-passing the western flank of the Frundsberg Division,
and at dusk they reached the south bank of the Rhine to link up
with the Polish Parachute Brigade near Driel, six miles west of
Arnhem.
It is necessary now to consider what befell British Ist Airborne
Division in Arnhem from the beginning of the operation.
Maj-Gen Urquhart landed his troops at Arnhem in five
zones - three to the north of the Arnhem-Utrecht railway line at
Ginkel Heath, and two south of the railway at Renkum Heath.
At 1330 on 17 September the occupying German troops and the
Dutch population were enjoying their Sunday lunch. Suddenly
at Renkum and Ginkel parachutists dropped like confetti out of
a clear sky, and gliders swooped in to land.
The astonished Dutch watched the liberating army descend
on them. Jeeps and light guns came out of the gliders, and the
jeeps
were
driven straight through hedges and barbed-wire
fences. Parachutists helped farmers to catch terrified horses and
to tether
COWs
and put them in the farm buildings.
British
officers commandeered farm carts and horses to take scattered
ammunition to a central depot. The Dutch were asked: 'Does
anyone speak English?' 'Are the Germans around?' "Where am
I on the
map?'
"Where
is Arnhem?' Cups of tea
and
congratulations were showered on the British as they collected
their weapons for an immediate advance.
Already there had been a hitch.
The plan was that the
