390
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Russians might get to LUBECK and up towards KIEL and
DENMARK before we did.
6. Such is the way we run the war. We would do much
better, and finish off the war far quicker, if Eisenhower could
be made to understand that public opinion does not win wars.
Wars are won by victories in battle, and these require sound
military
plans
unfettered by
political
or
national
considerations.
7. This afternoon (27th April) the Operations Branch at
SHAEF spoke to my Chief of Staff and said they hoped I
realised the need to get over the ELBE quickly and to reach
LUBECK before the Russians.
This is adding insult to injury.
I told my Chief of Staff to inform SHAEF as follows:
(a) I have always been very well aware of the urgent need
to reach and cross the ELBE quickly ...
(b) It was SHAEF that had stopped this.
(c) If the Russians should get to LUBECK, and up to
KIEL, and DENMARK, before we can stop it, I trust
that SHAEF will declare openly that no blame is
attached to 21 Army Group. The sole blame will rest
with SHAEF ...52
The entry was initialled 'B.L.M.'
Simpson tried to console Montgomery in a letter written on
30 April, saying that the War Office sympathised greatly with
his feelings on the subject of these messages from Eisenhower,
and that it was quite needlessly irritating of the Supreme
Commander to point out what had already been obvious for
some time'. Simpson had shown Montgomery's letter to him of
27 April to Nye, the VCIGS, who had commented: 'It was
incredible that SHAEF and the Supreme Commander should
rub this point in to Monty'. But Simpson told Montgomery that
he had not, however, shown the letter to Brooke, who was
deeply immersed in 'other horrors', chiefly with the problems of
Burma, the Far East, and Greece. By now the CIGS felt that the
campaign in Europe was as good as over, and therefore wanted
to concentrate on the difficulties raised in other theatres.
To add to the Field-Marshal's irritation, however, the Prime
Minister,
having read Eisenhower's message of 27 April,
telephoned Montgomery himself and emphasised the vital need
to push on to take L端beck. These prods were timely. Montgomery
Eisenhower's Revenge
had made his plans to cross the Elbe
on 1 May, but
Churchill's and Eisenhower's messages
advanced the date to 29 April. Even then, he only reached
L端beck a few hours ahead of the Russians.
After 27 April, Montgomery no longer had any need to write
more querulous letters
about Eisenhower's behaviour to his
friends, Brooke and Simpson, at the War Office, for there were
to be no more incidents. The war was won. The last exchange
with Eisenhower at the end of April showed both commanders
to be feeling the strain of the war. The Supreme Commander,
egged on by his colleagues at SHAEF, did not care any longer
about Montgomery's feelings, and neither was he frightened of
Churchill any more, now that the latter had climbed down over
the capture of Berlin and over the removal of US Ninth Army
from Twenty-First Army Group. Montgomery had been so rude
and abrasive with Eisenhower throughout the whole campaign
that the iron had entered the American's soul. For his part,
Montgomery despised Eisenhower, and resented his own minor
role in the final victory.
Twenty-First Army Group, with US XVIII Airborne Corps
on its right flank, crossed the Elbe against light opposition, and
once they were over that river German resistance collapsed
altogether. On 24 April Jodl had told the German commanders
in the west that the fight against the Bolsheviks was now the
only thing that mattered, and that loss of territory to the Western
Allies was of secondary importance to Soviet encroachment.53
The effect of this order was to produce immediate surrender
negotiations from the German commander
of the Hamburg
garrison, and the city was given up to the British without a fight
on 3 May. On the day before a British armoured column had
entered L端beck without opposition, and,
US troops in support, entered
Wismar a few hours before the Russians. Montgomery
saved Denmark from Soviet occupation, but only in the nick of
On 3 May a delegation of senior German officers arrived at
Montgomery's Tac HQ on L端neburg Heath to ask for surrender
terms. The envoys were Admiral von Friedenburg, on the staff
of Field-Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, and General Kinsel, Chief of
Staff to Field-Marshal Ernst Busch, and they were accompanied
by
Rear-Admiral Wagen and
Major Friede, the last two
