346
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
only will I look after the press myself through their
proprietors, but also I consider it may well be necessary to
impose an absolute blot out on the change for at least a
month after it has taken place to cover the movement of
troops from Italy by which you are receiving five British
Divisions [in fact, three of these divisions were Canadian].
Plainly Churchill was determined to do all in his power to
smooth Alexander's path to the post of Deputy.
Supreme
Commander, for the signal assumes a fait accompli. His letter of
22 February had been even more definite:
Private and Confidential
22 February, 1945
Brooke has shown me as you wished your letter about the
proposed change and I take the first opportunity on my
return to let you know how matters stand.
I had a long talk with General Marshall at Malta, and on
February 2 I had a conference with the President at which
General Marshall and also Field Marshal Brooke were
present. It was agreed that this change should take place in a
month or six weeks' time, that is to say, about the middle of
March. No question has ever been raised by me of any
change in the system by which you exercise your Command,
nor any proposal made to set up an Intermediate Staff or
Intermediate Authority between yourself and your Army
Group Commanders. On the contrary, I have always, as I
thought you knew,
been opposed to such a needless
complication. I felt however that there would be a great
advantage, now that the passage of the Channel is over, in
post of Deputy, which belongs to us,
professional soldier. I have also high employment in view for
Air Chief Marshal Tedder. Your reception of the suggestion
when I made it to you at Versailles, gave me great pleasure,
and I understood from General Marshall that you had
expressed the same opinions to him.
I have asked Brooke not to send your letter to Alexander. I
have no doubt what his reactions would be, namely, that he is
always ready to serve wherever he is told, and to do his best
to discharge such duties as are assigned to him. If however I
am to gather from your letter that the British Deputy to the
Rows Over Strategy
347
Supreme Commander would not be concerned with military
matters except in an informal way, and would be principally
responsible for dealing with the supplies of food and setting
up a decent living standard in liberated
and
conquered
territories, I must say quite frankly that I consider this would
be a waste of Field Marshal Alexander's military
gifts and
experience. I thought he would be a help to you in all your
cares and burdens, and that the change would be personally
agreeable to you.
I was not aware that your British Deputy was relegated to
such non-military functions. The Deputy is the second in the
Army, and the trusted confidant of the Supreme Commander.
This is the way the office has always been interpreted in the
Mediterranean and we never doubted it was the position in
North West Europe. Although our Army in France is much
smaller than the United States Army, it nevertheless amounts
to about a million men, before whom much heavy fighting
lies, and therefore I am sure you would not wish to deny us
the kind of representation on your Staff in respect of military
matters which is our due.
Neither you nor I have ever taken a narrow or nationalistic
point of view in regard to the High Commands and I feel sure
that you will approach the
matter in
that spirit
of true
comradeship of which you are the outstanding exemplar.
With all good wishes,
Believe me,
Yours very sincerely!!
w .S.C.
General Dwight D. Eisenhower, G.C.B.
P.S. I am hoping to see you soon. W.S.C.
Eisenhower replied swiftly, stressing that Alexander would be
consulted on 'everything we do including military briefings', and
that the intent of his previous letter had been 'to point out the
tendency of the press over the delicate question of command to
give its own interpretation and this might injure Alexander's
feelings.' Churchill, however, was so ready to ride roughshod
over the Supreme Commander's clear dislike of the change that
he
signalled
Alexander
on 1 March that he
was to
replace
Tedder by the middle of the month, but that news of the change
would be 'blocked by D Notices for a few more weeks.'12 The
