358
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
be that between the Lippe River and the road Wesel, Brunen,
Raesfeld, Erle, Schermbeck; in reading this you should note
that D Day is March 24. The assaulting divisions begin to go
over at 2100 23 March i.e. on D Day minus 1, hence the need
for a decision by 1700 on D minus 1.
I consider that the Prime Minister and the CIGS would be
well advised not to leave England until they hear that the
operation has actually been launched. If they come on D
minus one they may have to hang about for anything up to
four or five days if we have bad weather. I hope the above is
clear.'
This letter is, as usual, perfectly clear, but the inclusion of the
postponement options is evidence of Montgomery's extreme
caution, even at this stage of the war - quite simply, he was not
going to risk a failure like Arnhem. Needless to say he had not
consulted with Eisenhower about postponing the assault if the
weather was bad; the Supreme Commander would almost
certainly not have agreed, and the American generals would
have jeered even more at Montgomery if 'Plunder' was put off.
US Third Army's capture on the run of the Oppenheim bridge
between the despatch of the letter quoted above and D-day for
'Plunder'
must have caused Montgomery to have second
thoughts about postponement, especially since he knew that he
was under criticism both for his avowed need to employ
airborne forces and for his slow build-up to the operation.
Churchill, regardless of the risk of postponement, had decided to
come to Twenty-First Army Group Tac HQ on D-minus-1. The
problem of entertaining the Prime Minister, and of 'putting on a
good show' before him, must have increased Montgomery's
reluctance to put off the assault, even if the weather was bad.
Churchill himself was so taken with the romance of a British
Rhine crossing that he pre-recorded a BBC message in London
before he flew to Tac HQ. The recording, scheduled for
transmission at 1800 on D-day, focused upon the drama of the
set-piece attack, referring to it as the 'first modern assault
crossing of the Rhine'. Patton's success on 22 March had made
this remark out of date,
Minister's broadcast nevertheless.
but the BBC put out the Prime
Although Montgomery had always insisted to Eisenhower
that he needed US Ninth Army to give him sufficient strength
Eisenhower's Revenge
359
for 'Plunder', he had originally decided, in fact, to put Dempsey
at Second Army in full command of the whole operation, leaving
Lt-Gen William Simpson's Ninth Army HQ out of it, although
the latter was contributing at least a corps to the assault.
Simpson objected strongly to
this, and Dempsey
the two army commanders urged
Montgomery to split the assault area in order to give equal
frontage to both armies on the far, enemy-held, bank of the
Rhine. Montgomery insisted, however, that Simpson's crossing
should be restricted to a single corps, but he did concede that
this force should operate under Ninth Army command, and thus
averted a potentially dangerous inter-Allied quarrel.®
With a marked lack of consistency, given his reluctance to use
US Ninth Army, Montgomery also badgered Eisenhower for an
additional ten American divisions in order to guarantee success.
The Supreme Commander said that he would agree to this only
on condition that Bradley's Twelfth Army Group HQ moved
north to command all the American troops during the crossing;
Montgomery immediately answered that he did not want the US
troops on these terms. His desire to employ extra American
forces only if they came under his own direct command, coupled
with his unwillingness to allow Simpson's Ninth Army HQ a
part in 'Plunder', implies that Montgomery's mind was occupied
to some extent by the glamour and prestige attached to the
Rhine crossing. This was certainly the view of the American
commanders at the time, a view enhanced by their jubilation at
their earlier successes
Remagen and
Montgomery, they felt, was determined to achieve a similar
triumph. When US Ninth Army reached the Rhine at Neuss on
2 March, Simpson reported that seven of his twelve divisions
had nothing to do. He suggested to
Montgomery
surprise assault over the river, but got the reply that the Field-
Marshal preferred to wait for his prepared assault on 24 March.'
Given the enormous build-up for the crossing, the time spent
in preparation, and the use of American and airborne troops, the
question is raised, did Montgomery over-insure for 'Plunder"?
General Sir Charles Richardson told me:
Monty really left the supply build-up to Miles Graham, who
was not the sort
of character to over-insure. You
remember we needed our supplies not only for the Rhine
