282
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
judgement must have been clouded by his anger with the
command set-up and his frustration at being denied extra
resources.
Personal and Top Secret
TAC HQ
21 Army Group
10-10-44
Most Important
My dear P.J.
1. I am glad it is to be Hughes. I have been turning over in
my mind the problem of his successor.*
2. I cannot feel happy about things out here. The two big
points that require a very sound solution and plan have
always been:
(a) the thrust line.
(b) the command set-up.
The Thrust Line
3. Eisenhower's idea has always been for the whole line to go
forward, to capture the Ruhr and the Saar and the
Frankfurt area, line up the armies on the Rhine, and then
decide what to do next.
4. I have always said that this is not possible, because our
maintenance situation would not allow of it.
My idea has been to hold back on the right, and to swing
hard with our left against the Ruhr and right through to
Berlin. All resources to be put into the left hook.
5. My plan was not approved. We worked on Para 3 above.
The American armies have outstripped their maintenance,
and as a result we have lost flexibility on the front as a
whole. We are now unlikely to get the Ruhr, or the Saar,
or Frankfurt. In fact it is my opinion that we have
"mucked' the whole show, and we have only ourselves to
blame. It is a great tragedy. I did what I could; I have
always taken my stand by my cable to Eisenhower of 4th
September, in which I said we must concentrate everying
in one terrific blow.
* Canon Frederick Hughes, the newly appointed Chaplain-General to the
Forces. Montgomery had taken a keen interest in Hughes's appointment,
preferring him to the other candidate for the post, the Bishop of Maidstone.
Hughes had been Deputy Chaplain-General at Twenty-First Army Group
After Arnhem
283
I said that if we attempted a compromise solution and split
our maintenance resources so that neither thrust is full
blooded, we would
prolong the war.
You have that
telegram in the War Office.
The Command Set-up
8. All our troubles can be traced basically to the fact that
there is no one commander in charge of the land battle.
The Supreme Commander runs it himself from SHAEF by
means of long telegrams. SHAEF is not an operational
HQ and never can be.
9. General Marshall came to see me on Sunday
last, 8
October,
and
gave him my views on the present
organisation for command. I think it did good.
Tedder, Deputy Supreme Commander, came to see me
also; I gave him my views. Then I wrote a paper on it and I
have sent it to Eisenhower; I enclose you a copy herewith; it
explains itself.
Yrs ever,
Monty
Will you get Simbo to send me a wire to say you have got this
letter; I do not want it to go astray!!!
P.S. If the business is properly
handled now, we could get
away with it I believe and could finish the business this year -
or as near as matters.
But unless it is so handled, and a very firm grip is taken, I
fear we shall have only ourselves to blame if it goes on.
B.L.M.
10-10-44
P.P.S. I think I have let off a good bit of steam in this letter
and you had better burn it.
B.L.M.15
This letter perfectly reveals Montgomery's attitude of mind at
the time, and it is most fortunate that Grigg did not burn it as
requested. It is also interesting that Montgomery refers
to
Marshall's visit, which he mistakenly thought 'did good'. It is
quite clear from American sources that there was no meeting of
minds at all during their interview.
Before writing to Grigg, Montgomery had again irritated
Eisenhower by suggesting that US First Army would be put
