*Good-morning; good-morning!' the General said
When we met him last week on our way to the line.
Now the soldiers he smiled at are most of 'em dead,
And we're cursing his staff for incompetent swine.
'He's a cheery old card, grunted Harry to Jack
As they slogged up to Arras with rifle and pack.
But he did for them both by his plan of attack.
Siegfried Sassoon, 'The General'
Foreword
Field-Marshal the Viscount (Bernard) Montgomery of Alamein
was the best known and the most controversial general of the
Second World War. Under the thirty-year rule his archives in
the Public Record Office were made available to historians six
years ago, and only a short period remains while those close to
him during the war will be available to comment on the secrets
disclosed - sadly, many are already dead. Surprisingly, no work
of military history based upon these documents has so far been
published. This is therefore an appropriate moment to write a
study of his generalship in Europe from 1943 to 1945, when he
fought his most important campaigns, using these key fresh
documents and other archives, as well as the views of those close
to him during the period.
In some ways I found it easier to write about Napoleon than
Montgomery. Both commanders wrote a great number of letters
and orders each day during their campaigns. Napoleon's are all
collected and in print; Montgomery's are scattered. Meanwhile,
members of my own generation who took part in his campaigns
are becoming fewer, and I had much looked forward to meeting
and discussing Montgomery's conduct of these battles with Maj-
Gen Sir Kenneth Strong, KBE, CB, and
Maj-Gen R.F.K
(David) Belchem, CB, CBE, DSO. Alas, they have both died
since I embarked on this work,
although both left behind
valuable books.
Although Montgomery for most of his life had little interest in
money, he caught the publishing itch with the success of his
post-war books, and in 1962 sold his diaries and personal papers
to the Sunday Times for a capital sum and an annuity. In this
archive there may be some documents relating to his campaigns,
as
well
as to
his personal life, of importance to
historians.
military
No
date
has been fixed for their release, and
