422
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
weighty questions. What I want you to know is that I will
back you up to the limit in any effort you may decide upon to
prevent a deadlock and will do my best to phase forward any
unit you might find necessary. For example, if you could use
in an attack on your left flank an American armored division,
I would be glad to make it available and get it in to you as
soon as possible.
Beedle [Bedell Smith] tells me that he was prevented by
weather from dropping in to see you the other day, but will be
coming over soon. Possibly he will bring this letter. In the
meantime, please be assured that I will produce everything
that is humanly possible to assist you in any plan that
promises to get us the elbow room we need. The air and
everything else will be available.
If you get a chance to talk to Beedle, please give him any
views you have on these matters, so whatever duties or
planning
may
devolve
expeditiously carried out.
on my headquarters
call
be
With best of luck.
Sincerely
Ike
My dear Ike,
1. Thank you for your letter of 7 July.
8th July 1944
2. I am, myself, quite happy about the situation. I have been
working throughout on a very definite plan, and I now begin
to see daylight.
3. Initially, my main pre-occupations were:
(a) to ensure that we kept the initiative,
and,
(b) to have no setbacks or reverses.
It was not always too easy to comply with these two
fundamental principles especially during the period when we
were not too strong ourselves and were trying to build up our
strength. But that period is now over, and we can now set
about the enemy - and are doing so.
4. I think we must be quite clear as to what is vital, and what
is not; if we get our sense of values wrong we may go astray.
There are three things which stand out very clearly in my
mind:
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 423
(a) First
We
must get the Brittany
peninsula.
From an
administrative point of view this is essential; if we do
NOT get it we
will be greatly handicapped in
developing our full potential.
(b) Second
We do not want to get hemmed in to a relatively small
area; we
administration, and for airfields.
space - for manoeuvre, for
We want to engage the enemy in battle, to write-off his
troops, and generally to kill Germans.
Exactly where
we do this does not matter, so long as (a) and (b) are
we had to do was to capture
CHERBOURG
I wanted CAEN too, but we could not manage both at the
same time and it was clear to me that the enemy would resist
fiercely in the CAEN sector.
So I laid plans to develop operations towards the R.
ODON on the Second Army front, designed to draw the
enemy reserves on to the British sector so that the First US
Army could get to do its business in the west all the easier.
We were greatly hampered by
very bad weather and the
offensive towards the ODON did not begin till 26 June, on
which date the enemy commander at CHERBOURG was
captured and the port was practically in First Army hands.
But this offensive did draw a great deal on to it; and I then
gave instructions to the First Army to get on quickly with its
offensive southwards on
the western flank.
problems of reorganisation, and re-grouping, and bad weather
on the beaches; and First Army offensive could not begin
before 3 July.
6. The First Army advance on the right has been slower that
I thought would be the case; the country is terribly close, the
weather has been atrocious, and certain enemy reserves have
been brought in against it.
So I then decided to set my eastern flank alight, and to put
the wind
up
the enemy by seizing
CAEN
and getting
bridgeheads over the ORNE; this action would, indirectly,
help the business going on over on the western flank.
