174
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
to draw up his plans without consulting Eisenhower or Bradley,
and refused to visit them, remaining aloof in his own Tac HQ.
There is little in the argument that it would have been
hazardous to alter the inter-army boundary because of the
danger of the Allies shelling and bombing each other. Gun lines
for the artillery could have been fixed and altered at short notice,
taking into account prominent and easily recognisable features.
The nearness of the two armies would have made tactical
bombing impractical, but there were plenty of targets for the air
forces to the east and west of the bottleneck. Yet Bradley
believed that 'To have driven into Monty's advance could have
produced disastrous errors of recognition. 2 The tale that time
bombs had been dropped on the roads north of Argentan is also
untrue.
On the morning of 14 August the impatient Patton, refusing
to stand still at Argentan, requested that only two of Haislip's
divisions should stay there, and that the other two should be
allowed to make a dash towards the Seine. Bradley told him: 'If
Monty wants help in closing the gap then let him ask us for it.
Since there is little likelihood of him asking, push on east.?
On the 15th, therefore, US 5th Armoured and 79th Infantry
Divisions moved rapidly eastwards towards Dreux. Resistance
was light at first and there were fears that the bulk of the
Germans had already escaped to the Seine. But on 16 August
116th Panzer counter-attacked at Bourg St Leonard, some nine
kilometres
east of Argentan and five kilometres south of
Chambois. The village was lost and retaken in hard fighting, and
evidence mounted that the Germans were on the point of
escaping from the pocket.
On the same day the Canadians entered Falaise. Montgomery
telephoned Bradley and urged that everyone should get moving
to close 'the neck of the bottle'. He no longer wanted a link-up
between Argentan and Falaise, but suggested instead that the
armies should meet eleven kilometres north-east of Argentan,
between Trun and Chambois on the Dives river, hoping to
increase the bag by looping to the east.
On 17 August Field-Marshal Walther Model replaced von
Kluge both as C-in-C, West and as commander of Army Group
B. Von Kluge had done his best, but Hitler had consistently
refused to send reinforcements or to order a retreat, and the
imminent German collapse in Normandy was largely a result of
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
175
this policy. Nevertheless, it angered the Führer, who suspected
von Kluge of involvement in the 20 July plot, and was highly
suspicious of his activities on 15 August, when he had been out
of touch with his HQ all day. This mysterious lack of contact
remains an unsolved riddle. It is just possible that von Kluge
might have been trying to get in touch with the Allied Command
in order to negotiate an armistice in the west, and certainly
Hitter thought so. Von Kluge's radio truck had been silent since
0930 on the 15th, when he had set out for a conference with
Eberbach, and at
1930 he was
still missing.
For a senior
commander to vanish during a crucial battle is little short of
catastrophic; this caused Hitler to comment that it was 'the
worst day of his life'. Late that night von Kluge arrived at
Eberbach's HQ, explaining that his radio truck had been put out
of action in the morning by an air attack, and that the roads
were terribly congested. The explanation dissipated the last of
Hitter's trust in his C-in-C, West - he ordered von Kluge to
command from outside the pocket, and relieved him of his
command two days later. According to one historian, 33 an
Allied radio
signal seeking von Kluge's whereabouts was
monitored, but this cannot be substantiated from Allied
archives.*
Von Kluge's departure from the scene put paid finally to any
chance of a German capitulation, for Model was a dedicated
Nazi as well as a tough and ruthless commander who would
fight to the end (in April 1945 he committed suicide rather than
surrender, having first dissolved his army so that it would not be
captured, Butingen if von Kluge had contacted the Allies with a
view to
an
armistice,
Montgomery
had no
instructions
whatsoever
from Churchill. In fact the idea of a German
capitulation never entered Montgomery's mind after the abortive
discussions with Churchill on 20 July.
The bulk of the German units crossed the Orne in relatively
good order on 17 August, planning to move by night to the high
ground
east of the
Falaise-Argentan
road.
One
German
British did not follow up very vigorously from the west.'34
commander said during interrogation after his capture: 'The
* The most authoritative, and almost certainly true, account of von Kluge's
conduct on 20 July can be found in Wilhelm von Schramm, Conspiracy among
the Generals, English translation Allen and Unwin, 1956.
