362
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Germans. The incendiaries used by this lethal weapon began
to take its toll of low flying parachute aircraft at 600 feet, and
the glider aircraft and the resupply aircraft which flew at 200
feet. This occurred during the early stages of the drop.
Approximately 75% of the losses occurred during the first 30
minutes of the battle; the remaining were sustained in the next
two hours.
The report also said the operation demonstrated the successful
use of double tow gliders. 13
Final casualty lists for the first day showed that US 17th
Airborne Division had lost 921 killed and wounded, whereas the
two land-assaulting US divisions (30th and 79th) had together
lost only 500 men, and only 41 killed in the actual crossing. In
addition, the American airmen suffered 350 casualties, while
total British and American aircraft losses amounted to 50
gliders destroyed; 44 transport aircraft were also destroyed, and
332 damaged.
Several of those who took part in the land assault have
commented to me that the airborne operation made the crossing
of the Rhine
conclusion must be that
Montgomery was not justified in employing the two airborne
divisions because their contribution to the advance was quite out
of proportion to the casualties they suffered, and land troops
could have achieved the same results with fewer losses. Field
Marshal Lord Carver said to me that:
It was not essential to employ airborne troops for the
Chine crossing. It would have succeeded without. You coul
say it was a superfluous effort.
I crossed the Rhine early on March 24 as Commander of 4
Independent Brigade supporting the 15th Scottish Division.
At 1000 when the paratroopers started dropping on the
German gun positions the German artillery fire on my troops
stopped. They had to pull back hurriedly and did not harass
us again seriously.
Probably it hurried up the whole operation by 24 hours
and possibly 48. I doubt if this was sufficient compensation
for the heavier casualties amongst the airborne troops. They
lost considerably more than land troops would have done.
There were nasty casualties amongst the second wave. I could
Eisenhower's Revenge
363
see the German 20-mm guns shooting them down. Personally
I am deeply sceptical about the value of airborne operations.
General Sir Nigel Poett commanded 5 Parachute Brigade,
which dropped over the Rhine
on 24 March in Operation
'Varsity'. Not unnaturally, his view is rather different:
We had the hell of a lot of casualties, as we expected. I
parachuted down with my HQ staff, and within five minutes
of jumping I had lost my Brigade Major, Signals Officer and
Administrative Officer. We landed behind the front in the gun
areas and quickly mopped up the resistance.
They could not
concentrate against us. At that time there was no technique
for dropping jeeps and anti-tank guns by parachute, and they
had to come in the second wave by gliders. I do not think the
German moved in any 20-mm guns. They were there already.
I rate the operations as very successful. We captured all
our objectives, and without us the Rhine crossing would have
been held up considerably. We saved the ground troops at
least a whole day. It was costly, but then we knew that
beforehand.
And the late General Sir Richard Gale remarked:
I have never stopped to wonder if the use of airborne
troops for the Rhine crossing was justified. I was asked to do
the job, and I did it.
"Varsity'
was
well planned
and
successful. We swamped the Germans in the landing zones.
Someone had to do the attack, and there were bound to be
casualties whether it
was done by
air or land. As Corps
Commander I watched it from our bank of the Rhine and I
was proud of my chaps, who did a marvellous job.
Whatever the verdict on the use of airborne troops during
'Plunder', history must salute Poett and Gale as two gallant
airborne commanders whose operations in the Second World
War were
entirely successful. Montgomery was fortunate in
having such men to serve him.
sector of the Rhine
crossing than had the Americans,
but
Horrocks's XXX Corps and Lt-Gen Neil Ritchie's XII Corps
