58
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Still, even in this depressing winter in Italy, his spirits were
always up. With the front static he was always showing
himself to the troops and boosting their morale, which in turn
elated him and kept him happy.
I am afraid he did run down the First Army, comparing
their performance unfavourably with the Eighth Army in
North Africa, and Monty was responsible for some of the
antipathy which existed between the former Eighth and First
Army divisions during those early months in Italy.*
John Henderson told me: 'As the Eighth Army got bogged
down in Italy it became clear to Monty that this campaign was a
stalemate, and his mind wandered to the Second Front, as we
called the cross-Channel invasion, where he had a good idea he
might get command. All our minds were fixed on it, and Italy
became a second consideration?
In the end, Montgomery
was chosen by Roosevelt and
Churchill to command the cross-Channel invasion, though it
was a near-run thing. He received instructions to return to
England on 24 December, in the nick of time to save his
reputation as the Sangro operations ground to an unhealthy halt
— a stalemate which had to last until the spring. He was lucky. If
he had stayed in Italy his reputation as a victorious commander
must have faded, and Italian campaigners never held him in
such esteem as the rest of the Army. They felt he had left them
in the lurch.
Sir Charles Richardson told me:
Our little gang at Eighth Army HQ took a poor view of the
Sicily and Italy invasions. After doing so well in Africa we
could not see why we should be wasted on an uphill struggle
through the mountains of Italy. We thought, 'poor old Eighth
Army, labouring up the east coast of Italy along one main
road'. That is what Monty felt too. We felt we should be the
élite of the British Army for the much more important
invasion of France, although we had no idea it was so far off.
* The feuding between former soldiers of the British Eighth and First
Armies in the Italian campaign was extraordinary and shaming, and was
fanned not only by Montgomery, but also by Alexander. On one occasion I
heard Alexander telling officers it was important to put 'l' or '8' on their
Africa Stars to show which army they had been in.
Sicily and After
And so, on Christmas Eve 1943, Montgomery received a
coded signal 'for his eyes only' that he was to command the
invasion of Europe. He had already decided that if the call came
he would take with him his Chief of Staff, de Guingand, Maj-Gen
Miles Graham, his Chief Administrative Officer, and Williams,
his head of Intelligence. They all lived at Eighth Army Main HQ.
while Montgomery, with his hand-picked liaison officers were at
Tac HQ. The news came through to the Main HQ on the late BBC
bulletin during dinner on the 24th, and on Christmas Day the staff
officers were all agog to hear which of them would go back with
their general. Montgomery's high spirits and school-masterish
sense of fun immediately returned. Bill Williams takes up the
That night we heard on the BBC radio that Monty was to
command what was then known as the Second Front. Every
morning before breakfast I had to go from Main Eighth
Army HQ to Monty's Tac HQ to brief him about the enemy.
I was most excited about the Second Front because I was
sure Monty would want me to go with him. I told my driver
that I was probably going back to England and that he would
come with me: he was thrilled. That day I remember well
there was no news whatsoever about the enemy, and all that
Monty would discuss with me was how to prevent Bernard
Freyberg [Maj-Gen Sir Bernard Freyberg, VC, GOC New
Zealand Forces swimming the River Sangro to see exactly
what was going on on the other side. Freyberg was keen on
swimming
exploits and we both agreed he shouldn't be
allowed to do this. Both I and my driver were disappointed
men when we drove back to Main Eighth Army HQ, but as
soon as I got out of the jeep I got a message that 'Master'
wanted to speak to me on the 'phone. Then in his piping voice
he told me that he was going back to London and that I was
going with him. Our talk about Freyberg before breakfast had
been a school-boyish leg pull.
