126
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
open country about the Caen-Falaise road ... the possibilities
are immense with 700 tanks loosed to the south-west of Caen
and armoured cars operating far ahead
anything
may
happen. And he had written even more optimistically about
'Goodwood' to Eisenhower than he had to London: 'This
operation will take place on Monday, 17 July. Grateful if you
will issue orders that the whole weight of the air power is to be
available on that day ... my whole eastern flank will burst into
flames on Saturday. The operations on Monday may have far
reaching results?'
Eisenhower agreed enthusiastically, telling Montgomery on
13 July that all senior airmen agreed with the plan and that it
would be 'a brilliant stroke which will knock loose our present
shackles.37 Tedder promised Montgomery: 'All the air forces
will be full out to support your far reaching decisive plan to the
utmost of their ability?
Eisenhowever definitely expected 'Goodwood' to be a decisive
break-out in the east, which would mean that the Americans
would not have to put so much into their drive through the
bocage in the west. Some historians argue that because of his 13
July message to Montgomery, clearly designed to encourage a
break-out, Eisenhower believed that Montgomery's original plan
only to hold the
abandoned. But in any case, on 14 July Eisenhower wrote to
Montgomery:
I would not be at all surprised to see you gaining a victory
that will make some of the 'Old Classics' look like a skirmish
between patrols
... You can count on Bradley to keep his
troops fighting like the very devil twenty-four hours a day and
provide the opportunity your armoured corps will need to
make the victory complete. 38
This time Leigh-Mallory
co-op
commander, and the
days of Mo
gutless bugger'
Leigh-Mallory
de Gui
would be
"the
ared
the
support of ground tr
most c
Simpson:
We mu
empted
well with the land
y considering him 'a
June) were
ensive
over.
aen
• wrote ti
Mallory
as Air
Normandy Assault
127
us win the land battle and has no jealous reactions.'3 Everyone,
including Montgomery, hoped and prayed that 'Goodwood'
would prove to be the armoured break-out for British Second
Army. VIII Corps was to spearhead the attack with three
armoured divisions; XII Corps and Canadian II Corps were to
attack on the flanks.
"Goodwood' was
an armoured thrust towards the heart of
Normandy, and was launched from the bridgehead east of
Ranville, which was not more than two miles wide. To start the
attack three double Bailey bridges over the Orne and the Caen
canal had to be crossed; these were in full view of the Germans
perched on the tall chimneys of the Colombelles factory at
Caen. Five miles to the south of Caen rose the high ground of
Bourguebus and the woods near Garcelles Secqueville, which
gave the Germans perfect observation of the British advance,
and excellent fields of fire for their atillery. Some twenty stone-
built villages along the line of advance, surrounded by thick
hedges and
orchards, provided the Germans with
natural
strongholds in between the city
and the high ground to the
south.
Rommel and General Hans Eberbach (commanding Panzer
Group West) had organised their defence in five successive
zones, not three as the British thought,
with most of their
available armour well forward - today, NATO experts cite the
placing of these five zones as a classic example of defence.
194
German field guns were sited on the Bourguebus Ridge and the
adjoining woods, supported
by
272
Nebelwerfers
(multi-
barrelled mortars, known to the British as 'Moaning Minnies'
from the noise of the
finned projectiles
through
Montgomery was sending VIII Corps to attack Rommel where
he was strongest: observation and fields of fire were in the
German's
favour, but
Montgomery
was counting
on
his
overwhelming air support to redress the odds which, otherwise,
were clearly against him. 4,500 Allied aircraft were to blast the
Werman positions and, if properly directed and backed by guns,
this bombardment, it was hoped, would reduce the
German
infantry
and tanks to helplessness.
To veterans of the First
World War it sounded too much like the Somme again.
Another handicap was that Dempsey's artillery would have to
remain west of the Orne until all the armour had crossed the
three bridges, and even then moving the artillery forward would
