Conclusion
What are we to make of this remarkable man? History will
record that he performed an enormous service to his country by
his strong and intelligent command in the field, and by raising
the nation's morale in the hour of its greatest need. Certainly he
had greater qualities of leadership, and greater confidence, than
any other British general, and these elements combined in him to
produce the victories that were so badly needed. He possessed,
too, outstanding skills in organising armies and in co-operating
with the air and naval arms, and no other general had as
complete a knowledge of battle techniques and of the latest
weapons and equipment.
In years to come, Montgomery will be compared with the
great generals of the past, a process already under way by the
beginning of 1943, by which time he had become the most
acclaimed British general since the Duke of Wellington. There is,
too, a marked parallel with Napoleon, who with his 'ragged
army' delivered to the French Republic its first military victories,
the fruit of his lightning Italian campaign of 1796. During his
desert campaigns Montgomery maintained direct touch with the
Prime Minister, and, during his short visit to Britain in the spring
of 1943, became a national hero as suddenly as had Napoleon in
1796.
General
Sir
James Marshall-Cornwall,
himself a
Napoleonic as well as a modern military historian, wrote to me:
I do not
consider Montgomery just as a bon général
ordinaire. He was more than that. In some ways he was
Napoleonic and shared Napoleon's ambition, egotism and
ruthlessness. He aped Napoleon's method of gaining the
admiration and the affection of those serving under him.
Conclusion
397
Napoleon in later life admitted that he was never liked by any
officer above the rank of captain.
It is almost certainly true that Montgomery, like Napoleon,
was more popular with younger officers than with his own
contemporaries.
I have relied largely upon quotations from his own writings, in
all their many forms, to give a picture of Montgomery as a man.
What he wrote spontaneously during the war reveals far more
about his character and decisions than do his memoirs and his
other books, which tend to show history as he would have liked
it to be written rather than as it actually was. He had, for
instance, almost a fetish for stating
of an operation
that
everything had gone completely as he had planned, which was
not always the case. Happily I have been lucky enough to
unearth many hitherto unpublished letters and other documents
which illuminate Montgomery's state of mind at the time, and
which fill in the background to his important decisions during
the campaigns.
Montgomery's letters clearly demonstrate that he always
possessed complete faith in himself, and this faith seems never to
have wavered. He felt that he could accomplish almost anything
provided that he was given time to plan it and that he was
allowed to execute it in his own way. The extreme clarity of his
brain and his singleness of purpose shine through everything he
wrote during the campaigns - he was completely absorbed in his
work, and would not be distracted. He had, too, a great sense of
the right priorities, and that single-mindedness which is the
hallmark of a great man. And he had an enormous enthusiasm
for defeating the Germans, an enthusiasm which he could
communicate so well that it became infectious.
The exceptional harmony of Montgomery's relationship with
Grigg, Brooke and Simpson shows that he possessed the ability
to get on well with people of his own age provided that he had
faith in them - indeed, at times this axis operated almost as a
mutual admiration society. Montgomery knew that he owed his
career to Brooke, and only Brooke's views would make him
change his own.
When, in the course of writing this book, I met the survivors
of Montgomery's close personal staff, I was impressed by their
ability, integrity, good manners and obvious power to get on
