294
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
in the capture of the Ruhr. And, as Williams fed him accurate -
and depressing - information about the German build-up and
restored morale, he became more and more disturbed at the
flaws in Eisenhower's
strategic plan.
Twenty-First Army
Group's Intelligence Review for the middle of October stated
that 'the enemy has effected comparative stabilisation with
formation of a crust thicker than had been thought possible in
previous issues of this Review.?2
German morale on the
Canadian front was reported to be high, and there was a
confirmed
report of fresh German
armoured reserves in
Westphalia, close to the Ruhr. There had accumulated by now
overwhelming evidence that the soldiers and people of Germany
would not revolt against the Nazi régime, and Montgomery,
always a realist, saw that the only way to win the war was to
defeat the enemy
military
machine in battle.
But as the
American attacks on a wide front ground to their inevitable halt,
both he and Brooke became almost desperate about the way
Eisenhower was conducting operations.
Brooke had complete
faith in Montgomery, and both men felt that the Supreme
Commander was making a mess of things.
Early in November, Montgomery had a 'heart-to-heart' talk
with Cyril Falls, military correspondent of The Times, during
which he emphasised that Eisenhower was only pretending to
command the land forces, and added his own views about the
proposed American attacks towards the Rhine. Falls reported
the conversation to Brooke, who recorded in his diary on 8
November: 'I do not like the lay out of the coming offensive. I
doubt whether we shall even reach the Rhine. It is highly
improbable that we should cross before the end of the year?
On 9 November Montgomery came to London, and there
poured out his heart to Brooke. The latter remarked in his diary:
Monty goes on harping over the system of command in
France which prolongs the war. He has got this on the brain
as it affects his own personal position and he cannot put up
with not being in sole command of land operations. I agreed
the set up is bad but it cannot easily be altered as USA are
preponderate and consider they have a major share in the
running
of the war.
Perhaps
after they
see
results of
dispersing their strength all along the front it may be easier to
convince them some drastic change is desirable leading to a
295
The Dreary Autumn
concentration of forces at some vital part.
This extract demonstrates
how completely
the CIGS
endorsed Montgomery's views, and how willing he was to back
Montgomery to the hilt in challenging Eisenhower.
On 14 November, Churchill and Brooke met Eisenhower at
the SHAEF advance HQ near Rheims.
Brooke, often critical
of the Americans, noted in his diary that Eisenhower had made
a most unfavourable impression
because
his pretty private
secretary, Kay
Summersby,*
* had
acted as hostess at the
luncheon, and Churchill was put to sit on her right. 'This has
done Ike no good
with a lot of undesirable
gossip
Ike
completely fails as Supreme Commander.
He does nothing and
lives in Paris out of touch. The war is drifting in rudderless
condition.
Long
and despondent letter from
Monty.
am
preparing case as we shall have to take it up with Americans.'
With this solid support from Brooke both about command
and the single-thrust strategy, Montgomery was encouraged to
badger
Eisenhower to
change his plans and the command
structure. Surprisingly Brooke, in touch with American opinion
in London, never saw the hopelessness of his cause, for with the
United States providing so much in the way of men and
resources it was politically impossible to make Montgomery
overall land commander. Yet the CIGS encouraged the latter in
his fruitless argument with Eisenhower - as a result, relations
between Montgomery and the Supreme Commander, already
and remained so for the rest of the war.
recorded his view that the only satisfactory solution would be:
Bradley
Tedder
Land Commander
- Air Commander
* Formerly she had been Eisenhower's driver.
