56
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
The above letter
to Brooke
gives an
insight into
Montgomery's mind at that time. He felt strongly he should be
the 'overlord' of the Italian
campaign, and
was frustrated
because his efforts on the Adriatic, which were very costly in
casualties, were not properly co-ordinated with those of the
Americans. Alas, his 'heavy blow ... and crack' to be heard all
over Italy on the Sangro misfired. He rightly criticised the
higher command for sending him slogging up Italy
with no
master plan; 'we risk
an administrative breakdown,'
he
continued to Brooke. That was untrue except for the strain
imposed on transport by the colossal amount of field artillery
ammunition he deemed necessary for his assault over the
Sangro. It was only after he had left Italy that the Eighth Army
was starved of supplies during the build-up for the cross-
Channel invasion.*
Montgomery launched his attack over the Sangro on 28
November, announcing to his troops 'We will hit the Germans a
colossal crack'. Both the 27th, during which the German
positions were bombarded, and the 28th were fine for a change,
and Montgomery quickly secured a bridgehead over the Sangro.
But although he had broken into the German winter line, he
could not breach it. With his usual bombast he announced that
"my troops have won the battle as they always do. The road to
Rome is open.47 This was untrue, for there had never been any
chance of a break-through to the Rome lateral road at Pescara
in winter. Indeed, it was not reached until June 1944, after Rome
fell to the Americans,
and the Eighth Army never forgave
Montgomery for this false optimism. Casualties were heavy in
December as the British made attack after attack over the
Sangro, with only limited success. Bitter weather and snow
caused grave hardship, and there were many cases of frostbite.
The CIGS visited Montgomery in Italy on 14 December. In
London, the Prime Minister had been critical of Eighth Army's
slow progress, and scathing about the failure to use the landing-
craft available for amphibious landings behind the German lines.
Brooke noted in his diary:
Frankl
n rather depressed about what I have seen and
* The au
rounds per day in early 19
ers 25-pounder
ins being rationed to three
Sicily and After
57
heard today. Monty is tired out, and Alex fails to grasp the
show ... Monty strikes me as looking tired and definitely in
need of a rest ... I can see he feels Clark is not running the
5th Army right; nor
that Alex is grasping the show
sufficiently. Monty saw little hope of capturing Rome before
March ... no longer any talk of turning left by his forces to
capture Rome.
The next day he wrote: 'The offensive is starting badly ...
something must be done about it as soon as I get back,' and on
the day after, following a visit to US Fifth Army, he wrote
'Clark is planning nothing but penny packets'.
Montgomery undoubtedly felt that his luck was running out,
and both Churchill and Brooke were aware that the Italian
campaign was not to his liking. He was giving a poor impression
which might well have jeopardised his chance of command of
the Second Front. Fortunately for him, the decision was by
now almost made.
Bill Williams gave me this recollection of that period:
Monty definitely 'played the monkey' with the facts after the
Sangro crossing when he said the road to Rome was open
and, soon after establishing bridgeheads, he had to halt the
offensive with heavy losses.
This was all part of his business
of 'enthusing the troops', which is why he went out on a limb
at times. You must remember that in the very bad winter in
Italy morale was low; we were crawling about in yellow mud
which even covered all the roads. It was very cold and
Monty's reaction on the Sangro was to call it a victory to
encourage the troops, even when he had failed.
In Italy both Mark Clark and Monty were showmen. They
didn't see much of each other but Monty realised that the
Eighth Army front on the Adriatic would never yield
dramatic results. He was terribly egocentric and discussions
went on about shifting the weight of the Allied offensive in
Italy from the Adriatic to the Fifth Army's front in the west.
Monty
was bitterly opposed to taking any British troops
away from the Eighth Army and giving them to the US Fifth
Army [X Corps and other British troops had been sent to US
Fifth Army].
