48
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Although the war correspondents had proved that there was
nothing to stop Montgomery rushing 5th Division into the
'Avalanche' area, the British advance remained pathetically
slow. After Alexander's messages Montgomery had to make at
least some token efforts. He decided to concentrate XIII Corps
in the neighbourhood of Nicastro-Catanzaro, with light forces
extended northwards. 5th Division reached Castrovillari and
Belvedere on the 12th, and patrols from the Canadian division
entered Cotrone on the east coast.
Reports from Sth Division also give evidence of the easy path
a speedy advance would have had up the west coast. On 12
September the division's 5th Reconnaissance Regiment from
Amantea reported no enemy there because they had withdrawn
beyond Belvedere, and on the 14th the regiment reported the
road Paola-Castiglione 'fit for all vehicles'. The next day 5th
Recce were ordered to move to Lagonegro, but when it was learnt
there were Germans there the regiment was withdrawn and 13
Brigade was made responsible for patrols along the roads to Sapri
and Vallo, and for making contact with US Fifth Army. On this
day, too, 231 Brigade arrived south of Scalea by sea from
Niconastro, and on 16 September 13 Brigade contacted 36th
Division, US Army, five miles north of Vallo. The attack planned
by Montgomery for 17 September never took place because by
then the Germans had called off the battle for Salerno.
Eventually 5th Division's operational orders for 14 September
contained the intention 'Advance at all possible speed to relieve
U.S. Army', while 231 Brigade was ordered to remain in the
Scalea area and patrol vigorously north and west, but 'no move
likely until 19 September.?38
Immediately after the signing of the Italian secret armistice on
3 September, Alexander had
Division to embark
sent orders to Ist Airborne
at Bizerta on 8 September to land at
Taranto on the 9th, after the armistice had been announced. The
plan was to follow them up with HQ V Corps and two more
divisions,
8th Indian and 78th Infantry, together with four
Divisions were rushed to US Fifth Army; 200 men refused to fight with
strange units, however, and had to be marched back to the beaches under
arrest. Montgomery said firmly that if he had been consulted he would have
refused to allow Eighth Army reinforcements to go to US Fifth Army
(Ahrenfeld, Psychiatry in the British Army in World War II, p. 219).
Sicily and After
49
squadrons of fighter aircraft. As the 12th Cruiser Squadron
brought Ist Airborne into Taranto harbour the Italian battleships
Doria and Duilio sailed out to surrender at Malta, in accordance
with the armistice.
Ist Airborne landed on the 9th without opposition, welcomed
by the Italians who, thrilled at the news of the armistice, believed
in vain that the war was over for them. The Italian Army co-
operated in every way possible. Unfortunately, on the next
morning HMS Abdiel struck a mine while at anchor and sank
with the loss of forty-eight sailors and 120 soldiers of 6th
Parachute Regiment
drowned, and another 120
soldiers
Italian local government officials telephoned around the
province and were
able to give Maj-Gen
commanding Ist Airborne, the news that the German
Parachute Division was based at Altamura, west of Bari, with
rearguards at Castellanata, Gioia del Colle and Ginosa, but that
the whole formation, on hearing of the Italian surrender, was
moving back towards Foggia. By the 10th Monopoli on the
Adriatic coast was clear, but in the only serious fighting, at
Castellanata on the 11th, Maj-Gen Hopkinson was fatally
wounded. On 13 September Bari and Brindisi were taken
without opposition.
There was no
possibility of a counter-attack from the
Germans. Frost noted: '1st Parachute Brigade were given very
little to do, for the 8th Army was moving slowly in those days
and while the Sth US Army fought desperately for its beach-
heads at Salerno the 8th was maintaining its balance. We spent
four days digging at Taranto in case the Germans produced a
sudden riposte?39 This underlines Montgomery's wait-and-see
attitude; he was not prepared to use Ist Airborne to create a
diversion to ease 'Avalanche', although Taranto was only 140
miles from Salerno by a good road on which there were few
demolitions.
lst Airborne could
not manoeuvre in conjunction with the
rest of Eighth Army because Reggio and Taranto are nearly 200
miles apart by road, but a threat to Potenza, the key road
junction between Taranto and Salerno, must have drawn off
German troops from 'Avalanche'. There was nothing to prevent
an attack by 1 Parachute Brigade being made on Potenza, but
not even a feint advance was attempted. Potenza, as the British
