172
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
informed Twenty-First Army Group that '5 USA Division were
in outskirts of Argentan', but reported again at 1240 that
Argentan was held by enemy tanks and anti-tank guns. On the
next day, messages to Twenty-First Army Group showed US
5th Division to be north-east and south-east of Argentan, while
the French 2nd Armoured Division was to the south-west of
the town, about to move slowly north. Then came a report that
elements of the French division who attacked Argentan 'late
yesterday evening [13 August] were seen off by strong enemy
forces of infantry and anti-tank guns?28
These messages in the Twenty-First Army Group Log throw
doubt on Patton's claim that he could not only have taken
Argentan but that he could also have pushed on to Falaise.
Patton recorded:
I believe the order emanated from 21 Army
Group
Commander and was either due to jealousy of the Americans
or to utter ignorance of the situation, or both. It is very
regrettable that XV Corps was ordered to halt because it
could have gone on to Falaise and made contact with the
Canadians, north west of that point, and positively closed the
gap. 29
His first point is definitely incorrect - Bradley had made no
strong representations to Montgomery to be allowed to advance
beyond Argentan, and if he had pressed for permission for
Patton to move north Montgomery would have had to agree.
Nor is Patton's second claim that he could have pushed north
correct. Eberbach had swiftly concentrated 116th Panzer
Division together with elements of Ist SS Panzer and 2nd
Panzer in and to the north of Argentan; it was these formations
that had repulsed both the Americans and the French at
Argentan. Even so, according to German records these three
divisions were reduced to only some seventy tanks, although
these were Panthers and Tigers.
In his memoirs, Bradley wrote: 'In halting Patton at Argentan
I did not consult with Montgomery. The decision to stop Patton
was mine alone; it never went beyond my HQ:30 His memory is
slightly at fault, however, having overlooked Kleber's call to de
Guingand on 13 August. Bradley declared that he had never
suggested to Eisenhower that he should intervene to force any
173
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
inter-army boundary changes since he considered that, even if
Patton had linked up with the Canadians, he could not have
succeeded in keeping the gap closed because 'nineteen German
Divisions were stampeding to get out of the trap.' Here he was
wrong. On 13 August the Germans were not stampeding out of
the pocket - on Hitler's orders they were concentrating inside it
for another Mortain counter-attack. Bradley added, and here he
may have been correct, 'I much preferred a solid shoulder at
Argentan to the possibility of a broken neck at Falaise.'
Another
imponderable is whether Leclerc's Free French
division would have been prepared to accept major casualties to
close the gap. De Gaulle had almost certainly ordered Leclerc to
preserve his division for the assault on Paris, although once the
latter had realised how
close
von
Kluge's
army
was to
destruction he might have ignored such an instruction.
But it is indisputable that if Bradley had ordered Patton to
wait and build up reinforcements for XV Corps at Argentan,
and Montgomery had sent fresh British divisions in to support
the Canadian and Polish drive through Falaise, the sack would
have been closed much sooner, and most of von Kluge's army
would probably have been captured. In fact, more than half of it
crossed the Seine, although all its heavy equipment was lost.
Some American and Canadian historians argue, like Patton,
that Montgomery's obstinacy was responsible for the failure to
close the gap earlier. This is not a valid criticism. It is true that
he failed to initiate
any
fresh plan in order
to
seize
opportunity created by Patton's unexpected arrival at Argentan,
but the major cause of the failure
was Bradley's lack
initiative. These critics forget that if Bradley had reacted quickly
to Patton's message, and had pressed Montgomery to move the
inter-army boundary, then the latter would have been forced to
agree. Montgomery was nominally in charge of Bradley, but in
practice, at this stage of the Normandy
campaign after the
formation of US Twelfth Army Group, he no longer exercised
the same control as he had after the landings. Colonel Stacey,
the Canadian official historian wrote: 'There was an element of
committee in the Allied system of command during this month
of August.31 As a result, Bradley had been taking important
decisions without reference to
Montgomery; now, just when
firm, precise timing and control were needed, they were lacking.
For this Montgomery himself was partly to blame, for he liked
