438
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
must halt on the Roer to clear up the risk of artificial flooding
before they can go further. On the other hand, they are quite
happy about the prospects of getting over the River if this
added risk is promptly eliminated, and then of taking on the
Panzer Divisions there in order to chew them up.
Again I say that I am sorry that in my hurried reading of
your letter I made an interpretation that you did not intend. I
now see clearly exactly what you mean.
Sincerely
Ike 10
On 7 December 1944 Montgomery met Eisenhower, Tedder,
Bradley
and
Bedell Smith at Maastricht.
The Supreme
Commander was now hostile to the ideas Montgomery put
forward, and after the conference the latter wrote this frank and
outspoken letter to Grigg:
7.12.44
My dear P.J.
Thank you for your letter of 6 Dec.
I have returned from my
conference with Ike at
Maastricht. The result was complete failure, and he went
back on all the points he had agreed to when alone with me.
Bradley and Tedder were there too; I played a lone hand
against the whole three. That Tedder should take their side is
too dreadful.
I have written the whole thing in a long letter to the
C.I.G.S., and he will doubtless show it to you.
The American plan for winning the war is quite dreadful; it
will not succeed, and the war will go on. If you want to end
the war in any reasonable time you will have to remove Ike's
hand from the control of the land battle; and Bradley's hand
also. How you will do this I do not know; but unless you do
so, the whole war will go on. I hope the American public will
realise that, owing to the handling of the campaign in western
Europe from 1 Sept. onwards, the German war will now go
on during 1945. And they should realise very clearly that the
handling of the campaign is entirely in American hands. We
did quite reasonably well when it was in British hands.
One must keep on plugging away at it; possibly some
miracle will happen. But the experience of war is that you pay
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 439
dearly for mistakes; no one knows that better than we British.
We must keep on fighting all through the winter, and one
would not mind if success came at the end of it. But success
will not come. Come and see me some time. I will send my
aeroplane for you at any time.
Yrs ever,
Monty"
With this letter, Montgomery enclosed a thirteen-paragraph
résume of his controversey with Eisenhower over the thrust line
and the command problems, and he also sent a copy to Brooke.
This clearly demonstrates his complete confidence that both
Brooke and Grigg supported him to the hilt, and it was in this
confidence that he returned
to the attack over command in
January 1945, with nearly disastrous consequences for himself.
The résumé cited chapter and verse for the arguments:
The Thrust Line Problem
1. My note to Eisenhower on 22 August 44.
•1. The quickest way to win this war is for the great mass
of the Allied Armies to advance northwards, clear the
coast as far as ANTWERP, establish a powerful air force
in BELGIUM, and advance into the RUHR.
2. The force must operate as one whole, with great
cohesion, and so strong that it can do the job quickly.
3. Single control and direction of the land operations is
vital for success. This is a whole time job for one man.
4. The great victory in N.W. France has been won by
personal command. Only in this way will future victories
be won. If staff control of operations is allowed to creep
in, then quick success becomes endangered.
5. To change the system
of command now, after having
won a great victory, would be to prolong the war?
2. My telegram, M. 160, to Eisenhower on 4 Sep. 44.
'M.160 (.) TOPSEC (.) Personal for Eisenhower and
EYES ONLY from MONTGOMERY (.) I would like to
put before you certain aspects of future operations and
give you my views (.)
Para. 1 (.) I consider we have now reached a stage where
one really powerful and full blooded thrust towards
