370
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
night the Prime Minister minuted Eden: 'Eisenhower much upset
about Molotov's letter. We had a jolly day yesterday* and
crossed the Rhine.'25
Churchill and Montgomery did most of the talking at the 25
March meeting. Once the Prime Minister had finished his tirade
against the Russians, Montgomery took over, demonstrating on
maps how he would direct his advance out of the Rhine
bridgehead
which,
even
as
he spoke, was
expanding
spectacularly. But Eisenhower, when his turn came, was far
from frank. He failed to mention that he was on the brink of
shifting his main advance from the north to the centre under
Bradley, and of removing US Ninth Army from Montgomery's
command, and, further, that he had virtually decided not to
capture Berlin.
We shall never know with certainty whether Eisenhower had
not finally made up his mind, or whether he just jibbed at telling
Churchill that he was shifting his main attack away from
Montgomery in the north to Bradley in the centre, and that he
wanted to leave Berlin to the Russians. The most favourable
interpretation one can put on the Supreme Commander's deceit
is that he was still undecided, but the evidence is that he had
already made up his mind, but had baulked at incurring the
spontaneous rage of the Prime Minister and an unpleasant and
acrimonious discussion.
Eisenhower may be justly criticised for his silence on 24 and
25 March. He owed a definite duty to Churchill, as head of the
British Government, and to Montgomery, as commander of the
army of his principal ally, to discuss his plans with them before
changing his main strategy. But even more serious was his
failure to mention that he no longer wanted to capture Berlin,
but was instead ready to leave that city to the Russians.
When he became Supreme Commander in December 1943,
Eisenhower's brief was to 'undertake operations aimed at the
heart of Germany and the destruction of her armed forces. This
directive imposed upon him no specific obligation to
give
priority to the capture of Berlin, but it had always been
* This was a most callous remark. From the west bank of the Rhine
Churchill had witnessed through his binoculars the destruction of many
gliders and tow-planes, a great number being shot down in flames. He wrote
about this in his memoirs with scant feeling for the airborne losses.
Eisenhower's Revenge
371
considered by Churchill that the instructions encompassed the
taking of the German capital - indeed, in September 1944, as we
have seen, Eisenhower had told Montgomery that 'Berlin was)
the main prize'. If it was wrong of the Supreme Commander to
deceive the British on 24 and 25 March about removing US
Ninth Army from Twenty-First Army Group, it was an even
greater breach of faith not to tell the Prime Minister that he had
abandoned Berlin as a target, a breach that Churchill never
forgave. In the earlier stages of the campaign Eisenhower had
made every effort not to be over-nationalistic in matters of
command, but by March 1945 he had become anti-British and,
prodded by Marshall, was ready to snub both Churchill and
Montgomery. Patton and Bradley, the Supreme Commander's
close friends (Bradley and Eisenhower had been at West Point
together), had frequently chided him for being too pro-British; at
one point in the campaign Patton had made the typical remark:
'Ike is the best God-damn general the British have got'. But it
cannot be denied that much of the blame for Eisenhower's
developing feeling of
antagonism
towards
his allies
rests
squarely with Montgomery, whose actions and
personality,
coupled with his occasionally extreme caution,
had so often
provoked American resentment.
By 27 March, Montgomery's advance beyond the Rhine was
rolling away, meeting little serious German resistance. Given the
swiftness of the advance and his comparatively light casualties,
his appreciation of the agreed plan,
even after his talk with
Eisenhower on the 24th, was that once well into the plains of
north Germany he would send his armour at top speed towards
both the Baltic and Berlin. Montgomery looked on Berlin as a
"priority objective', and had become
would play an important part in the peace if the Allies were to
occupy it before the Russians, something which Churchill had
made clear to him. Late on the 27th, relaxed and confident
after hearing
encouraging reports from his liaison officers,
Montgomery signalled Eisenhower:
Today I issued orders to Army Commanders for the
operations about to begin... My intention is to drive hard for
the line of the Elbe using the [US] ninth and [Britishl second
armies.
The right of the ninth army will be directed on
Magdeburg and the left of the second army on Hamburg ...
