350
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Churchill who, as has been said, worked desperately to obtain
Alexander's new appointment, while the CIGS had reason to
believe that the letter showed that Eisenhower had decided to
leave Montgomery in charge of major Allied operations
certainly the latter
thought so. In view of the Supreme
Commander's later change of plan, the letter may almost be
considered as evidence of bad faith, since, in his attempt to
prevent Alexander's appointment, Eisenhower had
virtually
promised Montgomery that the northern front would be the
"main effort'. The deployment of US Ninth Army and the three
airborne divisions under Twenty-First Army Group seemed to
support this promise.
Brooke and Montgomery were wrong in their views about
Eisenhower's intentions, however, while Churchill, the only
might
have
forced
through
Alexander's
appointment, had had the ground cut from beneath him by
Montgomery's
sudden volte-face.
Eisenhower,
combination of charm and tact (and a certain amount of red
herring' about his being "bullied' by Marshall and Churchill).
had convinced Montgomery that he had been forgiven for his
past truculence, and that American troops would be left under
his command for the rest of the war. The Supreme Commander
had no such
intention, however. Within himself Eisenhower
concealed that he was still fuming with rage at Montgomery's
arrogance; he also knew that his American
generals hated
serving under the British field-marshal. He therefore planned to
withdraw the US troops from Montgomery's command as soon
as the battle situation made this convenient - with Alexander as
Deputy Supreme Commander, however, this would have been
difficult, if not impossible, to achieve. As will be seen, in the
absence of a pro-Montgomery faction at SHAEF - Alexander -
Eisenhower removed all American troops from Montgomery's
command, and allotted to Twenty-First Army Group a minor
and unglamorous role in the last few weeks of the war. This was
precisely
what Churchill had most feared, foreseeing
that
Alexander's presence at SHAEF would have prevented such a
course from being adopted, let alone implemented.
Although Montgomery now believed that Eisenhower would
be permanently well disposed towards him, and attentive to his
demands, Brooke was under no such illusion. On 6 March, after
seeing Eisenhower in Rheims, Brooke noted in his diary that
Rows Over Strategy
351
'... his relations with Monty are quite insoluble; he only sees the
worst side of Monty and cannot appreciate the better. Things
are running smoothly for the present but this cannot last.' He
added that:
to insert Alex now is only likely to lead to
immediate trouble for all, I gather.'
When, on 2 March, Churchill visited Montgomery, the latter
told him emphatically that he did
not want
Alexander
at
SHAEF, and that he had told Eisenhower so on the previous
day. The Prime Minister was displeased. Brooke arranged for
Churchill to see the Supreme Commander alone on his train on
the Sth, and there Eisenhower stated that replacing Tedder with
Alexander
would cause undesirable publicity
and 'upset the
apple cart'. Churchill caved in, albeit reluctantly, remarking that
he would leave the decision about Alexander to Eisenhower,
who immediately
said
"no
change'.
Returning to London,
Churchill signalled Alexander that, after passing three days with
Montgomery and Eisenhower he had found Montgomery to be
'in perfect accord with SHAEF and happy about his affairs and
relations ... at the eleventh hour on the western front you would
not obtain the scope appropriate to your military standing
and it would be wise not to disturb the existing harmony?'S The
Prime Minister was frustrated after wasting much time on the
abortive Alexander plan,
and, alas, the "harmony' which he
described was not to last for long.
