338
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
prosper should the latter be exploited.
(b) If tactical considerations allow, this main thrust should be
made in the north, in view of the overriding importance to
the enemy of the Ruhr area.
(c) The best results will be achieved if one Land Force
Commander, directly responsible to you, is given power
of operational control and co-ordination of all ground
forces employed in the main thrust.
No government could have given fuller support to its field
commander in his dispute with his allies than that given to
Montgomery by London at this time. It was to no avail,
however.
Washington disagreed completely;
the US chiefs
insisted on retaining the command set-up, and endorsed to the
full Eisenhower's plan for 'a strong secondary effort'.
Neither Montgomery nor Eisenhower attended the Joint
Chiefs of Staff conference in Malta. Instead Montgomery
briefed Brooke about his plans and intentions during his short
leave in England, and Marshall met Eisenhower at Marseilles.
Marshall told Eisenhower that both he and Roosevelt would
back his plan to the hilt, and that he would not hear of
interposing a ground force commander between the Supreme
Commander and the army groups, declaring that he personally
would resign rather than accept such a proposal.
Not surprisingly, the Malta conference produced long and
acrimonious discussions between the British and American
Chiefs of Staff - some, fortunately, held in private. On 30
January Brooke told the Americans at the conference that he
would not approve Eisenhower's appreciation, and reminded
them that the British were sending five divisions from Italy to
strengthen Twenty-First Army Group. These reinforcements
comprised three Canadian divisions together with the two
British infantry divisions that had been on operations in Greece.
The news of the allotment of these five extra divisions mollified
the Americans somewhat, but not sufficiently *
* As a result of their losses in the Ardennes the Americans were worried
about manpower. When Montgomery took over command of US Ninth and
First Armies he complained strongly to SHAEF that the American divisions
were, on average, 2,000 men below strength. In a generous gesture, Churchill
had ordered the call-up of an extra 250,000 British at the worst moment of
the Battle of the Bulge, and the Americans, equally worried, speeded up the
Rows Over Strategy
339
Bedell
Smith,
who
was
at
Malta
as
Eisenhower's
representative, argued that his chief accepted the basic British
contention that the main thrust should be made in the north, and
that 'the southern advance was not intended to compete with the
northern advance but must be of sufficient strength to draw off
German forces to protect the important Frankfurt area and to
provide an alternative line of attack if the main effort failed.' But
Brooke wanted the appreciation reworded so that it contained a
guarantee 'to deploy east of the Rhine and north of the Ruhr the
maximum
number
of
Divisions which can be
maintained
(estimated at 35 Divisions) and to deploy on the Frankfurt
Cassel axis such forces as may be available after providing 35
Divisions for the north and essential security elsewhere.
The Americans agreed with this, and thus went a long way
towards meeting Brooke's objections, but the CIGS still baulked
at Eisenhower's plan of reaching the Rhine along its full length
before attempting a major
crossing.
Bedell Smith therefore
persuaded Eisenhower to signal the conference: 'I will seize the
Rhine crossings in the
north immediately this is a feasible
operation and without waiting to close the Rhine throughout its
length ... I will advance across the Rhine in the north with
maximum strength and complete determination as soon as the
situation in the south allows me." The British had to be content
with this somewhat loose assurance, although after the session
Brooke had a row with Bedell Smith. When the CIGS ran down
Eisenhower, Smith replied: 'Then you had better take this to the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Brooke realised at once that he could
go no further, since there was plainly no chance of removing
Eisenhower or of promoting Montgomery now that American
troops were numerically
predominant in the north-west
European theatre.®
At Malta, Montgomery's plan for the northern thrust was
accepted, but so incensed was Marshall about the British open
contempt for Eisenhower as land commander that the question
of Montgomery
assuming
that post, even for the northern
to ask for coloured volunteers for infantry duty in the combat zone, but the US.
Government told him firmly that at home the cupboard was bare, and that
there were no reserves of American manpower.
