386
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
and he reported to the War Office that officers and ORs,
especially
despatch riders, were being murdered or simply
disappearing, and also that at Second Army Tac HQ a bomb
had been thrown into a tent, wounding six men. These instances
served only to underline the lack of serious opposition, however,
and General Pip Roberts told me that his 11th Armoured
Division met only slight resistance after they had crossed the
Rhine, except for a difficult and hard-fought battle near
Osnabr端ck. By 27 March the Germans had been in many cases
reduced to using oxen to draw their guns, and a captured
artillery officer told his interrogators: 'What is the use of having
a battery if you have neither petrol nor ammunition?'45 while
German staff officers argued whether farm carts should be used
for barricades or for transport. The Wehrmacht in the west was
up against the best-equipped army that an industrial nation
could produce, and Montgomery, to use a favourite metaphor,
was now batting on the easiest of wickets.
Worried about the German strength in Bremen, Montgomery
went forward to see Horrocks towards the middle of April,
remarking, 'Jorrocks, I am not happy about Bremen'. The two
men made detailed plans on a large-scale map, and Montgomery
told the XXX Corps commander: 'I will give you two extra
divisions and you must use four infantry divisions' 46 The main
assault on Bremen started on 24 April, and the greater part of
the city was captured by the 26th. Unhappily, by then much of
Bremen had been reduced to rubble by heavy RAF bomber
attacks, but Second Army had firmly told 83 RAF HQ 'Delayed
action bombs not acceptable'.47
Given his reduced role, Montgomery had displayed no
pettiness or rancour, or at least, not openly. As we have seen, he
had replied meekly to Eisenhower on 9 April that he would
crack along on the northern flank one hundred per cent and will
do all I can to draw away the enemy forces from the main
effort, and on the same day he had written to Simpson: 'All is
now clear as regards what Ike is trying to do. I shall play my
part to the best of my ability' 48 But long before Bremen fell,
Eisenhower had started to nag him about going too slowly
towards L端beck. On 8 April the Supreme Commander had
asked Montgomery what logistical help he would need from the
Americans, to which the Field-Marshal had replied 'nothing',
and Bradley, visiting Montgomery on the 10th, had got the same
Eisenhower's Revenge
387
answer.
Eisenhower
was not reassured, however. Declaring to his
SHAEF colleagues that he was unhappy
with Twenty-First
Army Group's rate of advance, he went to see Montgomery on
20 April. This time Montgomery said that he wanted part-time
use of the railway bridge at Wesel built by American engineers,
and that he would like an American corps to help with the Elbe
assault. Eisenhower immediately responded by assigning him
Ridgway's XVIII Airborne Corps, to the disgust of Bradley,
who still had to keep that force supplied.
Of these attempts to hurry
him,
Montgomery himself
commented that both Churchill and
Eisenhower
sent him
messages prodding him on faster, and 'I fear I got somewhat
irritated and my replies possibly showed it?49 Then, on 26 April,
the Supreme Commander delivered his final pinprick, ordering
his SHAEF staff to telephone Montgomery and emphasise to
him the urgent need to get to L端beck before the Russians, in
order to seal off the Denmark peninsula. Montgomery wrote to
Simpson on the following day:
My dear Simbo,
The Bremen battle went well and quickly and the whole
city is now in our hands. We go over the Elbe tonight. The
technique is the same as
in
the Rhine crossing.
The
Commando Brigade crosses first at 0200 hours and secures
Lauenberg; 15 Division then goes over.
Yesterday I had a telephone enquiry from Supreme HQ to
say they hoped I realised the urgent need to get to Lubeck
before the Russians. This is adding insult to injury and made
me very angry. I told Freddie [de Guingand] to get on to
Whiteley and inform him as follows:
(1) I have always been very well aware of the urgent need
to reach and cross the Elbe quickly. See my signal of March
28.
(2) It was Supreme HQ which prevented this plan being
implemented. They removed the 9th Army from me and left
21 Army Group so weak that the tempo of the operations
became slowed down.
(3) If the Russians should get to L端beck and on up to Kiel
and Denmark before we can
do so I would
suggest that
Supreme HQ should accept the full blame. I trust I shall have
