44
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Army's Public Relations Officer. That night they were all at
Vallo on the American flank, and at 1050 on the morning of 15
September they met American patrols at Castagneto. The
Americans were on the point of demolishing another bridge, but
when they heard the road was open to the Eighth Army they left
it alone. The war correspondents motored on to the lovely Greek
temples of Paestum, within a few hundred yards of US Fifth
Army HQ. General Alexander was there and insisted on seeing
them, demanding a detailed account of the condition of the
roads which they had traversed. Plainly he wanted to find out if
there was any excuse for Montgomery's dawdling.
Not until twenty-four hours later, on the 16th, did Eighth
Army patrols link up with the US Fifth Army. As there were no
demolitions to stop the advance and there was no enemy in the
area, obviously 5th Reconnaissance Regiment from 5th Division
could have linked up with the Americans at least forty-eight
hours before they actually did, and probably by 12 September.
Buckley wrote:
Wednesday, I5 September, was the turning point on the
Salerno front and the last day on which the situation was
critical ... If the 8th Army had pushed forward along their
route sooner General Clark would have received the news
that there were no German forces between the two armies, the
unnecessary demolition of several bridges would have been
avoided and Commanders at the beach-head might have felt
in a position to go over to the offensive rather earlier than they
did. At the very least the considerable tension prevailing at the
beach-head would have been relieved.36
Although there were no US troops in Vallo, the village formed
the southern edge of the 'Avalanche' perimeter. Buckley and his
party, by motoring 120 miles through no-man's-land in one day,
had linked up one army with another, a feat which makes
nonsense of Montgomery's excuses for not advancing. Buckley
rightly wrote:
This episode strengthened my previous conviction that a quite
unnecessary slackness had developed in the British forces in
following up and maintaining contact with the retreating
enemy; demolitions were accepted as an act of God, and
Sicily and After
45
although the sappers worked as hard and fast as they could
the command took it for granted that there were no means of
circumventing them.
The slow progress was due entirely to Montgomery failing to
give orders to push on as far and as fast as possible to relieve the
hard pressed beach-head at Salerno. (Indeed, in each town
Buckley's party had got the mayors to telephone to the north to
make sure the road was passable and that there were no
Germans.)
It was
shaming
for Montgomery
that unarmed war
correspondents should have reached US Fifth Army so far in
front of his troops, for as the Salerno landings ran into trouble
Alexander urged him to hurry; in addition, intelligence reports
reaching Eighth Army HQ made it clear from the first that
Salerno was a risky business. Montgomery virtually ignored
Alexander's orders to do his best to relieve the pressure on US
Fifth Army.
As a result of this lack of pressure from Eighth Army, 26th
Panzer Division was able to take up battle positions on the
Salerno perimeter
between
Eboli
and
Battipaglia on 14
September, and their arrival increased the Americans' problems.
Earlier, at midnight on 8/9 September, 26th Panzer had been
ordered to pull back to Castrovillari, seventy miles north of
Catanzaro. 29th Panzer Grenadiers were already there, and sent
a detachment north to Lagonegro to counter a rumoured British
landing at Sapri. The remainder of the division should have been
en route for the Salerno front, but the whole force was halted
because of the false news of a landing at Sapri. Nevertheless,
29th Panzer reached the line Sala Consolina-Eboli on 11
September; had it not been for the scare about a British landing
29th Panzer would have been available to Hube on the Salerno
perimeter just at the moment when US Fifth Army was in
deepest trouble.
On 7 September Alexander had asked Montgomery to take
command of ist Airborne Division when it landed at Taranto,
and
also of
Division,
which was to follow.
Montgomery's signal in reply was typical:
Appreciate no firm decision
regarding
use of 8th Army
Taranto for few days. Consider possibilities which might
