232
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Goulburn then dashed forward to the old monastery of
Marienboom in the suburbs of Nijmegen, where he issued orders
for one of the most dramatic attacks of the Second World War.
Capture of the bridge intact was a glittering prize, for it
promised not only the salvation of thousands of men of 1st
Airborne from otherwise inevitable disaster, but also the end of
the war within a few weeks. At any moment the Germans might
blow the huge bridge, but here was British armour within a few
hundred yards of it, and all the Americans, Dutch and British
concerned were seized with an unparalleled feeling of urgency.
Goulburn made his HQ in a café in Marienboom. Groups of
wildly excited civilians rushed in and out; it was full of Dutch
liaison officers and underground fighters; just outside, American
75-mm guns blazed away as hard as they could at the German
positions. The café's owners did a roaring trade.
Typhoons pounded the German positions inside Nijmegen at
1530, as the Grenadiers, with some platoons of American
parachutists, advanced into the stricken town, where the
Germans had wantonly burnt countless houses. At first there
was no opposition, and a few leading tanks and armoured cars
safely crossed the wide square of Maria Plein. For a moment the
British thought the Germans were waiting for the tanks to get on
to the bridge before blowing it. But suddenly intense anti-tank
and small-arms fire pinned down the follow-up troops on the
large open space of Maria Plein, and the frenzied rush to the
bridge ground to an abrupt halt.
A maze of streets made the tanks highly vulnerable to
German anti-tank guns, and as daylight disappeared it became
clear that the bridge would not be taken without much more
hard fighting; indeed, Browning planned to drop another whole
parachute brigade to capture the bridge next morning.
His
gamble was never put to the test because the weather suddenly
became bad, and at 0200 on 20 September Goulburn was told
that his Grenadiers would have the sole glory of assaulting the
bridge, on whose capture the Allied Command was pinning all
its hopes.
At 0530 the Grenadiers attacked, painfully edging their way
through the small streets towards the bridge. After five hours of
slow advance Goulburn felt he held a position from which he
could plan the eagerly awaited assault on the bridge.
At 1530 US 82nd Airborne troops crossed the Waal in British
Arnhem
233
assault boats, supported by the guns of 100 Guards' tanks, and
secured a toe-hold on the north bank of the 400-yard-wide,
swiftly running river, west of Nijmegen railway bridge. By dusk
a few Americans reached Lent, a mile inland, where the railway
crosses the main road. Casualties during the crossing
were
savage, but it was undoubtedly one of the finest feats of arms of
the Second World War.
Simultaneously with the American river crossing, Goulburn
sent his Grenadiers, still accompanied by a few
American
paratroopers, to take Huner Park and the Valkhof, a large
wooded mound, well tunnelled and trenched, to the north of
which there was a fort overlooking the bridge. British casualties
were heavy, but at 1800 German resistance surprisingly cracked
after 150 Germans had been burnt alive in a large house set on
fire by phosphorus grenades.
From the Valkhof the Grenadier tanks continuously pumped
shells into the enemy positions on the southern approaches to
the bridge; a patrol found the southern end clear of Germans,
except for a number of shell-shocked soldiers who were soon
made prisoner. At 1830 a troop of tanks moved towards the
bridge, but fell back as anti-tank fire proved too strong. As dark
fell, hopes of reaching Arnhem in time dimmed. Another day had
been lost.
The situation was suddenly transformed. At 1900 Sergeants
Robinson and Pacey of the Grenadiers saved the day for the
Allies by a desperate but successful rush across the 1200-yard
bridge in their tanks. They braved bazookas and anti-tank guns,
and although two of their comrades' tanks were knocked out,
they skidded broadside through the road block at the north end
of the bridge and knocked out the devastating German anti-tank
guns. A third tank, Sergeant Knight's, followed, and the three
bravely went on north to link up with the Americans in a
dangerous position one mile up the road to Arnhem at Lent.
Here they held on all night.
The first officer to cross the bridge was Captain the Lord
Carrington
(later
Foreign
Secretary
from 1979-1982), and
other tanks followed to consolidate the bridgehead. By the grace
of God the Germans did not counter-attack during the night,
and their attempts to blow the bridge failed.
A Sapper officer, Lieutenant Jones, ran behind the tanks, to
cut any wires leading to the demolition charges. His men then
