164
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Germans and I am working on that. On the left the Canadian
Army must hold while the force pivots on that flank. I must
take everything I can from the left and put it into the right
swing. The Airborne Troops lie 6th Airbornel must not be
used offensively. Therefore they must be used on the left flank
pro bono publico. I had taken the Division out to send home,
but I have now put it back again into the line east of the Orne.
Everything is going very well. The whole plan which I have
been working to all the time is now working out as planned. I
hope to turn the right Corps of 12 Army Group westwards into
Brittany tomorrow. 12th Army Group 9th US Army under
Bradley assumed control at 1200 today.
On the next day he wrote again:
The battle goes well and completely according to plan.
Rennes is now ours and St. Malo. I doubt if there are many
Germans left in the whole of Brittany except base wallahs,
etc. George Patton should be in Brest in a day or two [here
Montgomery was quite wrong, for Brest did not fall until 18
The broad plan remains unchanged. I shall swing the right
wing round towards Paris, and while this is going on I shall
try and hold the enemy on to his ground in the Caen area.
Then I hope to
put down a large airborne en arair.
transportable] force including 52 Division somewhere in the
Chartres area and cut off the enemy escape through the gap
between Paris and Orleans.
The big idea is to push the enemy up against the Seine and
get a 'cop'. However, these things do not always work out as
planned although the present operations are absolutely as
These letters are typical of Montgomery and give evidence of
his clear forward thinking, while the racy language conveys his
jaunty mood in those dramatic days when he knew that he was
on the brink of a triumph.
In his important Directive M515 of 27 July, Montgomery had
written: 'We must secure the Brittany ports before winter is
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
165
upon us. But now, in common with Eisenhower,
he had his
mind fixed on bigger targets than the continuation
of his
seaborne
supplies.
On
August
Bradley
decided,
in
Montgomery's words, 'to use Mortain as a hinge on which to
swing his front to Le Mans and Alençon'. Three days later the
Americans were
at
Le
Mans,
another
seventy-five
miles
forward; unless the Germans withdrew immediately to the Seine
they risked seeing their Army Group B destroyed in Normandy.
According to General Belchem,
between 5 and 6 August
Montgomery frequently told him that he was puzzled about von
Kluge's next move, and expected the Germans to order a staged
withdrawal
first to
Orne
and
thence
to the
Seine.23
Montgomery did not agree with Patton's surge through Brittany
because it was
diverting troops away from the main enemy;
after the advance through Avranches he had wanted Patton to
turn east across von Kluge's right flank in order to trap the
German Seventh Army west of the Seine. The American drive
through Brittany had been written into the original 'Overlord'
plan because at the time the planners had been obsessed with the
need to capture ports to maintain supplies to the invasion forces,
but the swift Allied advance now made this need less urgent. The
main prize in Brittany, Brest, did not fall until mid-September,
and while St Malo, Cancale and Granville were all captured they
could not be used because the Ile de Cézanne held out until
3 September.
Unless 'Anvil' was to be moved from the South of France to
Brittany, as Churchill alone wanted, the best use of all available
forces was to concentrate on destroying von Kluge's army.
Montgomery was not concerned in the futile controversy which
had suddenly arisen between Eisenhower and the Prime Minister
about
moving
'Anvil'
to Brittany,
a
wild
Churchillian
suggestion, but he now rightly saw Brittany as an unnecessary
diversion of resources.
Eisenhower overruled him, however,
preferring to stick to the outdated Overlord' plan, and coveting
Brest and Lorient as ports in which to land the American
reinforcement divisions now piling up on the other side of the
Atlantic. The Americans had more divisions in France at this
time than had been planned, but cargo unloading facilities were
below estimates.
By now, Hitler had finally come to realise that there would be
no second invasion in the Pas de Calais. Accordingly, in the first
