374
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
I have ordered ninth and second armies to move their
armoured
and mobile divisions forward at once to get
through to the Elbe with all possible speed and drive ...
My Tac HQ moves to the northwest of Bonninghardt on
Thursday, 29 March. Thereafter my HQ will move to Wesel
Munster Widenbruck Herford Hanover - thence by autobahn
to Berlin I hope. 26
Eisenhower, with little enough patience for Montgomery at
this stage of the campaign, was infuriated by the signal, for it
assumed (although
the Supreme Commander
had
never
promised any such thing) that US Ninth Army would stay under
the Field-Marshal's command for the final victorious
drive
through Germany. Worse still, in Eisenhower's view, was that
Montgomery was once more usurping his senior's prerogative of
deciding how the Allies should advance through Germany even
though American troops vastly outnumbered the British. And
beyond his rage, the Supreme Commander was extremely
conscious of how enraged Bradley would be if US troops
remained under Montgomery's command while German
resistance crumbled. And not only Bradley, for Marshall, Patton
and the other generals, as well as American public opinion,
would be equally outraged.
Whatever
qualms
about
antagonising
Churchill and
Mongomery Eisenhower might have had left, they went out of
the window on the morning of 28 March with the arrival of his
British
subordinate's imperious
signal.
IlI
temper made
Eisenhower, for once, curt and clear as he drafted the signal to
quash the Berlin proposal and to withdraw US Ninth Army
from Montgomery's command. There were no characteristic
woolly compromises now. First he informed Montgomery that
US Ninth Army would revert to Bradley as soon as it had
'joined up hands' with US First Army in the Paderborn area,
having ringed the Ruhr. The signal then continued bluntly:
'Bradley will be responsible for mopping up and occupying the
Ruhr and with minimum delay will deliver his main thrust on the
axis Erfurt-Leipzig-Dresden to join up hands with the Russians
... The mission of your army will be to protect Bradley's
northern flank.27 On the same day, without consulting either
London or Washington, Eisenhower signalled directly to Stalin
that his plan was for the Allied armies to link up at Dresden,
Eisenhower's Revenge
375
thus making it plain that Berlin would be left to the Russians. 28
He also made it clear to Marshall (in a signal copied to London
'for information' that he did not intend to capture Berlin.29
Tedder, Eisenhower's deputy, was not even informed until after
the signals had gone, and staff at SHAEF felt that the Supreme
Commander was so angry
with Montgomery that he
was
determined to carry out his own plan, willy-nilly, and would
brook no argument.
Montgomery
was appalled to find his role so
suddenly
downgraded after what he considered to be his Rhine triumph.
As we have seen, Simpson had given Brooke a fair idea on 19
March that something like this might come from Eisenhower at
any moment, but neither Montgomery nor Churchill had been
aware that such a turn of events was likely, or even possible. It
had, in any case, been thought that such changes would come
about later, in mid-April, and no one could have foreseen that
Montgomery would precipitate his own downfall. But it was
humiliating
now for him to
be forced to rewrite his army
commanders' orders in the light of Eisenhower's signal, the more
so since, on the day before, he had issued a directive telling them
to go 'flat out' - their advance had already begun. A downcast
Montgomery signalled the Supreme Commander back: 'I note
from your FWD 18272 that you intend to change the command
set up. If you feel this is necessary I pray that you do not do so
until we reach the Elbe as such action would not help the great
movement which is now beginning to develop. '30
Eisenhower
had
no
sympathy
for
Montgomery's
disappointment, however, and signalled that he had chosen the
Kassel-Leipzig axis for the advance, and that his main strength
would be concentrated in the centre, and not on Twenty-First
Army Group's front in the north. He promised to give twenty-
four hours' notice before Ninth Army reverted to Bradley after
the junction at Paderborn, and slightly sugared the pill by
suggesting that an American formation might come under
Montgomery's command
for operations beyond the
Elbe'
There was, however, another shock for the British commander:
•You will see that in none of this do I mention Berlin. So far as I
am concerned that place has become nothing but a geographical
location; I have never been interested in these. My purpose is to
destroy the enemy?31 More bitter still, the signal's last paragraph
indicated that the final role for Montgomery and Twenty-First
