168
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
south and east to secure Argentan and Falaise, while the
Americans would swing north from Le Mans to Alençon and then
on to the general line from Carrouges to Sees, twelve miles south
of Argentan. If the neck could not be closed by the Canadians and
Americans
meeting
at Argentan
they
would
revert
Montgomery's former plan, issued on 6 August, which was for
the Canadians to capture Falaise and then swing east to the Seine
through Lisieux.
Hitler now ordered von Kluge to launch another counter-
the
attack,
and German
Domfront area, well within the 'sack'.
On 11 August the Canadians were still eleven miles north of
Falaise, but
opposition at never-anticipated speeds. The US Army had a flair
for rapid movement; its troops were first-class mechanics, and
revelled in the swift advances. While the Canadians were bogged
down north of Falaise XV Corps of Patton's US Third Army
was racing up from the south towards Argentan, led by US Sth
Armoured Division and General Jacques Leclerc's American-
equipped Free French 2nd Armoured Division, which was fresh,
having landed on the Normandy beaches on 30 July. '2ème
Blindée joined Patton at Le Mans on 9 August, and captured
Alençon on the 12th.
In his Directive MS17 of 6 August, Montgomery had left the
inter-army boundary at Argentan; according to the Directive,
when Patton reached Argentan he was to concentrate his troops
and create a strong position from which he would be able to
withstand all German attacks. On Saturday 12 August, Maj-
Gen Wade Haislip, commanding US XV Corps, telephoned
Patton and told him that US Sth Armoured was on the edge of
Argentan and could take the town. The Canadians and Poles
were still eighteen miles to the north and had not yet taken
Falaise, which held out until the night of the 16th. Knowing this,
Patton rang Bradley and remarked, 'We have elements in
Argentan. Shall we continue and drive the British into the sea for
another Dunkirk?'
There then ensued one of the biggest controversies of the war
about Montgomery's tactics. According to the Americans, he
should, in trying to close the pocket, either have reinforced his
bogged-down Canadian corps, or asked Patton to advance
north. The Poles and Canadians were inexperienced and were
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
169
making poor progress, but Montgomery had more experienced
British divisions available to reinforce them; moreover, these
divisions did not suffer, as did the Poles, from the handicap of
the language barrier.
Colonel Stacey, the official Canadian war historian, wrote:
The Canadians would have done better if they had not been
learning the business as they fought
... a proportion of
officers were not fully competent for their appointments and
their inadequacy sometimes had serious consequences. The
capture of Falaise was long
delayed. A German force far
smaller than our own taking advantage of strong ground and
prepared positions were able to slow our advance to a point
where considerable German forces made their escape. Had
our troops been more experienced, the Germans could hardly
have been able to escape a worse disaster.
Polish Armoured
Divisions had never fought before they were committed to
Normandy at one of the highest and fiercest crises of the war
.... Less raw formations would probably have obtained larger
earlier results.
General Foulkes, Commander 2nd
Canadian Infantry Division, wrote frankly: 'When we went
into action at Falaise and Caen we found that when we
bumped into battle experienced German troops we were no
match for them ... it took two months to get the Division so
shaken down that we were really a machine who could
As Montgomery had noted in his letter (p.99) that
the
Canadians were jumpy' in the first few days of assault, it is
surprising that he let the inexperienced Poles and Canadians
alone take the full brunt of the vital drive towards Falaise and
the south, instead of reinforcing them with more experienced
divisions which were available. David Belchem felt this strongly,
and wrote: 'Monty overestimated the speed of advance of the
Polish Armoured Division and of the Canadians. He had forces
available to reinforce them but did not do so.'25
Originally, Montgomery had had high hopes of the Polish
Armoured Division. He had been enormously impressed (despite
his occasional tactlessness) with their esprit de corps, and their
fanatical will to defeat the Germans in revenge for Hitler's rape
