420
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
abandonment of ANVIL should be accepted only as a last
resort.?
At the beginning of July Eisenhower, prodded by Tedder and
Cunningham, became increasingly worried that Montgomery's
attacks around Caen were not being pressed hard
enough;
indeed Tedder told the Supreme Commander that they were
'company
exercises'?? Eisenhower's letter
of 7 July,
and
Montgomery's reply, demonstrate how far apart the
two
commanders had drawn in this most critical period.
PERSONAL
7 July 1944
Dear Monty,
Since returning here I have been studying our existing situation
and future prospects, particularly in consultation with G-2 and
the Air Commanders.
When we began this operation we demanded from the air
that they obtain air superiority and that they delay the arrival
of enemy reinforcements in the NEPTUNE area. Both of
these things have been done. In the meantime, in spite of
storms and hard luck, our
ground build-up has proceeded
rapidly and on the British side we are approaching the limit of
our available
resources. Very soon,
also, we
will
be
approaching the limit in the capacity of the ports now in our
possession to receive
and maintain American
troops.
Thereafter it is possible for the enemy to increase his relative
strength; actually he seems to be doing so already.
These things make it necessary to examine every single
possibility with a view to expanding our beachhead and
getting more room for manoeuvring so as to use our forces
before the enemy can obtain substantial equality in such
things as infantry, tanks and artillery. On the left we need
depth and elbow room and at least enough territory to protect
the SWORD beach from enemy fire.
We should, by all
means, secure suitable air fields. On the right we need to
obtain additional small ports that are available on the north
side of the Brittany coast and to break out into the open
where our present superiority can be used.
I am familiar with your plan for generally holding firmly
with your left, attracting thereto all of the enemy armor, while
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 421
your right pushes down the Peninsula and threatens the rear
and flank
of the forces facing the Second British Army.
However, the advance
on the
right has been slow and
laborious, due not only to the nature of the country and the
impossibility of employing air and artillery with maximum
effectiveness, but to the arrival on that front of [German]
reinforcements, I believe the 353rd Div. In the meantime, 1
understand from G-2 that some infantry has arrived on the
front opposite the British Army
allowing
the enemy
withdraw
certain
Panzer elements for re-grouping
and
establishing a reserve.
It appears to me that we must use all possible energy in a
determined
effort to prevent a stalemate or of facing the
necessity of fighting a major defensive battle with the slight
depth we now have in the bridgehead.
We have not yet attempted a major full-dress attack on the
left flank supported by everything we could bring to bear. To
do so would require some good weather, so that our air could
give
maximum
assistance.
Through Coningham
and
Broadhurst there is available all the air that could be used,
even if it were determined to be necessary to resort to area
bombing in order to soften up the defense. On the right, about
the only way I could visualize helping out would be launching
an airborne operation against St. Malo.
At one time this was reported to me
as impracticable
because of the strength of the defensive garrison at that point.
I am having the matter re-examined in the light of information
that the enemy has thinned out very considerably in that
region. The First British Airborne Division is now available
and if it could seize the port and a U.S. Infantry Division
could follow in quickly by sea, they could, from that position,
assist materially in getting your right flank rapidly down the
Contentin Peninsula.
Because of the transfers that we
have to make to the
Mediterranean to help out in ANVIL, I think we cannot put
on a full-scale three or four division
airborne attack before
early September. We are planning for this eventuality but in
the meantime we will have the lift for more than a full division
and the moon will again be right for such operations along
about August 3rd or 4th.
I know that you are thinking every minute about these
