262
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
by 17 September 25,000 men and 550 vehicles had crossed from
the mainland to the north bank. Montgomery failed to interpret
this intelligence as evidence that these escaping troops would be
ideally placed to attack the left flank of his XXX Corps as they
advanced towards Arnhem. During the Arnhem operation itself,
Ultra signals showed that 82,000 men, 530 guns and 46,000
vehicles had been ferried north over the Scheldt, which in the
end meant that German Fifteenth Army was able to make
strong attacks on both XXX Corps and the airborne troops
from the south-west.
Neither Montgomery nor Eisenhower showed a proper
understanding of the true significance of the escape of Fifteenth
Army and of the threat it posed to any further Allied advance
through Holland to the Rhine. Throughout September SHAEF
intelligence reports were over-optimistic about the end of the
war, and gave no prominence to the menace of Fifteenth Army
in Holland, nor to the impossibility of opening Antwerp unless
more divisions were diverted to the battle of the Scheldt. Bill
Williams at Twenty-First Army Group understood the situation
perfectly, and insisted again and again to Montgomery that
clearing the Scheldt must have priority over an air drop and a
Rhine crossing.
His general, however, would not listen, being too intent on
persuading Eisenhower to pursue a strategy which would enable
him (Montgomery) to command a powerful force in a drive over
the Rhine into Germany. Eisenhower was only concerned about
balancing the conflicting claims of the Americans and the British
to priority in what he expected to be the final victorious thrust.
Thus, in the first weeks of September the overriding importance
of dealing with German Fifteenth Army on the Scheldt was
overlooked by both commanders. As far as Montgomery is
concerned, the only possible verdict is that the prospect of an
immediate, complete victory in Europe blinded him to the threat
on his left flank, of which normally, with his usual caution and
professionalism, he would have been completely aware.
Montgomery wrote in his memoirs: 'I admit a bad mistake. I
underestimated the difficulties of opening up the approaches to
Antwerp. I reckoned the Canadian Army could do it while we
were going for the Ruhr. I was wrong?3
10
After Arnhem
Montgomery found it hard to accept that withdrawing from the
bridgehead over the Rhine meant that he must abandon his
cherished plan for a drive into Germany, a drive backed by the
US troops which Eisenhower had only assigned to him after so
much argument. Once
the
withdrawal from
Arnhem was
completed, Montgomery immediately signalled the CIGS: 'A
fine division has been practically wiped out in sacrifice but it has
ensured operations succeeding elsewhere.' This statement was
misleading, but it was part of his philosophy of never admitting
defeat. General Simpson told me that 'Monty felt it was his duty
to exude confidence in front of his subordinates,
and inside
himself too he always felt cocksure, although David Belchem
wrote that: 'After the Arnhem setback Monty was quiet and
withdrawn,
usually a sign of anger." Brigadier Williams,
however, told me that:
The failure of Arnhem did not make Monty despondent.
He was as cocky as ever. In his mind it was essential to
pretend it was not a major defeat in order to keep up morale
and
deceive the enemy. He found no difficulty in doing
precisely that because of his peacock vanity. His reaction
was: 'It is no good pining - as a good soldier I must get on
with the next move.'
This fitted both his moods, eg one, that as the best general
in the world he must plan his next operation, and two, his
peacock vanity, which would not let him admit defeat.
When "Market-Garden' began, both Montgomery
and
