Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
and Turks run away, and if unable to do so, surrender.
7. Our initial attack was on a wide front, and there were gaps
between landings. The impetus of the assault carried us some
way inland and many defended locations were by-passed;
these proved very troublesome later. In one case a complete
German Bn, with artillery, was found inside 50 Div area; it
gave some trouble, but was eventually collected in (about 500
men). There is still one holding out - the radar station west of
Douvres; it is very strong and is held by stout-hearted
8. Sniping in back areas has been very troublesome, as a
result of para 7. The roads have been far from safe and we
have lost some good officers. I have been all right myself,
though I have toured the area all day. There have been
women snipers, presumably wives of German soldiers; the
Canadians shot four women snipers.
9. The Germans are doing everything they can to hold on to
Caen. I have decided not to have a lot of casualties by butting
up against the place; so I have ordered Second Army to keep
up a good pressure at Caen, and to make its main effort
towards Villers Bocage and Evrecy, and thence S.E. towards
10. First US Army had a very sticky part at Omaha, and its
progress to Utah has not been rapid. I have therefore ordered
it to join up its two lodgement areas and to secure Carentan
and Isigny. It will then thrust towards La Haye du Puits and
cut off the Cherbourg peninsula.
11. The two Armies have now joined hands east of Bayeux.
No time for more.
PS. - The country here is very nice; green fields; very good
crops; plenty of vegetables; cows and cattle; chickens, ducks
etc. The few civilians there are appear well fed; the children
look healthy; the people have good boots and clothing. The
locals did not believe the British would ever invade France or
come over the Channel; they say that the German officers
and men thought this too, which may account for the tactical
B.L. Montgomery.6
Normandy Assault
Top Secret
Personal
99
Headquarters
21 Army Group
10.6.44.
My dear Freddie,
I cannot possibly come out to Ramsay's ship tomorrow, nor
is there any need for me to do so; for one, beyond the
pleasure of seeing Ramsay, it would be a waste of time. You
have my letter sent by Johnnie, and my intentions and plans
will now be clear to you.
It is quite impossible to send any commandos back yet. I
am directing the left of First Army on CAUMONT as a first
priority, then ST LO next. Everything is going very well and I
am well satisfied. The Canadians are a bit jumpy just at
present, but they will settle down as they gain experience.
I have issued enclosed Personal Message. Give it to the
press your end, and have it given out by the BBC. Send
copies to Second Army Main for distribution to Second
Army formations still in England, and send a copy to First
Canadian Army.
Do not let any VIPs visit me, or anyone not actually
concerned with the operations on land e.g. War Office PM 'B'
etc. etc. I have two Army Commanders who have never
commanded Armies in battle before, and a large number of
inexperienced Divisions and Generals, and my time is very
fully occupied; I have not time to spare for visitors. I would
like to see Miles Graham, and also Nap White.
The roads have been far from safe, due to snipers left
behind by the enemy. So far 8 women snipers have been
killed.
Night bombing is going to be a nuisance;
we had a very
near miss at Tac HQ last night, and Sgt Ship had a narrow
escape in the Mess tent.
Yrs ever
B.L. Montgomery.
If you want to discuss things come over and see me?
A second short letter to Simpson - written on 14 June - is
quietly confident:
