50
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
knew, was only lightly held by troops of 1st German Paracnute
Regiment and 26th Panzer Division. Any serious movement
towards Potenza must have forced Vietinghoff to divert troops
from the Salerno perimeter.
On 16 September the Canadian Division, advancing slowly
up the east coast road, linked up with lst Airborne
near
Metaponto on the Gulf of Taranto. After a quite unnecessary
bombing Potenza fell to the Canadians on the 19th with little
resistance, but by then the urgent need to relieve Salerno had
passed.
In his memoirs Montgomery claimed that 'he pushed on in
reply to Alexander's cry for help', but this is not borne out by an
analysis of the troops' movements. On 14 September, the last
crisis day at Salerno, his troops were still seventy-five miles
away and static, although by then the war correspondents had
reached the southern edge of the Salerno perimeter. He went on
to blame lack of supplies for his slow progress, though in fact
virtually no ammunition was consumed because there was so
little fighting, apart from the action at Pizzo. Although the
British sustained 200 casualties in one day at Pizzo, total
casualties for the campaign up to 16 September, including
sickness and accidents, were only 635. True, transporting petrol
forward was a problem, and there was a shortage of jerry cans,
many of which were being stolen by the Italian civilians.
Montgomery, moreover, could call on whatever supplies he
wanted from his own ad hoc 8th Army supply base ('Fortbase')
in Catania.
Although Montgomery complained of petrol
shortage, his Q' staff had not set a good example, because they
demanded 1,000 gallons of high octane petrol for the Army
Commander's private motor launch which, his ADC John
Henderson told me, Montgomery only used once. 40 In any case,
Sth Division carried fuel for 225 miles, and Reggio San Venere
and Cotrone were in use as ports. 63,663 men, 24,512 tons of
stores and 15,273 vehicles had been landed in Italy up to 16
September. Apart from the Taranto troops, XIII Corps had a
total strength of 58,000 with only a few rearguards left in Sicily,
but even with this massive force Montgomery failed to influence
in any way the Salerno battle. He would have encountered no
serious supply difficulties in pushing two brigades up to the
southern flank of US Fifth Army between 11 and 14 September;
at the same time Ist Airborne could have drawn all the supplies
Sicily and After
51
they
wanted from Taranto if they had advanced
towards
Potenza.
In his memoirs, General Mark Clark is kind to Montgomery.
He writes that he received several letters by courier from Eighth
Army's commander detailing his progress up the coast towards
the beach-head, and that
Montgomery suggested on
September, 'Perhaps you could put out a reconnaissance along
the road from Agropoli to meet my people who have already
started from Sapri ... it looks as if you may not be having too
good a time and I do hope all goes well with you. We are on the
way to lend a hand and it will be a great day when we actually
join hands.' Clark replied: 'It will be a pleasure to see you again
at an early date, situation here well in hand.' Certainly the
situation
was in hand by 15 September, but Clark adds
ironically: 'In view of the fact that we had narrowly escaped
being pushed into the sea I didn't mention his optimistic idea of
our sending out a reconnaissance party?4) His strongest anti-
Montgomery observation
slow advance towards Salerno despite Alexander's almost daily
efforts to prod it into greater speed.'
When, on 19 September, the Canadians took Potenza for
Montgomery, the road from Bari to Salerno was opened, giving
the Allies a firm line from which to launch an offensive up Italy.
On 21 September, as soon as the Fifth and Eighth Armies had
firmly joined hands on the Salerno-Bari line, Alexander issued a
directive ordering Clark to capture Naples, and Montgomery
the Foggia airfields on the Adriatic. Naples fell on 1 October,
after the Germans had carried out heavy demolitions, and the
Americans were then given Rome as a further objective, while
Eighth Army, after Foggia, was to push up the east coast to
Pescara, from where ran the most southerly non-mountainous
lateral road to Rome.
The Allies now had eleven divisions facing Kesselring's nine,
though the Germans had fourteen more in northern Italy ready
for contingencies in Yugoslavia,
France or the
Balkans. The
Allied divisions were much stronger numerically and had far
more tanks, guns and ammunition. In addition the Allies had
complete command of the air.
Kesselring's plan was to pull back his nine divisions first to
the Bernhard Line (so
called because it was meant to stop
Montgomery) on the Volturno and Biferno rivers, and then to
