30
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
the Mediterranean at Amilcar, Tunisia. But with Alexander
backing his general, all the diplomatic American could do was to
tell McNaughton that 'he could not interfere in a family matter
between Britain and the Commonwealth.'14
Lord Tweedsmuir, who commanded a Canadian regiment in
Sicily and Italy, told me that Simonds asked Montgomery to
keep McNaughton away. Bill Williams states that Montgomery
said to him at the time 'he would not have parades with a C-in-C
while they were fighting battles under his orders'. This Williams
felt was 'absurd and just an excuse for being high-handed'.
Montgomery showed at least some consistency in keeping
McNaughton out, for he refused to have the observers from
Cairo sent by GHQ, Middle East Forces. During the planning
stages in Cairo de Guingand, without consulting Montgomery,
had arranged with his opposite number at MEF for them to send
into Sicily three observers - a gunner, an infantryman, and a
tank soldier. The gunner observer, Colonel Godfrey Jeans,
stayed in Sicily for three weeks at Eighth Army Main HQ with
Montgomery's Major-General, Royal Artillery, Alan Hornby.
At first Montgomery thought Jeans was one of Hornby's staff,
but when he learned that he belonged to MEF he immediately
sent a message that he must leave at once or he would be
arrested and deported. Godfrey Jeans told me: 'At the time we
felt Monty just could not stand any interference from outside.'
Tragically, the tank observer, Lt-Col Archie Little, was killed
just as he got his marching orders, and the infantry observer
never got further than Malta because Montgomery, as soon as
he learnt of his presence, told him to go back to Cairo.
Montgomery was in fact cutting off his nose to spite his face,
since the job of the observers was to transmit back to the
training schools in the Middle East valuable information about
the Sicily beach landings and other aspects of the fighting, and
these training
reinforcements. 1s
schools were supplying the Eighth Army's
The Allied Military Government Officers, responsible for civil
affairs in captured Italian territory, did not come under
Montgomery's direct command. He was equally high-handed
with them. He refused to allow them in his early loading
schedules, and when in his opinion they failed to take over
captured towns quickly enough he complained strongly to their
head, Maj-Gen Lord Rennell of Rodd, in charge of Civil Affairs
Sicily and After
31
Lay and sho it in port. Mong herd
said to him: 'Why can't they get cracking on a bicycle?'
Lord Rennell found Montgomery so unco-operative that he
complained to Grigg, the Secretary of State for War. Grigg and
Rennell were friends, and both enjoyed making outspoken
criticisms in private. Grigg passed on Rennell's complaint to
Montgomery, and got back this amusing letter:
Rennell, dressed as a Major-General, arrived at my Tac HQ.
He was given tea and greeted. He asked me how AMGOT
was going. He was very pompous and rather superior; he
gave the impression that it was good of him to have come. I
told him AMGOT was going very badly and hampering our
operations. He disagreed and said it was going very well, and
became rather argumentative.
He resented any criticism of his show. In my opinion they
have a very poor lot of chaps in AMGOT; old school ties, the
peerage, diseased guardsmen, etc. 16
Montgomery had found the thirty-eight days of the Sicilian
campaign frustrating. He had so enjoyed being in sole charge in
North Africa that it was a step down to share the command and
what glory there was with the fire-eating George Patton. He was
disappointed, too, when his forward commando troops entering
Messina found Patton's infantry already there, having covered a
considerably greater distance while his army had bogged down.
Sicily was an anti-climax for him, and only a partial success.
Now, with his laurels stolen during 'Husky', Montgomery was
desperately anxious to be the 'overlord' of the Allied invasion of
Italy. He wanted a new triumph, and felt discredited because the
Germans had successfully evacuated to the mainland the bulk of
their forces, and were now preparing for the defence of Italy
under the overall command of Field-Marshal Albert Kesselring.
Although the Allies had complete air supremacy and the Royal
Navy dominated the sea, the Germans with 60,000 men and
10,000 vehicles had crossed the Straits of Messina before the
city fell on 17 August.*
* On 17 August General Alfred Jodl, Hitler's Chief of Staff, telephoned
Field-Marshal Erwin Rommel, commanding the German armies in north
