360
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
crossing, but also for the long advance over many rivers in
the German plain to the Elbe and beyond, including, we
thought, to Berlin. Monty would have left all that to Graham.
Personally I was amazed at the amount of geological data we
had about the Rhine river, sub-strata, soil, depth of mud, etc.
That was all very thorough, and as a sapper I liked it.
250,000 men were lined up for the assault; thirty divisions
together with army troops and independent brigades made up
British Second, US Ninth and Canadian First Armies. 7,311 air
sorties were flown against any targets which might conceivably
cause trouble to the attacking troops, and 50,000 tons of bombs
were dropped
Wesel
itself
was
all but destroyed.
Montgomery's exhortation to his forces ended with the words:
'Having crossed the Rhine we will crack about in the plains of
northern German chasing the enemy from pillar to post.'
Operation 'Plunder'
started at 1700 on 23 March with a
massive artillery bombardment, and at 2100 the first troops
began to cross, arriving safely on the far bank a few minutes
later. Initial German opposition was scattered and poorly
organised, and casualties among the leading Allied divisions
were consequently light. On the following day the main weight
of Montgomery's forces went in, and all went according to plan,
including 'Varsity', the airborne drop, by both parachute and
gliders, of British 6th Airborne and US 17th Airborne Divisions.
That evening Montgomery signalled the War Office, drafting the
message after the CIGS and the Prime Minister, present since
the start of the operation, had listened to the reports of the day's
fighting from his liaison officers: 'First day's operations in
Plunder have been most successful. We have got six Divisions
over the Rhine including the two Airborne. Our casualties about
1200.'10
His
signal
on the next evening, however,
reported
(provisionally) heavy airborne casualties. Although the two
airborne divisions had captured all of their first day's objectives,
together with 3,500 POWs, British 6th Airborne had lost 30 per
cent of its personnel killed or wounded: the Airlanding Brigade,
which came in gliders, had lost 70 per cent of its equipment: and
US 17th Airborne had suffered 500 casualties. On the first day of
'Plunder' Simpson's divisions had lost only 41 men killed and 450
wounded; by comparison, after three days the US airborne troops
Eisenhower's Revenge
361
had lost 1,544 total casualties, and British 6th Airborne Division
1,344. Many historians (especially American ones) have been
critical of 'Varsity''', and it is necessary now to consider whether
Montgomery was justified in his use of airborne troops for
'Plunder'.
Conscious of the planning failures of 'Market-Garden',
Montgomery made sure that there was plenty
of time for
detailed planning of the air drops, and for their co-ordination
with the 'Plunder' ground operations. A planning conference for
the airborne operation had been held at Twenty-First Army
Group Main HQ as early as 9 February, with David Belchem as
its Chairman - Richardson,
Parks,
Maj-Gen Richard Gale,
commanding British 6th Airborne Division, and Ridgway, now
GOC, US XVIII
Airborne
Corps,
also attended.
At this
conference Montgomery had insisted that the airborne troops
should be 'concentrated and in strength'; they were to drop
'within range of artillery, at least of medium artillery'; there
should be 'a quick line up between the ground and airborne
troops,'
and all these criteria were met.
stated that the earliest possible date for such an operation would
be 1 April, because US 17th Airborne Division was still in the
line, and had suffered 4,000 casualties, but he later agreed to 24
March.
The
conference
had
communications, so deficient at Arnhem, and elaborate signal
diagrams for radio nets were prepared. With the
'Varsity' laid, the airborne planners had gone on to attend two
other 'Plunder'
conferences at British Second Army HQ in
Brussels on 27 February and 9 March. 12
Montgomery's insistence that the
drop
should be close
enough for a quick link-up was militarily sound, but as a result
airborne
troops
landed
in
the German
gun
area.
In
consequence, the enemy was able to rush light anti-aircraft guns
to the dropping zones, and these contributed greatly to the high
Allied casualties. The Allied First Airborne Army report on the
operations states that zero hour for 'Varsity' was 1000 on 24
March, and that 6th Airborne Division began landing at 0952,
achieving complete tactical surprise in 'timing and locations'.
The report continues:
Initial losses were light but hostile mobile AA guns of 20mm
batteries were quickly moved to the threatened areas by the
