348
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Prime Minister's perseverance, against the more-or-less declared
wishes of Eisenhower, Marshall and Roosevelt, was a measure
of
his
certainty
that,
once
Alexander
was
installed,
Montgomery's views and aims would prevail, and that British
troops would be given their righteous, glamorous role in the final
battle.
But even as Churchill gained his point and Alexander
prepared to come to SHAEF, the unpredictable Montgomery
had changed his mind. In his memoirs he wrote that he advised
Brooke and Churchill that: 'There would be storms both in the
press and with the American Generals and [hel was happy with
the present set up.' He and Eisenhower had held a friendly
conference at Namur on 5 February, where the Supreme
Commander falsely gave Montgomery the impression 'that he
had swung over to his side. Montgomery told Dawnay that he
felt that 'Bradley was playing the lone hand', for Eisenhower
now agreed with the British view, which Bradley did not share,
that the Allies should not close up to the Rhine along its length.
At this period the influential Hearst press in America had be-
come critical of the US generals, and had stated several times that
Eisenhower did not have the time to act as land commander,
and that Montgomery should do the job under his direction The
British field-marshal gave too much weight to these press articles
and misinterpreted the American view, believing that Marshall
and Eisenhower were in favour of the British plan for strong
thrusts in the north. In this he proved to be wrong.
On 14 February Eisenhower and Montgomery had met again,
this time at Zondhoven. For once the meeting had
been
harmonious. Eisenhower promised Montgomery that he would
leave US Ninth Army, with its twelve divisions, attached to
Twenty-First Army Group, and Montgomery reported this to
Nye, the Deputy CIGS, saying in a letter written that evening
that 'the sky is now clear'. Eisenhower did, however, complain
to Montgomery that at the Malta conference Churchill had told
either the President or Marshall that he (Eisenhower) did not
visit Montgomery enough, and had also implied that the British
side of operations was being neglected. This, Montgomery's
letter to Nye continued:
Hurt him a great deal, and he went on to say he was always
being bullied by Marshall and the U.S. Chiefs of Staff for
Rows Over Strategy
349
being too British or by the P.M. and the British Chiefs of Staff
for being too American and neglecting to visit me. I am sorry
this was said at Malta; it got back to Ike very quickly and
was no doubt attributed to me and he is such an awfully
decent chap that I hate to see him upset. It may not have
improved my stock in SHAEF circles. 13
Eisenhower had put not only US Ninth Army under Twenty-
First Army Group but also one British and two US airborne
divisions. Montgomery now had all that he could realistically
hope for, and thought that this advantageous state of affairs
would continue. So when Eisenhower mentioned the command
situation during their meeting,
Montgomery agreed with him
that it was unnecessary to have Alexander interposed as a land
commander between the Supreme Command
and the army
groups, and went on to express the hope
that the present
command set-up would remain unchanged until the end of the
war, which, he said, would be in the spring. Montgomery wrote
in his letter to Nye that:
Eisenhower was delighted that I was happy about the present
command situation. There is no doubt that he was worried
about
something
when
he
arrived
at Zondhoven and
appeared so during our talks.
I have even now no idea what is at the bottom of this
worry. But it was very obvious that as soon as I had said I
was very
well satisfied with
the present
situation
about
command he became
different man; he drove away
beaming all over his face. 14
The Field-Marshal
had
miscalculated
badly,
however.
Eisenhower was in fact worried about Alexander becoming his
deputy, and had only wanted to persuade Montgomery to tell
Churchill that he too was opposed to the change in command.
On
16
February,
clearly
relieved
by
Montgomery's
friendliness, and by his agreement that it was unnecessary to
appoint a land commander, Eisenhower wrote to Brooke. This is
the letter, quoted earlier, in which the Supreme Commander
sought to set aside any idea of there being a land commander,
and to diminish Alexander's role to that of dealing primarily
with
"non-military functions'.
Brooke showed the
letter to
