84
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
In his own mind, Montgomery had decided that, after landing
and consolidating the beach-head, British Second Army would do
its best to capture Caen and the airfields beyond it. If, as he
anticipated, however, Rommel flung too many of his Panzers
and infantry divisions into the defence of Caen, the British
would attempt just to hold and contain the enemy, and to attract
as much of the German armour as possible to the Caen sector
so that the Americans thrusting down the Cherbourg peninsula
would meet weaker resistance. He did not intend at this stage to
risk the sacrifice of his British divisions in a desperate effort at a
break-out in the Caen sector. He knew only too well that the
British and Canadian reserves of manpower were too low for
such a slaughter, and that no fresh British divisions could ever
be raised because of the country's already
daunting com-
mitments, although more US divisions were available.
Conscious of the disaster of the Dieppe raid in 1942, both
Montgomery and the American commanders insisted
on
overwhelming fire support. Montgomery therefore plumped for
forty-five minutes of daylight before touch-down on the beaches,
so that the fire support could be observed and adjusted. It was to
prove a wise decision. The landings, he noted, must be made at
full moon and low tide, and this meant only 5, 6, or 7 June,
allowing a margin of two days' postponement for bad weather.
Montgomery and de Guingand were still having difficulty in
keeping Tedder, Leigh-Mallory and Air Vice-Marshal Arthur
Cor
n (commanding the Tactical Air Forces) happy, so
glibly
promised
the air force
airfields beyo
Caen whi
commanders the
were
nlikely to be to be taken
in their heart of hearts, they knew
This pr
mise, and the use
for some time after the landings.
of ti
mmuniti
unrealistic phase map, gave
n to Montgomery's critic
ttle
hung
The
erdict
later, when the Normandy
history,
ng for the landin
however,
on
in Normandy,
and his conduct of the
lould allow
no such
ent was magnificent, and the way in
tails to his planning staff and went on
ting tours stamps him with greatness.
he did
not attend
Eisenhower's
ay or 29 May, preferring to stump
led details.
to have a pet
Montgomery and the Invasion
aversion on which he could let off his tensions,
became clearer as the invasion drew near. With the strain of
waiting for D-Day, the Prime Minister worried more and more
about the large
personnel which showed up on the charts of loading priorities.
He now began to query the loading programme. The War Office
could give him no satisfactory answer; all they were able to say
was that Montgomery's planning staff had certified that these
scales were essential.
A week before D-Day Churchill went down to Twenty-First
Army Group HQ, which had now moved to Portsmouth, and
there suggested to Montgomery that he (Churchill) should
address the latter's staff on the subject of unnecessary vehicles
and
unnecessary
clerical
personnel.
Characteristically
Montgomery would have none of it, and said to Churchill:
It would be unwise for you to speak to my staff. Even if I
have made mistakes it is now too late to put them right. The
loaded trains are on the way to the ports and many of the
boats are already loaded. To alter things now would dislocate
'Overlord'. I myself am sure that every single man and vehicle
is necessary. If you do not believe me and insist on last-
minute alterations you must have lost confidence in me."
It was a tense moment. Suddenly Churchill saw that he had
left things too late, and that 'Overlord' was beyond his control.
He could not afford a quarrel with Montgomery at this eleventh
hour. He was in fact almost certainly right about the loading
priorities and the unnecessary personnel, and undoubtedly he
Montgomery led him out of his office and introduced him to his
waiting staff, all of whom knew what the two men had been
discussing. Churchill rose to the occasion and acknowledged
defeat, saying with an impish grin: 'Gentlemen, today I must not
talk to you? A clash between these two dedicated leaders had
been averted, but it had shown that Montgomery knew how
enormously powerful was his
own position vis-à-vis the Prime
Minister. It was an incident that did nothing to make him more
main Twenty-First Army Group HQ had moved to
Southwick House, Portsmouth at the end of April, leaving only
