12
Ardennes
At dawn on 16 December 1944 von Rundstedt and Model, on
Hitler's direct orders, launched Fifth Panzer and Sixth SS
Panzer Armies across five-inch deep snow against the American
forces in the Ardennes. They struck at the thinnest point in the
defensive line, held by only two inexperienced infantry divisions
since the terrain was considered by the Allies to be unsuitable
for this type of warfare. Now, however,
armoured cars quickly drove deep into the US lines, creating
havoc.
Hitler had ordered von Rundstedt in September to build up
reserves of petrol and ammunition for the attack, but it was
expected that the Panzers would advance far and fast enough to
capture sufficient petrol from American dumps to fuel their
onward progress. The German plan was to crash the two well-
equipped tank
armies, with
Seventh Army providing
flank
protection in the south, through the weakest American divisions
and then turn west and north towards the Meuse. The assault
depended upon cloud cover to ground the dominant Allied air
forces and, luckily for the Panzers, low cloud and fog, with rain
or snow, prevailed in the Ardennes for over a week. Soon the
Germans
had driven a wedge between
US
First and Third
Armies, and within five days were closing up to the Meuse.
surprise.
Montgomery, like the Americans, was caught completely by
The day before the attack started he had written to
Eisenhower saying that he wanted to go to England on
December to spend Christmas with his son, and on the morning
of 16 December he sent out this report, contained within
Directive M538:
Ardennes
305
3. The enemy is at present fighting a defensive campaign on
all fronts; his situation is such that he cannot stage major
offensive operations. Furthermore at all costs he has to
prevent the war from entering on a mobile phase; he has
not the transport or the petrol that would be necessary for
mobile operations, nor could his tanks compete with ours
in the mobile battle.
4. The enemy is in a bad way; he has had a tremendous
battering and lost heavily in men and equipment. On no
account can we relax or have a 'stand still' in the winter
months; it is vital that we keep going, so as not to allow
him time to recover and so as to wear down his strength
still further. There will be difficulties caused by mud, cold,
lack of air support during periods of bad weather, and so
on. But we must continue to fight the enemy hard during
the winter months.
5. The main objective of the Allies on the western front is the
RUHR; if we can cut it off from the rest of Germany the
enemy capacity to continue the struggle must gradually
peter out.
A further, and very important, object of our operations
must be to force mobile war on the Germans.
Paradoxically, as the report was being signed Hitler himself
had already forced mobile war upon the Allies; Montgomery
can seldom have been so far astray in his appreciation of a battle
situation. Having signed this statement and dealt with other
business at his Tac HQ, a relaxed and confident Field-Marshal
flew to Eindhoven for golf with the professional, Dai Rees. Before
he had played many holes,
however, he received an urgent
message which sent him hurrying back to his HQ.
I showed Montgomery's Directive M538 of 16 December to
Brigadier Williams, who told me that he could not recall ever
having seen it before and that paragraph 4 was typical of his
chief. He added:
Monty ignored my Intelligence Summary of 3 December,
which made it clear Sixth Panzer [Armyl was waiting in
reserve intact.
Monty never showed his
draft
orders
to
anyone. He just wrote them. On this occasion he ignored my
briefing
about Rundstedt's Sixth Panzer Army. He was
