The Canadians on the Coast
When Twenty-First Army Group
crossed the Seine on 30
August, Canadian First Army, reinforced by British I Corps,
began mopping up German
resistance
on the
coast with
considerable élan. In his directive
M520 of 26 August,
Montgomery showed a deep understanding of Canadian and
Scottish feeling, writing: 'All Scotland will be grateful if the
Commander Canadian Army can arrange that the Highland
Division can capture
St Valery. I have no doubt that the
Canadian Second Division will capture Dieppe.
Montgomery's message was greatly appreciated by both the
Scots and the Canadians, for both divisions would now have the
chance to even the scores. The first-line 5 1st (Highland) Division
had been captured almost intact by Rommel at St Valéry in June
1940, chiefly because Churchill, in a vain bid to boost French
morale, had insisted that the division stayed in France when all
was lost. The Canadians, during their disastrous raid on Dieppe
on 19 August 1942, had lost almost 1,000 dead, with total
casualties of nearly 3,500, in nine bloody hours. Now St Valéry
quickly fell to the Scots, Dieppe to the Canadians, and the
inhabitants of both towns gave their liberators enthusiastic
receptions, in which they paid tribute to their predecessors.'
In his personal relations with the Canadians,
however,
Montgomery often made mistakes. In 1942, for instance, he was
barracked while addressing a Canadian unit - he had picked his
moment badly, too near to the troops' mealtime. A few days
later the Canadian I Corps GOC, Lt-Gen Henry Crerar,
travelling in Montgomery's car,
got out his cigarettes
and
offered one to the British general. Montgomery refused, and
The Canadians on the Coast
253
ordered the driver to stop, saying, "Smoke if you have to, but if
you do I will get out of the car.
The two men clashed later in
Italy, when Crerar informed Montgomery that he would be
visiting the Canadian Division from time to time and wanted to
leave batmen, drivers and vehicles at Eighth Army Main HQ -
Montgomery refused to let the Canadian 'clutter up' Eighth
Army Main. On another occasion Crerar sent a signal stating
that he wanted to visit Montgomery, who replied that he did not
want to see Crerar. Montgomery's Canadian liaison officer had
a most difficult job in soothing over a potentially dangerous
international incident.
Again, in Sicily Montgomery refused to allow the GOC-in-C,
Canadian First Army, Lt-Gen Andrew McNaughton, to visit
Canadian Ist Division. As has been said earlier, this was ill
received; plainly Montgomery,.
brought up in the days of
colonialism,
did
not
appreciate
the
emergence
of
the
Commonwealth. While in Normandy, he told the War Office
firmly that he would not accept Canadian Army HQ 'with all its
troops' into the narrow
bridgehead
and, despite protests,
Crerar's HQ only became operational on 31 July, even though
Crerar himself had been in France for weeks.
Bill Williams told me:
Monty's handling of the Canadians was strange ... [Hel did
not like Crerar, whom he used to describe, correctly, in my
view, as more of a
Quartermaster-General than a Field
Commander. With hindsight, I feel Monty was astonishing in
his relationship with all the Dominion troops.
He ordered
them around like British troops, ignoring the devolution of the
British Empire ... he was completely
out of date.
Still, he
handled them well in battle. He liked the Canadian General
Guy Simonds very much and he respected Simonds's qualities
as a soldier greatly, but he was far too grand in his attitude to
their commanders
and could never understand they were
allies, not subordinates. Because he admired
Simonds so
much he frequently bypassed Crerar and dealt with him
direct. The best way to describe Monty's manner with Crerar
is de haut en bas.
Maj-Gen Guy Simonds commanded Canadian 1st
Division,
part of Eighth Army, under Montgomery in Sicily in 1943. In
