244
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
badgered by Bradley and Patton, had failed to give VIII Corps
priority in supplies.
The main task for Gavin's US 82nd Division was to capture
the nine-span, 350-yard-long road bridge at Grave and the
massive 1200-yard-long highway bridge over the
Maas at
Nijmegen. These bridges had to be kept open and usable, so that
the Guards' tanks could advance unchecked to Arnhem
otherwise
British
1st
Airborne Division
was
doomed.
Unfortunately, however, Gavin and Browning, instead of giving
absolute priority to Nijmegen after taking the Grave bridge,
concentrated instead on defending the Groesbeek Ridge between
Beek, east of Nijmegen, and Mook, on the Waal east of Grave,
fearing counter-attacks from German armour hidden in the
Reichswald Forest. In fact, this enemy armour did not exist; US
508th Parachute Battalion found no tanks in the area, and were
told by many
civilians that the reports of armour in the
Reichswald were false. Troops occupied in this fruitless search
should have been ordered at once to Nijmegen, when it became
clear that there was no Panzer threat.
Before take-off from England, Gavin and Browning had
decided on the following priorities: first, Groesbeek
Ridge;
second, Grave Bridge; and third, Nijmegen Bridge. Gavin
himself placed
greater importance on Nijmegen
than did
Browning, and in his memoirs recorded that, seventy-two hours
before take-off, he had decided that 'If I could possibly spare a
battalion I knew I had to commit it to the Nijmegen [road]
bridge as quickly as I could send it in that direction.' He added
that he gave a verbal order to US 508th and 1st Parachute
Battalions to attack Nijmegen on the evening of D-day if the
situation
at Groesbeek
was
quiet. In the event, a fatal
misunderstanding occurred. The situation at Groesbeek was
indeed quiet by the evening of the 17th, but Colonel Lindquist,
commanding US 508th Parachute, did not obey this order, and
later testified that he understood his orders were to send no
troops to Nijmegen until all other objectives were secured. Nor
did Colonel Warren's US ist Parachute Battalion attack the
bridge as Gavin had anticipated, assuming instead a defensive
position on the outskirts of Nijmegen. In actual fact, when
Warren's battalion reached the town the bridge was defended by
only
arrived.5
eighteen men, although German reinforcements
Arnhem
245
Certainly Gavin showed more concern about the delay in
capturing Nijmegen bridge than
Browning.
As late as the
afternoon of D-plus-1 Browning rejected a plan for a strong
effort against the town's rail
and
road bridges, instead
instructing 82nd Airborne to concentrate on holding
the
Groesbeek Ridge. By adopting the wrong priorities, Browning
sealed the fate of 'Market-Garden', but it is surprising that
neither Horrocks nor Montgomery insisted before D-day that
Nijmegen bridge should be
the prime objective. Browning
obviously interpreted his orders as being that he need not order
an attack on Nijmegen bridge until XXX Corps' tanks arrived,
but it is strange that Montgomery condoned this obvious error.
Frost wrote:
The Guards had expected to be able to motor on and over,
but when they arrived, late as it was, the bridge was still
firmly in German hands. Now the 82nd, trained at vast
trouble and expense to drop by parachute over obstacles, had
to cross the river in the teeth of intense opposition in flimsy
canvas folding boats that they had never seen before. When
so bravely it was done, it was too late.®
Frost also complains that although Browning continually
stressed to Urquhart the imperative need to capture 'Arnhem
Bridge. And hold it', he never stressed to Gavin in the same way
the vital need to secure Nijmegen bridge.
The official Twenty-First Army
Group report on 'Market-
Garden' bears signs of having been heavily doctored by
Montgomery. In the section entitled 'Important Lessons' there is
this statement: 'If the weather had been good the operation
would have been 100% success instead of 90% because the
Poles
would have dropped on D-plus-2 and
352
Glider
Regiment on D-plus-2 as planned and normal scale of air supply
would have been available."' That Arnhem was 90 per cent
successful is a theme reiterated by Montgomery in his memoirs
and in talks he gave: such a view is, however, both wrong and
unworthy of him. British 1st Airborne Division casualties were
appalling; the
Nijmegen
bridgehead gained
could not be
exploited until March of 1945; and the Allies were left with a
deep salient to defend. Meanwhile, because of 'Market Garden'
the opportunity to clear swiftly the Scheldt and open up
