220
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Airborne, complained bitterly to Browning about the reduction
in his division's lift, and was told that priority had been given to
US 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions,
whose task was to
secure a clear run through to Arnhem for XXX Corps' armour.
Yet even though Urquhart's troops had the crucial task of
capturing the vital Arnhem bridge, his division was allocated no
extra aircraft. It was explained to him that since both Eindhoven
and Nijmegen lay on XXX Corps' route to Arnhem his division
would be left out on a limb, without chance of relief, if these
bridges were not taken the southern drops must, therefore,
have priority.
Others shared Urquhart's misgivings. Maj-Gen Stanislaw
Sosabowski, GOC Polish 1 Independent Parachute Brigade
Group, which for the operation was to be within Urquhart's
divisional command, told Browning that the plan for his troops
to land near Arnhem on the second day was 'disastrous', and
that the senior British planners were guilty of reckless over-
confidence'. Browning's poetic reply was that 'the Red Devils
and the gallant Poles can do it'. When Maj-Gen James Gavin,
GOC US 82nd Airborne Division, read the plan he said: 'They
cannot mean it', and Bradley was equally incredulous. Maj-Gen
Maxwell Taylor, commanding US 101st Airborne Division, was
so appalled by the decision not to drop parachute troops on the
south side of the Zon bridge at Eindhoven, owing to the number
of German AA guns in the Eindhoven area, that he by-passed
Browning and Brereton and appealed directly to Montgomery to
overrule the decision. When Montgomery telephoned Browning,
however, he was firmly told that it was much too late to alter the
plan in any way 11
General Sir Charles Richardson, then the brigadier in charge
of plans at Twenty-First Army Group, told me that he only saw
the Airborne Corps plan on D-minus-2, by which time it was
final, and Maj-Gen David Belchem (BGS, Ops at Twenty-First
Army Group) confirmed this. Belchem thought that the plan
was 'rotten', but considered that all they could do was to ask
Montgomery for a postponement. In fact, on 11 September
Montgomery had sought just such a postponement from
Eisenhower.
Montgomery had passed a sleepless night on the 10th,
worried about not being able to get VIII Corps into line by 17
September, and in the morning he signalled Eisenhower that the
The Fatal Wrong Decision
221
23rd, or possible even the 26th, were the earliest dates possible
for D-day. The signal galvanised Eisenhower into sending Bedell
Smith on 12 September from Granville to Montgomery's HQ.
There, to Montgomery's delight, Bedell Smith promised an extra
1,000 tons of supplies per day by air or road for Twenty-First
Army Group; he also said that Patton's southern drive would he
halted so that the bulk of American supplies could go to US
First Army for operations on Montgomery's eastern flank. In
addition, three US
divisions would be grounded
and their
transport assigned to Twenty-First Army Group. Montgomery
felt that he had won his battle, and reinstated 17 September as
D-day for 'Market-Garden', declaring that he hoped 'the war
would soon be won'. He was deaf to warnings from his staff.
Bedell Smith also gave Montgomery a verbal assurance that
US First Army would operate on the British eastern flank, and
that petrol earmarked for American forces would be provided in
order to bring up British VIII Corps to Holland, together with
its non-divisional artillery - the last was still immobilised in the
Seine valley because of lack of fuel.
Unhappily, Bedell Smith's promises were not
Elements of VIII Corps and the non-divisional artillery did not
reach the Meuse-Escaut Canal until D-plus-2. The three US
divisions to be grounded were not in the line, as Montgomery
had thought, but had just landed in Normandy - they had no
American Red Ball* convoys did start running to
Brussels from Normandy on 16 September, but Montgomery's
supply airlift was only slightly increased, from 400 tons a day to
500. Montgomery was forced, therefore, to rely on his own
resources for his build-up. He had to choose between supplies
and extra troops, and decided to dispense with VIII Corps. As a
result, during the advance to Arnhem XXX Corps' right flank
became dangerously exposed - US First Army was by then
deeply involved around Aachen against tough opposition, and
thus was unable to conduct an offensive in support of 'Market-
Garden' on XXX Corps' right.
This was not Eisenhower's fault. On 16 September he had
asked Bradley to halt Patton and to give priority in everything to
US First Army, so that it could support Montgomery. Patton
*The Red Ball Express was a one-way truck transport supply system,
improvised by the Americans in order to keep up with the sudden swift Allied
advance in the late summer of 1944.
