323
322
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Unfortunately, the
British press was now
interpreting
Montgomery's temporary command of the north of the bulge as
presaging his being put in overall command of a number of
American divisions. In Washington Marshall was so angered by
reports on 29 December in The Times and other nationals,
which stated that Eisenhower would leave US First and Ninth
Armies under Montgomery, that he signalled the Supreme
Commander:
They may or may not have brought to your attention
articles in certain London papers proposing a British Deputy
Commander for all your ground forces and implying that you
have undertaken too much.
Under no circumstances make any concession of any kind
whatsoever. You not only have our complete confidence but
there would be terrific resentment in this country following
such action. I am not assuming you had in mind any such a
concession. I just wish you to be sure of our attitude on this
side. You are doing a grand job, and go on giving them hell.
On New Year's Eve, de Guingand had arrived at Versailles
to explain to Eisenhower why Montgomery would not attack on
1 January. Montgomery, he said, felt that 'the Allies had the
Germans on the run like a wet hen from one side of the salient to
the other'; time was on the Allies' side, and they should let the
Germans exhaust themselves before attacking.
Eisenhower, who liked de Guingand, nevertheless turned on
him and said that this was a breach of faith by Montgomery,
who had promised at the Hasselt conference three days before to
start his attack on 1 January; he sent his staff scurrying through
the files to see if the promise was in writing. De Guingand
calmly said: 'Knowing Monty, I can tell you the last thing he
would do would be to put a commitment to attack on paper.
At that moment, as Eisenhower was breathing fire against
Montgomery
not
co-ordinating
his
attack
with
the
Americans, a tactless letter for the Supreme Commander arrived
from the subject of his present rage. As usual, Montgomery had
decided that he must follow up his discussion with Eisenhower
on the 28th at Hasselt with the usual written confirmation of his
cogent
arguments - plainly
he believed that the Supreme
Commander had swung round to his view, but this time he went
Ardennes
too far with the written word:
My dear Ike,
It was very pleasant to see you again yesterday and to have
a talk on the battle situation.
2. I would like to refer to the matter of operational control of
all forces engaged in the northern thrust towards the Ruhr,
i.e. 12 and 21 Army Groups.
I think we want to be careful, because we have had one
very definite failure when we tried to produce a formula
that would meet this case..
3. When you and Bradley and myself met at Maastricht on 7
December, it was clear to me that Bradley opposed any
idea that I should have operational control over his Army
Group; so I did not then pursue the subject.
I therefore consider that it will be necessary for you to
be very firm on the subject, and any loosely worded
statement will be quite useless.
4. I consider that if you merely use the word 'co-ordination',
it will not work. The person designated by you must have
powers
of
operational
direction
and
control
of the
operations that will follow on your directive.
5. I would
say that your directive will assign tasks
and
objectives to the two Army Groups, allot boundaries, and
so on.
Thereafter preparations are made and the battle is
joined.
It is then that one commander must have powers to
direct and control the operations; you cannot possibly do
it yourself, and so you would have to nominate someone
else.
6. I suggest that your directive should finish with this
sentence:
'12 and 21 Army Groups will develop operations in
accordance with
the
above
instructions.
From now
onwards full
operational direction,
control,
and
co-
ordination of these operations is vested in the C-in-C 21
Army
Group, subject to such
instructions as may
be
issued by the Supreme Commander from time to time.
I put this matter up to you again only because I am so
anxious not to have another failure.
