218
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
halt Patton, but it was important in the Supreme Commander's
eyes that, in the end, the American armies should be seen to be
at least equal victors with
the
British.
The
two Allied
commanders now agreed on 17 September as D-day for
'Market-Garden'.
At I Airborne Corps HQ at Moor Park, rushed plans were
made for the Arnhem drop, while Dempsey
and Horrocks
conferred about the operations for the link-up. Liaison between
Second Army and XXX Corps and the Airborne Headquarters
was, however,
unsatisfactory,
for
neither
Horrocks
nor
Dempsey sent a sufficiently senior or experienced representative
to the Arnhem planning conferences. And there was, in any
case, an even greater urgency than that imposed by the
September deadline, for it would take five days to brief the
necessary aircrew, which were dispersed on twenty-two different
airfields.'
Allied First Airborne Army HQ, situated at Ascot, was a new
joint British-US creation, bristling with teething problems and
equipped with few trained planners. There were problems with
the commanders as well, for Browning never managed to
establish close relations with his American opposite numbers,
while Brereton, in the words of David Belchem, 'was pleasant
and kind, but never came alight until after half a bottle of
Scotch'. The American historian Russell Weighey is less
generous, writing that Brereton was 'perpetually discontented
and querulous' because of his ill luck in the Far Eastlo (when
commanding the US Far East Air Forces in the Philippines in
December 1941, his bombing strike force had been destroyed in
a surprise attack on Clark Field by Japanese aircraft).
Unfortunately, the problems did not end at Airborne HQ.
There were not enough transport aircraft available to carry
more than half the Airborne Army in one lift, so that instead of
three divisions landing on D-day, as Montgomery anticipated,
only three half-divisions could be dropped. When Montgomery
heard this he sent Belchem to see Brereton at Ascot, to try and
persuade him to find the aircraft for at least a partial double-
run' by Ist Airborne Division, which was to take and hold
Arnhem bridge. However, Maj-Gen Paul Williams, head of US
Troop Carrier Command, firmly turned this suggestion down,
saying that it would be impossible because of the strain on the
aircrews'. Maj-Gen Roy Urquhart, commanding British 1st
• Wesel
HOLLAND
117 SEP 1944
a Nijmegen - ----
V. Eindhoven
I7 SEP)
Maastricht SEP
Rotterdam
Antwerp
Osteud|
alais
Dunkirk
30 SEP 1
BRITISH
21st ARMY
GROUP
Boulogne o
(22 SEP
North
GERMANY
GROUP
21 ARMY
GROUP
The Seine to Antwerp & Arnhem
DA PARIS
Kilometres
