24
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
invasion was scheduled for early June.
Brooke, the CIGS, had advised Churchill that Montgomery's
lack of tact and tendency to arrogance made the American
generals dislike him, and that they refused to back him as sole
commander of 'Husky'. While in Algiers Brooke recorded his
opinion of Montgomery in his diary:
He requires a lot of education to make him see the whole
situation outside the Eighth Army orbit. A difficult mixture to
handle; brilliant commander and trainer of men, but liable to
commit untold errors due to lack of tact, lack of appreciation
of other people's outlook. It is most depressing that the
Americans do not like him and it will always be a difficult
matter to have him fighting in close proximity to them. He
wants guiding and watching continually, and I do not think
Alex is sufficiently strong and rough with him.
Brooke was a close friend and admirer of Montgomery, and
remained devoted to him until the end of the war, which makes
his
criticism revealing. He was always disparaging about
Alexander who, according to one historian, acted in Sicily and
Italy only as 'Monty's glorified road manager'.
Montgomery's task with Eighth Army was to land XIII
Corps (Lt-Gen Miles Dempsey) just south of Syracuse, and
XXX Corps (Lt-Gen Oliver Leese) astride the Pachino
peninsula to capture the airfield there. Both the American and
the British landings were to be preceded by airborne assaults,
with British 1st Airborne Division landing in gliders and US
82nd Airborne parachuting in.
Morale in the Italian Sixth Army, defending Sicily, was low
and their fighting troops were in poor condition, while the Italian
battle fleet was at La Spezia, 1,000 miles away, and reluctant to
leave port. But the German 15th Panzer Division had nearly
100 tanks, and the Herman Goering infantry division was on its
way - German morale was high. There were 315,000 Italian and
50,000 German troops on the island.
More troops and ships took part in the Sicilian invasion than
in the initial Normandy assault. 2,500 naval vessels carried
115,000 British Empire and 66,000 American assault troops in
the largest amphibious operation in history.
At 0245 on 10 July Montgomery's Eighth Army assault went
Sicily and After
25
in, and made good progress against light opposition. The enemy,
however, reacted more strongly against Patton's US Seventh
made counter-attacks with tanks against the
Americans at Gela. These were beaten off with the help of naval
guns. By the evening of the 10th Eighth Army held forty miles of
coastline, and the port of Syracuse - so important to the Allies -
was captured without opposition. Montgomery himself landed at
1700 on 12 July (D + 2); Brigadier Sir Edgar (Bill) Williams, head
of Eighth Army Intelligence, told me they both bathed in the sea
at Syracuse that evening.
Montgomery signalled Alexander at Fifteenth Army Group
on 12 July: 'Battle situation very good. Everything going very
well. No need for you to come unless you wish', but to his own
Main HQ he reported: 'Most of Airborne Brigade landed in sea
and thus could not contribute to the operation."
Although
Montgomery's airborne landings had been disastrous. On the
night of 9 July 1,200 men of British 1 Airlanding Brigade were
flown into Sicily in 144 gliders. The American pilots of the
towing aircraft were inexperienced and most of them loosed
their gliders far too early. Sixty-nine gliders fell into the sea,
fifty-six were scattered along the southern coast, and only twelve
gliders with around 100 men landed on the target, the Ponte
Grande bridge near Syracuse. Eight officers and sixty-five men
held the bridge until they were relieved, but the proportion of
casualties amongst these scarce, highly trained elite troops was
tragic.
1 Parachute Brigade, which Montgomery sent in to attack the
Primosole Bridge between Augusta and Catania on the night of
13 July, fared
worse.
Although Montgomery had captured
Syracuse and Augusta the German armour held up his advance
through the plain to Catania, and he badly needed the Primosole
Bridge. 1,900 parachutists in 126 Dakotas piloted by Americans,
together with nineteen gliders carrying anti-tank guns, dropped
at the same time as the Germans dropped their redoubtable 4th
Parachute Regiment from the air almost into the same dropping
zone. Of the British, only 250 of all ranks could be assembled
after landing. They captured the bridge, but after removing the
mines and detonators they ran out of ammunition and were
forced to leave the bridge to the Germans. It was not recaptured
until 16 July - Montgomery had wasted his airborne troops.
