378
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
The CIGS remained sympathetic towards his protégé in the
hour of his disappointment. The Chiefs of Staff met with the
Prime Minister on 1 April, and cabled the Joint Chiefs of Staff in
Washington that London was opposed to the shift in command
proposed for US Ninth Army, and asked for the decision to be
reconsidered. To console Montgomery, Brooke wired him on 3
April that he was disputing the change with
Washington,
although he considered
that Eisenhower
would be left a
completely free hand. The CIGS expressed his full sympathy
with the difficulties in which Montgomery had been placed, but
advised him that,
since he had made his views
clear to
Eisenhower, he should take no further action..
Kit Dawnay told me that at this time Montgomery would
frequently ask him 'Why are they so hostile to me at SHAEF?
Who are my enemies?' and Brigadier Williams provided me with
a plausible answer. He told me that Strong, the British major-
general in charge of SHAEF Intelligence, together with Maj-
Gens Gale, Whiteley and Morgan, had all developed
considerable loyalty
for,
and bias towards, that largely
American organisation.
Williams continued:
'Montgomery
continually rubbed them up the wrong way. Morgan and
Whiteley were always under suspicion at SHAEF which was
dominantly an American HQ because they were 'limeys'
Therefore they had to over-work their passages to be accepted
properly, and latterly this meant being anti-Monty and anti-21
Army Group?
General Sir Charles Richardson told me that he never went to
visit SHAEF if he could possibly avoid it, and this typified the
Twenty-First Army Group approach. SHAEF had become too
large and impersonal. It was remote from the fighting and its
atmosphere was alien to the British-trained staff officers at
Twenty-First Army Group and in the War Office, and without a
doubt these
attitudes,
altogether of Montgomery's making.
and the frequent quarrels, were not
On 6 April, Montgomery made another effort to persuade
Eisenhower to let him go on to Berlin. He wrote to the Supreme
Commander, saying that if British Second Army was over the
Elbe and captured Hamburg it should advance towards Lübeck
and south-east to Berlin, and that 'this should be comparatively
easy ... I consider Berlin has definite value as an objective and I
have no doubt the Russians feel the same; but they may well
Eisenhower's Revenge
379
pretend this is not the case.' The letter drew a dusty response
from his superior, who replied on the 8th: 'Berlin has political
and psychological significance, but of far greater importance will
be the location of the remaining German forces ... on them 1 am
going to concentrate my attention ... it is not Bradley's role to
protect your southern flank. My Directive is quite clear on this
point.' He did, however, add that if he had a chance to take
Berlin cheaply he would do so. Montgomery's last chance to
deliver the final blow had gone, and Eisenhower's phrase 'it is
not Bradley's role to protect your southern flank' was plainly
intended as a snub.34
Montgomery instructed Dawnay to write an interim view of
the controversy in the Log:
At this moment of swift advance following the victory in the
battle for the Rhine crossings a cloud suddenly appeared
which threatened the prospect of reaping to the full the fruits
of the victory which had been gained ...
The Field-Marshal moreover had heard privately that there
had been great political pressure, from the staff at SHAEF
and from General Bradley, to get Ninth US Army back under
command of 12 US Army Group. And with victory in sight,
the violent anti-British element at SHAEF was pressing for a
set-up which would clip the wings of the British Group of
Armies, and would relegate it to an unimportant role on the
flank, while the Americans finished off the campaign alone ...
... He [the Field-Marshall considered that the Allies were
now repeating the mistake they had made in September, 1944.
Then, having won a great victory south of the SEINE, the
Allied armies advanced to the RHINE on a broad front; they
were nowhere strong enough to get decisive results quickly.
And so the war dragged on through the winter of 1944-45.
In April, 1945, the Allies had achieved a very favourable
position; they had won the battles for the Rhineland and
the battle of the RHINE, inflicting smashing defeats on the
German Army; now once again the Allied armies
advance on a wide front, nowhere strong enough to get decisive
results quickly. And so the war would drag on longer than
otherwise would be the case.
The Field-Marshal had always considered that the correct
strategy for the campaign in north-western Europe was to be
