132
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Technically Erskine was right in saying that it was a
misuse of tanks, but it did not matter as we had any number
of tanks but we were terribly short of infantry. It was really a
dash forward with tanks to the Bourguebus Ridge after mass
bombardment. Dempsey told me he did not mind if we lost
700 tanks in our three armoured divisions in his corps. I lost
200, but did not have heavy casualties in men, and a
proportion of my tanks were recoverable.
General Sir Nigel Poett, then commanding 5 Parachute
Brigade, had a grandstand view of the start of 'Goodwood' from
a hill to the south-east of the start line. He told me that he sat in
an armchair on the first floor of the house which was his HQ
and that
the engineers had dug trenches all around our HQ house so
that we should be safe during the massive bombardment
before 'Goodwood'. In fact not a single bomb fell near us T
saw our tanks advancing splendidly until they got out of
range of our artillery. Then they were picked off one by one:
The mistake was not using them in conjunction with
infantry. The desert philosophy was that a tank is like a ship
at sea, and they had not learnt that this simply did not work
in Normandy ... When I was Commandant of the Staff
College after the war I always told the students that
'Goodwood' was a misuse of tanks.
Of course Monty was right, as Pip Roberts said, in saying
our bridgehead over the Orne was vulnerable, but it was
nothing like as vulnerable at the time of 'Goodwood' as it had
been on D-Day.
Lord Carver, who commanded an independent armoured
brigade which was in reserve during 'Goodwood', disagrees with
General Poett. He told me:
Monty did not misuse tanks at 'Goodwood'. He had plenty.
On that ground infantry could do nothing except by night
battalions. Three of these would have been lorried infantry and the remaining
battalion would have been motorised, which meant it travelled in armoured
cars and bren carriers.
Normandy Assault
133
completely different from the bocage and only suitable for a
tank to attack in daylight. Although the ground was right for
tanks, the operation was a failure tactically ...
been slaughtered in daylight attacks.
My criticism of Monty is that he had not learnt the lesson
from El Alamein that you cannot in open country
good to carry
them
forward.
They needed
the next attack
in the 'Goodwood'
area by putting
attack.
Brigadier Tony Hunter, who commanded the motorised infantry
battalion of the Rifle Brigade which took Hubert Folie, told me:
'We rode in on armoured half-tracks and brens, and made a
successful attack on Hubert Folie. We
were part of Pip
Roberts's 11th
Armoured Division infantry.
In my
view
'Goodwood' was a success, and Montgomery achieved what he
set out to do, and what General Dempsey's Second Army orders
said.'
The next day, 19 July, Dempsey tried to advance again with his
tired and depleted troops. He still had superiority in numbers of
tanks and men, but he made only limited progress although the
Germans were near the end of their tether.
7th
Armoured
attacked Bourguebus, only to find that it 'bristled with Tigers
and 88s' - they accomplished little.
On the 20th, the day of the bomb plot against Hitler,
Armoured attacked
Bourguebus again,
and
found
that
the
Germans had retreated. On their right flank the Canadians had
taken their objectives in the town of Caen and had advanced
along the east bank of the River Orne beyond Fleury, as set out
in Montgomery's orders of 15 July. They had not, however,
been able to give him 'the through communication' and the 'very
