108
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1943
Ultra intercepts hecame good. Miter had amazng, wo
because all our airerall were grounded when his Arden
offensive began
By 2240 on 16 December Ultra had contirmed so Twenty
Fust Army Group that on the next day German fighter secret
would support the assault by the two Panzer armies. No one ar
the Allied side. however, appears to have been undely weat
although at first Montgomery took the German attack
seriously than did the Americans or the staff at SHAEF Fal
instance, Strong's weekly SHAEF Intelligence Summary of 17
December (alleged by one historian to have beer
doctored®) dismissed the enemy offensive as 'a diversionary
attack on a fair scale', and declared that it was too early to 1a)
much about it. insisting it was designed only 'to relieve pressust
from the Cologne, Dusseldorf and Saar sectors.'
On the same day Montgomery, not over worned by tha
situation south of his army group, presented medals to tar
Canadian troops, and held a conference to discuss "Vernabie
the proposed combined British-Canadian attack to close up ar
the Rhine. But on the following day, 18 December, there cam
the alarming news that Ist SS Panzer Division was within a len
mies of Stavelot, where there was a giant American petrol dump
containing two million gallons, and almost no troops to defend it
Fortunately, the Panzer columns turned away three miles from
the dump, but there were other German gains. The Panzers went
pouring through a fifty mile gap in the line, and the American
forces were scattering in front of them. By nightfall German
forward troops were some twenty miles over the Belgian frontier.
Montgomery, well briefed, but still effectively out of the
battle. signalled Brooke on 20 December:
Situation in American area is not not good ... great confusion
and all signs of full scale withdrawal. There is definite lack of
grip and control
Ar: and atmosphere of great pessimism in
First and Ninth Armies. Bradley is sull al Luxemburg but !
understand he is moving as his HQ are in danger... I have
heard nothing from Ike or Bradley and had no orders of
requests of any sort. My own opinion is the American forces
have been cut in half and the Germans can reach the Meust
• David Irving, Hitler's War. p.342.
A nuenne
109
at Namur wthout opposition. The Command act up always
faulty is now futile. I have tld Winteley What Bue ought so
place me in operational command at all troops on sorthern
half of the
front. He should be given a direct order bo
someone to do so. The situation needs to be handled very
frmly and with a tight prip
Brooke, fearing thai Montgomery would upset L senhower by
badgering him for command of the nouthern sector mcluded use
following in his reply
5. Agree would be a great advantags to have
Commander, (preferably yourself for all troops on
northern half of froat. But only authonty which can ande
Eisenhower to do so is Combined Cluels of Staff, and 1 sol
no chance of our being able to convincr U'S Chiefs of Stall
at present that, necessity exists for Combed Chiefs of
Staff to take the drastie step of mstructing Eisenhower ou
his conduct of the hattle.
6. Be careful what you say to Eisenhower himself on subject
of command set up as it may do much more harm than
good especially as he is now probably very worried about
whole situation. It is a different thing to make suggestions
to Whiteley as you have done and this may hear truit.
7. I have sent the P.M. copy of your telegram.
Fortunately Eisenhower, supported by
Redell Smith, had
already decided that he had no optien but to put Montgomery in
charge of all the northern sector, where a great number of troops
from US First and Ninth Armies had been cut off from Bradley
by the 'bulge' of the German attack. On the morning of the 201h
him: 'We now have two fronts
and I want you to assume
command of the northern front.' The Supreme Commander
went on talking, but Montgomery paid no attention (the line was
in any case very bad). He had got what he wanted, though under
much less happy circumstances than would have prevailed at the
Group had succeeded in crossing the Rhine at Arnhem.
