Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
These operations by Second Army on the eastern flank
began today; they are going very well; they aim at securing
CAEN and at getting our eastern flank on the ORNE river -
with bridgeheads over it.
7. Having got our eastern flank on the ORNE, I shall then
organise the operations on the eastern flank so that our affairs
on the western flank can be got on with the quicker.
It may be that the best proposition is for the Second Army
to continue its effort, and to drive southwards with its left
flank on the ORNE; or it may be a good proposition for it to
cross the ORNE and establish itself on the FALAISE road.
Alternatively, having got CAEN
and established the
eastern flank on the ORNE, it may be best for Second Army
to take over all the CAUMONT area - and to the west of it -
release some
of Bradley's divisions for the
southward 'drive' on the western flank.
8. Day to day events in the next few days will show which is
The attack of Second Army towards CAEN, which is
going on now, is a big show; so far only 1 Corps is engaged; 8
Corps takes up the running on Monday morning (10 July).
I shall put everything into it.
It is all part of the bigger tactical plan, and it is all in
accordance with para 4 above.
9. I am not anxious to seize ST. MALO by an airborne
operation if it can be avoided. I would much prefer to take it
from the land and this is what I hope to do - vide my M505
dated 30 June. But it may happen that Bradley's southward
move is very slow and requires help to get down the Cotentin
peninsula, in this case an air
and sea move against ST.
MALO might become necessary, and it is being planned in
case it is needed.
10. I am very anxious to secure the Quiberon Bay area so
that we can get a move on with developing it for our
administrative needs.
This would be done sometime about the first week in
August - when I hope 8 U.S. Corps will have turned the
corner and be heading for RENNES and ST. MALO.
This operation is being planned.
11. I do not need an American armoured division for use on
my eastern flank; we really have all the armour we need. The
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 425
great thing now is to get First and Third U.S. Armies up to a
good strength, and to get them cracking on the southward
thrust on
the western flank, and then to turn Patton
westwards into the Brittany peninsula.
12. To sum up.
I think the battle is going very well. The enemy is being
heavily attacked all along the line; and we are killing a lot of
Germans.
Of one thing you can be quite sure - there will be no
stalemate.
If the enemy decides to concentrate very great
and
overwhelming
strength
against
uS,
that
will
take
a
considerable time; and during that time we will relentlessly get
on with our business; we are very strong now and need not
delay any longer for build-up purposes.
I shall always ensure that I am well balanced; at present I
have no fears of any offensive move the enemy might make;
I am concentrating on making the battle swing our way.
Yours ever
Monty*
On 14 July Eisenhower wrote again. His letter is evidence that
he was hoping strongly that the main attack and break-out
would be achieved by the forces on Montgomery's east flank,
and not by the Americans in the west. The British general's
strategy, however, was only to hold the enemy in the east,
hoping for a break-out in the west.
The letter was also an
undisguised 'prod', an attempt to get Montgomery to attack as
hard as possible.
14 July 1944
Dear Monty:
Through our recent exchange of telegrams I clearly
understand the proposed timing of the impending operations.
With respect to the plan,
I am confident it will reap a
harvest from all the sowing you have been doing during the
past weeks. With our whole front line acting aggressively
against the enemy
so that
he is pinned to
the ground,
O'Connor's plunge into his vitals will be decisive. I am not
discounting the difficulties, nor the initial losses, but in this
case I am viewing the prospects with the most tremendous
