306
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
always inclined to be euphoric, and if you gave him news he
did not want to hear he would switch off. That is what had
happened to him on 16 December, and it has a trace of pig-
headness about it.
In his Intelligence Report of 3 December, Williams had
reported the existence of Sixth SS Panzer Army, uncommitted in
reserve, but he added that he was positive that it was being held
back for a counter-attack when the Allies advanced further.' In
compiling his report Williams had taken Ultra evidence into
account, and part of the summary reads:
The bruited German drive on Antwerp is just not within his
(von Rundstedt's] potential
... he needs more infantry of
better quality. Although von Rundstedt has 6 Panzer Army in
reserve he, at the age of 69, will wait to use it to smash our
bridgeheads over the Roer
... 6 Panzer Army may contain
1, 2, 9, and 12 SS Panzer Divisions west of the Rhine forward
of Cologne.
Williams emphasised that the strategic reserve, that is, Sepp
Dietrich's Sixth SS Panzer Army, had not been committed at
this date, and that to have a Panzer army in reserve was "a
luxury not known to von Rundstedt since D-Day'. The words
*bruited German drive on Antwerp' show that Montgomery and
Williams had discussed the danger of an enemy counter-
offensive by Sixth Panzer Army, but had dismissed it. I asked
Williams why he had thought that von Rundstedt's age was
relevant, to which he replied:
At that stage we knew the German plans came from Hitler's
sick bed and not from von Rundstedt, and although I have
now reached the age of 69, I still think von Rundstedt's age
was relevant because it meant he would be set in his ways and
inflexible, and as it was Hitler's plan and not his own he
would let it take its course, willy-nilly. But in fact Model led
the offensive, not von Rundstedt himself.
US First Army's Intelligence Report of 9 December was nearer
the mark than Twenty-First Army Group's, and stated that
Sixth SS Panzer Army had high morale and that the Germans
Ardennes
307
might soon be ready 'for an all-out offensive'.?
About this
Brigadier
Williams commented: 'Colonel Mark Dickson,
G2
Intelligence, US First Army, went on leave to Paris just after he
written the 9 December report.
This is
scarcely
the
behaviour of an officer agog about an enemy offensive. In fact he
always prophesied every sort of woe about an enemy offensive.
Dickson was indeed
treated as an alarmist by
the
senior
American
commanders
who,
from
Eisenhower
downwards, continued with their preparations for a festive
Christmas.
In mid-November Ultra had revealed that there
was a
concentration of enemy fighter aircraft in the central Rhineland,
described by the Germans
with
the
word
Jägeraufmarsch
(fighter assembly or deployment) - significantly, the Allies had
seen that word used on other occasions only before a major
attack. On 2 December Model's Army Group B was reported
by Ultra to be asking urgently for fighter cover to protect 200
trainloads of troops,
including the
Führer
Escort Brigade,
Hitler's dedicated personal guard. Other messages showed that
thousands of trucks were being collected for Sixth Panzer Army.
So what had gone wrong with Allied intelligence?
Brigadier Williams told me that:
As far as we were concerned every item of information fitted
the picture,
whereas we should have rethought the picture
itself, as events made us do speedily enough.
There was a curious wireless silence before the attack. This
put Ultra at Bletchley on the qui vive (so I gathered after the
war). Their traffic analysis made them think something was
on. At 21 Army
Group we were too near the battle to be
alerted in the same way.
Bad intelligence brought about the attack; good intelligence
defeated it. Once the balloon went up we shaped our reactions
correctly, based on our information from German wireless
messages. Joe Ewart said to me two days after the attack:
'Have you seen the German Air Force signals? They reveal
from the list of bridges to be attacked and not attacked; the
