142
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Tac Hq
21 Army Group
19.7.44
My Dear Prime Minister
I have just heard from the C.I.G.S. that you are proposing
to come over this way shortly; this is the first I have heard of
your visit. I hope that you will come over here whenever you
like; I have recently been trying to keep visitors away as we
have much on hand.
But you are quite different, and in your capacity as Minister
of Defence you naturally are above all these rules. So as far
as I personally am concerned I hope you will visit Normandy
whenever you like; and if I myself am too busy to be with you
I will always send a staff officer. And if you ever feel you
would like to stop the night and stay in one of my caravans -
which will be held ready for you at any time.
Yrs sincerely
B.L. Montgomery
Montgomery did not show the letter to the CIGS - he dared
not, since it contained the untruth that he had not 'heard' of the
proposed visit. He repeated this to Simpson on the next day,
obviously hoping that he would be believed in Whitehall.
According to Brooke, the letter worked like magic'; certainly
it saved Montgomery. Churchill telephoned Brooke to say that
he was delighted with the letter, and that he felt ashamed about
all he had said in the morning. Late on the 19th he signalled
Montgomery 'Thank you very much for your letter'. On the first
draft of the signal he had dictated 'You may be sure that I shall
never be a burden but only a prop if ever needed'. He put his
fountain pen through this phrase, thinking perhaps that there
might arise an occasion when he would have to be a 'burden',
and also, perhaps, that he must not make his general any more
conceited than he was.
Churchill visited Montgomery on 20 July. All went well, for
Montgomery, having seen the red light, exerted his mesmeric
charm to convince the Prime Minister, successfully, that his
campaign was going according to plan. Montgomery himself
was genuinely optimistic, mainly because Ultra signals showed
the Germans in the US sector to be in poor shape. Ultra also
confirmed that 'Goodwood' had drawn almost all the German
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
armour to the eastern front, so that the prospects for a swift
triumph with
were excellent. All
Churchill lapped up greedily; when he returned to London he
said that 'all was going well in Normandy', telling the War
Cabinet that he had never seen 'a happier army'. General
Roberts told me that if Churchill had gone forward to visit his
division at the end of 'Goodwood', he would have found morale
high because, although they had lost a lot of tanks, casualties
during the fighting had been low.
On 21 July Montgomery wrote to Simpson: 'The PM has just
been here very friendly. I gave him a bottle of brandy as a peace
offering.' He could not have found a better present for the
brandy-loving Churchill-at that stage of the war there was
hardly a bottle of French brandy left in London.'
Dramatically, Churchill's visit to Montgomery at Twenty-
First Army Group Tac HQ on 20 July had coincided with the
explosion of von Stauffenberg's bomb in Hitler's command
room at the Wolf's Lair. Williams told me, recalling Churchill's
Upon that day I knew
happening in Germany, and from the scraps of Ultra it was
clear to me there was a sort of revolution: an attempt to
topple Hitler, and that von Witzleben and
involved in the opposition. I knew that Fromm was in charge
of the German signals network, which was encouraging. In
Italy in the autumn I had interviewed a high-up Nazi deserter
and asked him who was going to be the Nazis' Badoglio. He
told me it would be Witzleben.
I told Monty that something dramatic was afoot and that
at any moment he might get peace feelers from von Kluge
that day, or even a battlefield surrender or armistice. Monty
was most intrigued and like a schoolboy. When Winston
Churchill arrived at Monty's HQ
on July 20th, because
news from Germany
Monty arranged a
me. I was to tell Winston
minutes exactly what the enemy was up to; then Monty for
five minutes would tell the PM how he was going to defeat the
Germans, and would then ask Winston 'What is going on
with this news of a revolution in Germany?' Winston
completely nonplussed. He sat on the only stool in Monty's
