404
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Rome and a sea landing nearby would have automatically
caused us to evacuate all the southern half of Italy.'
When Eighth Army crossed the Messina Straits unopposed
and found no enemy, Montgomery made little effort to push
north quickly. He felt his role to be an anti-climax, and he saw
little future in the operations of his drastically reduced army at
the base of the continent of Europe, faced by a strong enemy
installed behind
range after range of high mountains.
magnified the difficulties posed by the roads and by demolitions,
and alleged that he feared a strong German armoured counter-
attack, although he knew that any help Eighth Army could give
to the embattled Allied
beach-head at Salerno
would
be
invaluable. During this period, as his army slowly moved north,
he virtually ignored some of Alexander's instructions, yet he sent
a bombastic signal to Churchill claiming to have cleared a large
part of Italy, although his forces had seen very little fighting. But
while he had been annoyed by his reduced role, he was not
sulky. He enjoyed looking after the well-being of his troops and
building up a strong base on the mainland of Europe.
When the Germans retreated from Salerno, Montgomery had
no enthusiasm for Eighth Army's hard slog up Italy parallel with
Clark, whose generalship he despised.
The glittering prize of
Rome lay on the American route, and Montgomery, after one
bold and successful amphibious operation at Termoli, became
resigned to unrewarding battles in the mountains and on the
Adriatic coast. Again he signalled direct to Churchill, this time
hoping soon 'to meet him in Rome'.
He wanted to keep his claims for command of the Second
Front in front of the Prime Minister, but when the CIGS visited
him in October 1943 he found him tired and pessimistic, and 'in
need of a change. Churchill himself was deeply critical of
Eighth Army's slow progress, and became scathing about the
stagnation of the Italian campaign and about Montgomery's
failure to carry out amphibious landings on his front.® He
considered that Alexander
and Montgomery had failed to
exploit the great opportunity that the possession of large
numbers of landing-craft, combined with air and sea superiority,
gave them to deal the Germans deadly blows in Italy' (Brooke
had reported this failure to Churchill on his return to London).
As a result, it was touch-and-go whether Montgomery would
be given command of the Second Front. Churchill's enthusiasm
Conclusion
405
for his general was waning,
and Eisenhower had a strong
preference for Alexander. Montgomery was nearly left to kick
his heels in Italy, where his full potential would never have been
realised, although his expertise might have made a success of the
attack on the Gothic Line in August 1944, which would have
opened up Austria to the Allies. Instead, the attack on the
Gothic Line became a costly failure under Alexander and
General Sir Oliver Leese, who had replaced Montgomery as
GOC, Eighth Army.
When, in December 1943, he was appointed C-in-C, British
Group of Armies and
Allied
Armies,
Northern
France,
Montgomery knew that his moment had come. He believed
correctly - that no one else in the British Army (except Brooke)
was so well qualified for the job, and he had supreme confidence
not only in his organisational ability and knowledge of modern
weapons, but also in his power to enthuse the troops.
In addition, his health was superb, and in this perhaps lies a
mystery. While in Palestine in 1939 he became seriously ill with
pleurisy and suspected TB, and had had to be carried as a
stretcher case aboard the boat taking him home. Yet he made a
spectacular recovery while on board ship, and as soon as he was
given command of a division, shortly after his return, he never
looked back. John
Henderson told me that he never knew
Montgomery to be ill in all the time from Alamein to Lüneburg
Heath, and that although he occasionally suffered from colds his
staff took it for granted that he was always well. But within a
few weeks of the German surrender he was ill in bed with
tonsillitis, and he was never to be so fit again after the war. It
seems likely that there was a psychological link between his
good health and his intense involvement in all-absorbing work.
Montgomery's arrival in London in the first days of 1944
proved to be a tonic for the entire Allied invasion organisation,
which
until then had suffered from nervousness and from
conflicting views about how to carry out the cross-Channel
assault. His clear, well thought-out plans removed doubts and
created
unity
and
confidence
in a confused and
jealous
command. At this stage Eisenhower had complete faith in his
subordinate and delegated the bulk of the planning to him;
Montgomery rightly insisted on widening the invasion front and
increasing the number of ships to be used. During the planning,
surprisingly, in view of what happened later, the Americans were
