194
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
nor Americans believed that Hitler could stage a dramatic
recovery which would extend the war until May 1945.
On 27 August, just as Patton's Third Army ran out of petrol
and it looked as if he would have to halt his XII Corps, he cap-
tured 100,000 gallons of German petrol at Sens. He did not report
the find, but instead sent his tanks advancing again, thus creating
a yet more imperative need for supplies allocated to, and coveted
by, Montgomery. US Third Army found two similar caches of
German petrol on 29 August and 3 September, and, after reading
commander's
over-optimistic
signals
about
prospects of his army's reaching the Rhine, Eisenhower changed
his mind again and diverted 250,000 gallons of petrol to Patton
on 5 September, and during the next three days another
1,400,000 gallons. Thus Patton was able to continue his onward
progress towards Germany against light opposition. Both he and
Bradley knew that transport and supplies would simply have to
be diverted to them to keep them operational and, in their
jealousy of Montgomery, this was exactly the state of affairs
they were seeking.
On 2 September Eisenhower, Bradley and Patton held a
conference at Chartres.
The Supreme Commander reiterated
that, because he needed to capture the Channel ports and the V2
sites, he must give priority in supplies to Montgomery. Patton
protested strongly, and was supported by Bradley. As usual,
Eisenhower compromised, and Patton recorded: *We finally
persuaded Ike to let V Corps of First Army and Third Army go
on and attack the Siegfried Line as soon as the Calais area was
stabilised. Eisenhower was impressed with the thought of a great
battle in
Germany. I finally
got permission to cross the
Moselle?" Eisenhower's response to his two generals at Chartres
was weak, and by permitting Patton to move so far towards
Germany he seriously endangered his overall plan. With each
mile that Patton's Third Army advanced towards the Siegfried
Line the greater became the likelihood that it would be involved
in heavy fighting, which would require resources of petrol and
ammunition at the expense of the northern drive.
Patton and Bradley believed that they could cut through the
Panzer divisions which Hitler was sending to their front before
these had time to establish a defensive line. They hoped that
their armies could then 'punch' into Germany, and thus bring
the war to a swift and successful conclusion. It is certainly
Eisenhower Takes Command
195
possible that they were right, but Eisenhower's decision to give
them sufficient petrol for limited advances but not for a decisive
battle proved to be the worst of both worlds. Patton called it 'the
most momentous error of the war', because he was so certain of
victory if he continued his push. It was indeed a 'momentous
error', for it sealed the fate of both the southern and the northern
assaults.
Bradley reinforced Patton with French 2nd Armoured and
US 79th Infantry Divisions, taking them out of First Army. This
so weakened First Army that it could not keep pace with
Montgomery's advance on its left flank. By 10 September
Patton had established two small bridgeheads over the Moselle
south of Metz,
but Third Army was then stopped dead by
German reinforcements moved in by Hitler. Hodges's First
Army had crossed the Meuse almost without opposition, and on
10 September he was approaching the Siegfried Line on a broad
front between Aachen and Trier.
But because of the removal of
his two divisions,
and because of supply difficulties, he was
forced to turn right on to Patton's flank, instead of covering
Montgomery on the left in his drive for the Ruhr. By dissipating
his resources - against Montgomery's advice - and pandering
to Patton and Bradley, Eisenhower had missed his chance of
delivering a knock-out
blow
to
Germany
by
thrusting
enormously strong forces into the Ruhr from the north. Such an
opportunity would not recur for months.
