178
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
a major contribution to victory, although it rankled with him
that he never got the glamour of his longed-for armoured break-
out by Second Army into the open country beyond Caen.
It is wrong to argue, as some have done, that Eisenhower
never understood
Montgomery's plan to draw Rommel's
armour to the east to facilitate the break-out in the west. In fact,
he understood it perfectly, but he overestimated the difficulties of
the bocage for the American advance, and was worried by the
US Government's insistence -
in an election year - that
casualties and sacrifices must be borne equally by the British
and Americans. Besides this,
he genuinely
thought
that
Montgomery was over-cautious, and accepted, too readily, the
continual complaints of senior British and American officers at
SHAEF about slow progress.
Bradley, whose
relations with Montgomery
were good
throughout the Normandy campaign,
appreciated that the
latter's master plan had worked well; no flatterer, he wrote after
the war: 'Montgomery bossed the USA First Army with
wisdom, tolerance and restraint ... I could not have wanted a
more tolerant or judicious commander' 37 Sadly, however, fierce
disputes between the two generals were to flare up before Hitler
was defeated.
Unfortunately, by the time the battle for Normandy was over
Eisenhower had lost much of his confidence in Montgomery,
mainly because his performance fell so short of his promises,
and because he never produced proper explanations or excuses.
If only Montgomery had consulted Eisenhower regularly about
his plans a good working relationship might have been achieved.
But Montgomery would never visit the Supreme Commander,
nor would he let him know the reasoning behind his plans. He
despised Eisenhower both as a strategist and as a commander in
the field, and thus thought it not worth while wasting time on
him - Bill Williams told me that throughout the campaign
Montgomery kept saying: 'Ike is no battle general'. Unhappily,
both Grigg and Brooke fostered this arrogance. Montgomery
knew that these two powerful and influential figures, prodded by
Simpson, would always back his decisions, as he also knew that,
after their one serious disagreement, Churchill was on his side.
This conduct towards Eisenhower was inexcusable, and was
naturally, and rightly, resented by the Supreme Commander. As
a result, once Bradley took charge of his own Army Group there
was no proper Allied chain of command. There was
Near-Failure and the Break-Out
179
considered examination of the wisdom of overrunning Brittany
with strong forces while von Kluge's army remained undefeated
further north. (Here Churchill further confused the issue by
wanting, unreasonably, to switch 'Anvil' from the South of
France to the still uncaptured Brittany ports, coining an absurd
phrase: Why batter down the back door when we have the key
to the front?') Perhaps most serious of all, the opportunity to
close the Falaise gap and encircle more of the German army
was also bungled by the Allies because of lack of co-ordination.
It is possible that if Eisenhower, as was strongly urged by
Marshall, had himself taken command of the closing stages of
the Normandy battles these mistakes would have been avoided,
although making quick decisions was not his strong point. By
then the Supreme Commander not only disliked Montgomery
but was also frightened of him; he knew he could not rely upon
his difficult subordinate to carry out the orders given to him. Yet
Eisenhower baulked at a showdown with the hero of El
Alamein, so immensely popular with the British people, although
Tedder and Morgan, and his top American advisers, tried hard
to get him to make a bid for Montgomery's dismissal.
Montgomery evidently envisaged the Supreme Commander
as a figurehead in the background while he, in consultation with
Bradley, made the plans and took the decisions. How deeply
Eisenhower resented this bid to usurp his position is shown by a
statement which he issued in the middle of August:
No major effort takes place in this theatre by ground, sea or
air, except with my approval, and no-one in the Allied
Command presumes to question my
supreme authority and
responsibility for the whole campaign. 38
Yet however unequivocal such statements, and however much
his role was cut down to size, Montgomery felt strongly that he
ought to be in sole command of the land battle, and that he was
supremely qualified for the task. Brooke, Grigg and Churchill
are greatly to blame for encouraging him in his attempts to
assume a mantle of command which was not his.
The enmity and lack of communication between Montgomery
and
Eisenhower,
coupled
with
the jealous hostility
shown
towards the British general by the forceful George Patton led,
after Normandy, to
strategic errors and
misunderstandings
which prolonged the war into 1945, with disastrous results for
the future of Europe.
