354
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
establishment of a bridgehead across the Rhine decided the
Supreme Commander in his course; he would make Bradley's
thrust into Germany
'equal in scope and importance to
Montgomery's. On 21 March SHAEF issued a directive which
instructed Bradley to use Patton's Third Army to establish a
firm bridgehead over the Rhine in the Frankfurt area south of
Remagen, and then 'make an advance in strength' towards
Cassel. If successful, this would lead to a link-up between
Hodges's First Army advancing east from Remagen and
Patton's coming up from Frankfurt
- the two armies had
already (9 March) joined forces on the west bank. Eisenhower
signalled the Chiefs of Staff in Washington that, if successful,
this plan would give him a force south of the Ruhr at least equal
in strength to Montgomery's Twenty-First Group in the north?
That order
sounded,
irrevocably, the
death
knell for
Montgomery's ambition to lead the Allied armies in their
triumphal march on Berlin.
Montgomery had ordered Twenty-First Army Group to begin
its planning for a Rhine crossing early in October, once it had
become plain that 'Market-Garden' would not snatch a bridge
intact. Besides the troops
necessary to force an opposed
crossing, 37,000 British and 22,000 American engineers were
involved, while both the Royal and the US Navies supplied
ocean-going assault boats. In all, Twenty-First Army Group
built up 250,000 tons of material and supplies for the Rhine
assault, codenamed 'Plunder'. As soon as the Wesel pocket was
eliminated on 10 March, Montgomery fixed the 24th for his set-
piece attack, although the first troops would start crossing on
the evening of the day before, 23 March. With full air and
artillery support, Twenty-First Army Group, aided by US Ninth
Army and a massive airborne drop over the river, would storm
across the Rhine at Wesel. The American generals, basking in
the reflected glory of the capture of the Remagen bridge, scoffed
at Montgomery for his ponderous build-up, and were jealous of
his retaining US Ninth Army under his command.
To Montgomery's horror, Churchill insisted on being present
The Prime Minister had
Montgomery on 2 March
and "Grenade'
when it was becoming clear that
conclusions, and had asked both him and de Guingand to dinner
on his special train. Montgomery
went early to bed, and
Eisenhower's Revenge
Churchill then told de Guingand that he intended to come over
to watch the Rhine crossing on 24 March, asserting belligerently
that he had discussed this idea with Eisenhower, who had said:
"You will be alright if you go forward in a tank'. De Guingand
annoyed Churchill by failing to take the suggestion seriously,
and Montgomery also viewed it light-heartedly, telling Simpson
that 'It just was not on as he could not have the Prime Minister
wandering about in the middle of the battle disturbing the
commanders who were running it.'
Churchill became angry at being fobbed off, and made his
wishes clear to Brooke.
On 7 March the CIGS wrote to
Montgomery: 'If the Prime Minister is not allowed to come you
have the seeds of serious trouble ahead. When the P.M. gets
such ideas in his head nothing will stop him.' In his own diary
Brooke noted: 'T am not happy with this trip. He will be difficult
to manage and has no business to be going. All he will do is to
endanger his life unnecessarily and get in everyone's way and be
a damned nuisance to everybody. However nothing can stop
him.' When, on 8 March, Simpson went out to see Montgomery,
he had been instructed by Brooke to insist that Churchill was
invited to see the start of 'Plunder' 3 Making the best of a bad
job, Montgomery wrote to Brooke: 'If the P.M. is determined to
come out for the battle of the Rhine there is only one course of
action and that is to ask him to stay at my camp. Then I can
keep an eye on him and see he goes only where he will bother
no-one. I have written him a letter which should please the old
boy. Simpson will show you the copy?
The Prime Minister was indeed pleased by the letter. His
happy reply demonstrates the difficulties facing commanders
who have to entertain heads of government during a major
battle, and also both his schoolboy delight in the trip and his
disregard of any inconvenience that he might cause:
TOP SECRET
March 11, 1945.
My dear Field Marshal,
I was delighted to receive your letter, which reached me at
2 a.m. this morning. I am resolved to be no hindrance to you,
and you must
consider yourself absolutely free from any
obligation during this important battle. I would not come if I
