340
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
operation, was never formally discussed. On 1 February Brooke
had an acrimonious private session with Marshall in which the
American Chief of Staff made it clear how strong was his
antipathy towards, and dislike of, Montgomery. In Williams's
words, 'There was no oil in Brooke'; the CIGS was possessed of
a very quick brain and an equally quick temper, and for all his
manifest ability he could be indiscreet 'and tactless'. One is
tempted to wonder how de Guingand or Simpson would have
fared in the meeting with Marshall. The conference in Malta was
an unhappy one, and undoubtedly the strain of the war was
telling on Brooke. Churchill would not allow him to push the
issues of strategy and command too far because not only did the
Americans have an enormous preponderence of troops
Europe, but also there was always the danger that the American
government might decide not to give the defeat of Germany full
priority, and instead switch some of their resources to the war
against Japan in the Far East. Such a switch would have been
disastrous for the European campaign.
Brooke had suggested to the Prime Minister, as far back as 28
November, that the best way to deal with Eisenhower's
incompetence as a land commander would be for Alexander,
now a Field-Marshal and the Supreme Allied Commander,
Mediterranean Theatre, to replace Tedder as Deputy Supreme
Commander
and
'to
command the
land forces for him
(Eisenhower] as in Tunisia'. Were Alexander to be appointed
Eisenhower's
deputy
then
Brooke
was
certain
that
Montgomery's strategy would be accepted at SHAEF - in
Tunisia and Sicily Alexander had complied with everything
Montgomery
had
wanted. Churchill had
returned to this
proposal and discussed it privately with Brooke on 3 January
1945, when they were staying with Eisenhower at Versailles. On
next
day
Churchill had
Eisenhower at lunch
suggested the
proposal
to
while they were
travelling up in the
Supreme Commander's special train to see Montgomery at his
HQ at Hasselt, and the American had replied that he would
welcome Alexander as his Deputy in place of Tedder.
On 5
January Brooke had put his suggestion to Montgomery, who
answered that he 'was all for such a plan' as it might go some
way towards putting the business of command 'straight'.
It is surprising that Brooke seriously considered this scheme
for replacing
Tedder, since he had a low opinion of both
Rows Over Strategy
341
Alexander and his Chief of Staff, Lt-Gen Sir John (later Field-
Marshal Lord) Harding. He continually commented adversely
on Alexander, stating that he was too much under the thumb of
Harold Macmillan, the Minister Resident at Allied HQ, North-
West Africa, in the theatre in which he commanded. Churchill's
proposal
that
Tedder should
replace
Alexander in the
Mediterranean would, however, have given more power to
Harding, and indeed to Macmillan.
When, on 22 August 1944, Brooke had visisted Alexander in
Italy, he had been contemptuous of a detailed plan, written by
Harding and approved by Alexander, to make the Italian front
an all-British affair by removing the American divisions and
sending them to France, replacing them with British forces
drawn
from that theatre. Brooke thought
the scheme was
'fantastic"', and an example of Alexander's lack of appreciation of
what he was faced with. Given the lack of shipping at the time,
such a move would have taken months, during which time a large
force would have been out of action on
either front. When
Churchill had visited Alexander the two men had indulged in
pipedreams of capturing Vienna with an all-British force; Brooke
had thought nothing of these plans.
At the Malta conference on 31 January Brooke informed
Alexander of the possibility
of his becoming
Eisenhower's
Deputy (and also scolded him severely for being too subservient
to Macmillan in Italy) - Alexander replied that he would be
happy with the change. Two days later, Churchill asked Brooke
to discuss with himself, Roosevelt and Marshall the proposal for
Alexander to replace Tedder. The two Americans felt that there
might
be
repercussions
in
America
if the
change
was
implemented immediately,
since
it could be interpreted
as
Alexander
being
put
in
to
support Eisenhower
after
the
Ardennes failure. They were, however, prepared to accept the
told Eisenhower of the proposal,
Alexander as his
Deputy he
strategy would be
dominant,
and that
Group would have the greater portion of the resources.
