314
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
sort of the situation.
To the south, US 101st Airborne Division was besieged in
Bastogne, and the Panzers were still driving forward as the
Americans fell back before them. But the real danger point lay in
the north of the bulge where Montgomery had firmly taken
control; a German tank group was in sight of the Meuse at
Celles, four miles from Dinant, although Montgomery refused to
mount a counter-attack until he was ready and sure of victory.
Meanwhile Patton, with extraordinary speed, had disengaged his
forces south of the bulge, turned them through 90 degrees, and
driven them with some success against the Germans' southern
flank as Montgomery was savouring his key role in the battle for
Europe.
Montgomery visited Hodges and Simpson each day and
undoubtedly served as a steadying influence. Hodges.
pulled his First Army HQ back behind the Meuse, where it was
very tired and needed moral support. Williams considered that
"Monty was marvellous' in restoring the American general's
At first, Montgomery had been so little impressed with
Hodges that he had telephoned Bedell Smith to discuss his
replacement because of his 'exhaustion', adding that, as a British
soldier, he could not personally be responsible for sacking a US
commander. Smith replied that if Hodges had to go,
then
Eisenhower personally
would tell him, and the
Supreme
Commander sent a message to Montgomery: 'Hodges is the
quiet reticent type and does not appear as aggressive as he really
is. Unless he becomes exhausted he will always wage a good
fight? Montgomery generously replied that Hodges, 'originally a
bit shaken, very tired and in need of moral support is improving.",
By midday
on 22 December Montgomery was able
reassure Hodges that he had deployed 150 British tanks along
the Meuse between Namur and Givet like 'clothes pins on a
clothes line'. The American general was grateful to Montgomery
for his moral support, and absorbed some of his confidence, but
according to Stephen Ambrose, Eisenhower's biographer, both
he and Simpson disliked the British commander.
'Big Simp' Simpson was far cockier than Hodges. He found
Montgomery 'rather pompous', but told Eisenhower:
Ardennes
315
I and my army are operating smoothly and cheerfully under
the command of the Field Marshal Montgomery. The most
cordial relations and a very high spirit of co-operation have
been established between him and myself personally and
between our respective staffs. You can depend on me to
respond
cheerfully
and
as efficiently as I can to every
instruction he gives ... Yesterday the Field Marshal paid me
a visit and at his request I took him to HQ XIX Corps where
he met my Corps and Divisional Commanders. He made us a
splendid talk on the present situation. Then we all had lunch
together.®
Hodges may have felt grateful to Montgomery in his initial
relief at the strong, confident handling of his worrying situation,
but Chester Wilmot, who saw a lot of Montgomery
American generals, commented that: Monty felt in defeat the
Americans had to turn
to him to extricate them from a
predicament which would never have developed if he had been
left in command ... (hel did not endear himself to the Americans
for his confident tone seemed to carry a note of censure."
The stimulus of taking command in a crisis after everything
had gone wrong was a tonic to Montgomery, and during this
period he was a ball of energy, radiating confidence - exactly
what the American
British commanders needed, even
though his lack of tact tended to nettle the Americans. He was
already looking ahead to the end of the Battle of the Bulge, and
began to plán in his mind the final offensive against Germany in
which, more than ever, he was anxious to have overall command
of the vital northern drive. Brooke urged him to be cautious,
however, and on 21 December wrote:
A word of warning.
Events and enemy action have forced on
Eisenhower a more satisfactory system of command. It is
most important that you should not even in the slightest
degree rub this undoubted fact in to anyone at SHAEF or
elsewhere. Any remarks you make are bound to come to
Eisenhower's ears sooner or later and that may make it more
difficult to ensure that this new set up for command remains
even after the present emergency has passed. I myself have
felt you were right all along.
