118
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
My broad policy has been always to draw the main enemy
forces on to our eastern flank and to fight them there so that
our affairs should proceed the easier on west ... our policy
has been so successful that Second Army is now opposed by
a formidable array of 8 German Panzer Divisions identified
between Caumont and Caen ... a full blooded counter-attack
is imminent ... we welcome it …... it will be between Caen and
Villers Bocage.
At this stage 7th Armoured had been put in reserve
and
Montgomery had asked the Americans to widen their front
eastwards in order to support his operations.
On 3 July Montgomery wrote a long letter to Eisenhower
boasting of how he had drawn Rommel's Panzers to the British
sector, thus enabling the Americans to take Cherbourg and
regroup without the menace
of Panzer
attacks from the
Germans. When, however, the British general called for massive
bombing by the Strategic Air Command before he could
advance on Caen again, Eisenhower became angry. On 6 July
he held a conference with Tedder and Cunningham, both of
whom were sarcastic about Montgomery. On the day following
this conference Eisenhower wrote and rebuked him for only
attacking with two or three divisions so far; he added that what
was needed was a full-dress attack with all forces committed, and
offered an American armoured division for use on the British left
flank. Montgomery refused the offer, and emphasised that there
would be no 'stalemate'. This letter, and Montgomery's reply of
the next day, marked a breakdown in relations between the two
generals, and the beginning of an antipathy that was to last for the
rest of the campaign. The letters are reproduced in full in the
Appendix.
After the war, Montgomery himself - and some historians -
argued that Eisenhower never understood that his plan was to
draw the German armour to the east and to keep it engaged
there while the Americans attacked in the west. This argument
is, however, untenable in view of Eisenhower's sentence in the
fourth paragraph of his letter: 'I am familiar with your plan..'
When Tedder read the words 'You can be sure there will be
no stalemate' he commented that Dempsey's operations were
"company exercises'. General Morgan and Lt-Gen Sir Humfrey
Gale (Deputy Chief of Staff and Chief Administration Officer at
Normandy Assault
119
SHAEF) were also scathing about Dempsey's slow rate of
advance, and Gale pointed out that unless the Allies soon
captured a second deep-water port in addition to Cherbourg 'the
whole build-up could collapse'." This was a false judgement, for
in fact no other deep-water port was properly in use until late
November, by which time the Allied armies were preparing for
the battle for the Rhineland, more than 300 miles to the east.
On 8 July Dempsey had attacked again, helped by 6,000 tons
of bombs dropped by Allied aircraft, and by nightfall on the 9th
the enemy had been pushed back across the River Orne. But the
Germans still held all Caen south of the river, and Montgomery
could go no further. The battle for Caen had ended in stalemate.
On 10 July Montgomery signalled Eisenhower:
Operations on eastern flank proceeding entirely according to
plan and will continue without a halt. 8 British Corps joins in
tomorrow. Have ordered 2nd Army to operate southwards
with left flank in Orne ... all this will help expedite affairs on
western flank. Have had good conference with Bradley today
and he will crack ahead hard tomorrow.
Eisenhower was unhappy at this, because he mistakenly believed
that Rommel had transferred his Panzers from the British to the
American sector so as to be ready for the American attempt
southwards down the Cherbourg peninsula. Montgomery had
been right, however; Ultra decrypts had revealed that between 1
and 4 July all the Panzer divisions except for a single battered
one were in the British sector, and could not be transferred either
to reserve or to the American sector since Rommel was so
worried about the British attacks.
Montgomery's Directive
M 510, also dated 10 July, to
Bradley and Dempsey included the statement: 'Now that Caen
has been captured...'
' This was untrue. British Second Army's
attack of 8 July had largely failed, and the Germans were still
holding the part of the city south of the Orne.
The Directive
casualties to obtain this bridgehead over the Orne as we still have
plenty elsewhere.'
The failure of this latest assault on Caen placed Montgomery
