320
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
exaggerated by the Allies. The assassination plot, however, was
merely a rumour started by Skorzeny. Nevertheless, as soon as
the Supreme Commander's train drew up at Hasselt station
teams of machine-gunners leapt out and set up their weapons on
both platforms at each end of the train, while other guards
positioned themselves at all the vantage points; Montgomery
commented that 'It would have been hard for Nazi assassination
troops to kill Ike'. In fact there was concern in London about
Montgomery's personal safety, and the Field-Marshal told
Frank Simpson that, having seen Eisenhower's guard, he felt
rather naked because his only protection was an armoured car
travelling behind his own vehicle. When, a few days later,
Simpson himself spent the night at Montgomery's HQ, now
moved to a villa 'adequate but not very comfortable' because of
the cold weather, he tested the security after Montgomery had
gone to his usual early bed. He saw a tank outside with a
couple of British soldiers looking out of the top of it, two
armoured cars in the bushes on either side of the house, and
similar protection at the back. On his return he was able to tell
Brooke and Churchill that Montgomery was taking
sensible
precautions'. 14
No British or American
commanders
were
assassinated,* although some risk existed.
As the Field-Marshal and the Supreme Commander talked on
28 December there was a lull in the fighting - the Germans had
been stopped, at least temporarily. Hitler had in fact decided to
launch a southern attack against Devers's Sixth Army Group in
the Vosges on 1 January, believing that the American force had
been much
weakened in
the
Eisenhower had been briefed by
initial Ardennes
onslaught.
General Strong that
the
Germans in the bulge were badly battered and short of all
supplies, and he therefore wanted Montgomery to attack their
salient
immediately.
Montgomery
refused.
Rundstedt, he said, would attack again in the north, and he
preferred to wait for this attack and launch a strong counter-
attack as soon as the German thrust petered out.
commanders
The two
argued but could
not reach
agreement,
and
eventually Eisenhower asked Montgomery to promise to attack
on 1 January if there had been no further German attack in the
* It has been suggested, albeit with very little evidence, that Patton, who
died as a result of a car accident in Germany in December 1945, was in fact the
victim of an assassin.
Ardennes
321
north by then. The American left the meeting thinking that
Montgomery had agreed to this scheme.
At the
meeting,
to
Eisenhower's
extreme
irritation,
Montgomery once more insisted on discussing future operations,
and ploughed into another exposition of why it was essential for
him to have co-ordinating powers in order to synchronise the
movements of the American northern armies with his
own.
Then, as he saw his arguments foundering, he again offered to
serve under Bradley, to which Eisenhower once again firmly
replied that he had no intention of
giving Bradley such a
command. Even so, Montomgery
wrote to the CIGS that
Eisenhower
had
accepted
his
points, although the letter
prompted Brooke to record in his diary:
Monty has had another interview with Ike. I do not like the
look of it. It looks to me as if Monty has been rubbing into
Ike the results of not having
listened to
his advice
According to Monty Ike agrees that the front should now be
divided in two and that only one major offensive is possible. I
expect whoever meets Ike next day may swing him to another
At this stage Montgomery was extremely patronising about the
Americans, and particularly about Eisenhower. A letter he sent
to Grigg on 31 December typified his attitude towards them, as
well as his supreme confidence in himself:
Simpson takes this and will tell you what I am doing. All is
well and the Germans will now not get what they wanted. But
they have given the Americans a colossal 'bloody nose' and
mucked up all our plans; however, as we had not got a plan I
suppose they will say it does not matter. IS
Thinking that Montgomery would attack on 1 January, as
Eisenhower believed he had promised, the Americans attacked
the south of the salient on that day. Von Rundstedt immediately
transferred Panzer divisions from the north to meet and contain
this assault, something he could do with relative ease since
Montgomery did not attack. Eisenhower and his colleagues were
livid at the British commander's failure to
fulfil what they
claimed was his agreement to attack simultaneously.
