328
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
would certainly not get over that river. And I carried out
certain movements so as to provide balanced dispositions
to meet the threatened danger; these were, at the time,
merely precautions, i.e., I was thinking ahead.
4. Then the situation began to deteriorate. But the whole
allied
team rallied
to meet
the danger; national
considerations
were
thrown
overboard;
General
Eisenhower placed me in command of the whole Northern
front.
I employed the whole available power of the British Group
of Armies; this power was brought into play
gradually and in such a way that it would not interfere
with the American lines of communication. Finally it was
put into battle with a bang, and today British divisions are
fighting hard on the right flank of First US Army.
You
have thus the picture of British troops fighting on both
sides of American forces who have suffered a hard blow.
This is a fine allied picture.
5. The battle has been most interesting; I think possibly one
of the most interesting and tricky battles I have ever
handled, with great issues at stake.
The first thing to be
done was to 'head off the enemy from the tender spots and
vital places. Having done that successfully, the next thing
was to 'see him off', ie. rope him in and make quite certain
that he could not get to the places he wanted, and also that
he was slowly but surely removed away from those places.
He was therefore 'headed off', and then seen off.
He is now being written off, and heavy toll is being taken
of his divisions by ground and air action. You must not
imagine that the battle is over yet; it is by no means over
and a great deal still remains to be done.
The battle has some similarity to the battle that began on
31 Aug 1942 when Rommel made his last bid to capture
Egypt and was 'seen off' by the Eighth Army. But actually
all battles are different because the problem is different.
6. What was Rundstedt trying to achieve? No one can tell for
certain. The only guide we have is the message he issued to
his soldiers before the battle began; he told them it was the
last great effort to try and win the war; that everything
depended on it; that they must go 'all out'.
On the map you see his gains; that will not win the war; he
is likely slowly but surely to lose it all; he must have
scraped together every reserve he could lay his hands on
for this job, and he has not achieved a great deal.
One must admit that he has dealt us a sharp blow and he
sent us reeling back; but we recovered; he has been unable
to gain any great advantage from his initial success.
He has therefore failed in his strategic purpose, unless the
prize was smaller than his men were told.
He has now turned to the defensive on the ground; and he
is faced by forces properly balanced to utilise the initiative
which he has lost.
Another reason for his failure is that his air force, although
still capable of pulling a fast one, cannot protect his army;
for that army our Tactical Air Forces are the greatest
7. But when all is said and done I shall always feel that
Rundstedt was really beaten by the good fighting qualities
of the American soldier and by the team-work of the
I would like to say a word about these two points.
8. I first saw the American soldier in battle in Sicily, and I
formed then a very high opinion of him. I saw him again in
Italy. And I have seen a very great deal of him in this
campaign. I want to take this opportunity to pay a public
tribute to him. He is a brave fighting man, steady
fire, and with that tenacity in battle which stamps the first
class soldier; all these qualities have been
marked degree during the present battle. I have spent my
military career with the British soldier and I have come to
love him with a great love; and I have now formed a very
great affection and admiration for the American soldier. I
salute the brave fighting men of America; I never want to
fight alongside better soldiers. Just now I am seeing a great
deal of the American soldiers; I have tried to feel that I am
almost an American soldier myself so that I might take no
unsuitable action or offend them in any way. I have been
given an American identity card; I am thus identified in the
Army of the United States, my
fingerprints have been
registered in the War Department at Washington
is far preferable to having them registered at Scotland
