392
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
described by Montgomery as 'G2s' (Staff Officers, Grade 2).
The Germans lined up outside Montgomery's caravan, their
jackboots and waisted overcoats contrasting ludicrously with
the workaday battledress of the
British
officers and men.
Montgomery's first remark was 'Who are these people?' adding,
'What do they want?', although he knew perfectly well the
purpose of the visit. (General Ferdinand Foch had made almost
the same remark, under the same circumstances, in the Forêt de
Compiègne in November 1918.) The Germans said that they
had been sent by Keitel, who had given them written authority,
and that they
wanted to
surrender
to Field-Marshal
Montgomery three German armies withdrawing in front of the
Russians. They also wanted the Field-Marshal 'to take action to
prevent the civilians in that area from falling into the hands of
the Russians, to which Montgomery replied: 'No, certainly not.
Nothing to do with me - they must surrender to the Russians.'
At 1630 Montgomery telephoned Simpson at the War Office,
in a 'very jaunty mood', and said that he had refused to accept
the surrender, and had replied to the Germans that they must
surrender to the Russians, but that if any German soldiers came
into the British lines with their hands up they would be made
prisoners of the British. Simpson's minute of the call goes on:
'The Germans then asked what could be done about the civilians
for the "Russians would kill them all". FM Montgomery says
that his only reply was "I hope so"? This sounds harsh, but
General Sir Frank Simpson assures me that Montgomery did
not mean it: 'Monty knew he had "finished his business" but
wanted to hurry up the Germans and put an end to any argy-
bargy?54
During these preliminary surrender negotiations on 3 May,
Montgomery asked the Germans if Keitel would surrender all
his forces on the northern and western flanks of Twenty-First
Army Group. The enemy officers replied that they had no
authority to do so, but that they were very worried about the
fate of civilians in the battle area, and were thus prepared to
withdraw German forces slowly in front of a British advance so
that the civilians could be spared. Montgomery then said that if
that was all they had to say he must bid them 'Good morning'
and get on with the battle. As they did not seem anxious to go,
he showed them the battle maps - the Germans were horrified
and looked 'completely collapsed'. Montgomery then said that
393
he wanted to make three points: first, if they wanted to save
German lives they must surrender unconditionally all German
forces in Holland, Denmark and Schleswig-Holstein; second,
was agreed unconditionally he would
discuss the best way of occupying the areas in question and of
dealing with the civilians; and third, if the Germans did not agree
he would continue fighting, with all the consequences that this
course would have for German soldiers and civilians.
Von Friedenberg said that Keitel was in an HQ south of Kiel,
and that Doenitz, C-in-C of the German Navy and acting head
of the Government since Hitler's suicide on 30 April, was also
there. Montgomery told Simpson that he thought that Doenitz
surrender talks,
Friedenberg had given his personal opinion that Doenitz and
Keitel would agree to unconditional surrender.
The German
envoys now left, having said: 'We will try and get fresh authority
and return at 1700 tomorrow', although Kinsel and Wagen
asked (and were allowed) to stay behind - solitary and alien
figures in the cheerful British camp. 55
At 1600 on the next day, 4 May, Montgomery, certain of the
result, assembled the war correspondents.
Twenty-First Army
Group had hurriedly obtained a copy of the document by which
the Germans troops in Italy had surrendered (signed on 29th
April and effective from 2 May), and from this a document was
prepared to conclude the unconditional surrender of all enemy
forces in
north-east
Germany,
Holland
and
Denmark.
Montgomery told the journalists: 'I am demanding they sign this
piece of paper and
surrender
all forces
facing me'; then,
chuckling like a schoolboy, he added: 'If that piece of paper is
signed over a million chaps will have surrendered to me. Not so
bad - a million chaps. Good egg.
A little later the German delegation arrived. The envoys filed
into a tent, equipped with a single wooden table, and all sat
down, together with their British counterparts. The instrument
of surrender was placed before them on the table. Montgomery,
enjoying himself hugely, said, like a schoolmaster, 'The German
delegation will now sign in order of seniority? The cameras
clicked, and Montgomery finally said: 'I will now sign on behalf
of the Supreme Commander'; then, removing his tortoiseshell
spectacles, he stated: 'That concludes the surrender.' He had
loved the moment; indeed, so great was his excitement that he
