342
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
On 10 January, after Churchill had made the suggestion of a
new SHAEF deputy, Eisenhower had written to Marshall that
Tedder could not help him with visits and conferences with
troop commanders, and had added that the only deputy I could
think of myself would be Alexander' At the time, however, he
had not told Marshall that this had already been suggested by
Churchill. Marshall had replied that Alexander's appointment
would mean that the British 'had gained an important point in
getting control of ground operations', in which their divisions
would play a minor part while the US forces would inevitably
suffer heavy casualties, and that with Alexander as his Deputy
Eisenhower would have great difficulty in offsetting the direct
influence of Churchill. Eisenhower's response to this had been
that he had not foreseen these disadvantages, and that he had
enjoyed a fine relationship with Alexander in the past but that
Tedder, although equally splendid, suffered a handicap in that
senior ground officers, especially the British, assumed him to be
incapable of discussing intelligently any ground operations not
in the single field of air-ground co-operation' - this was certainly
Montgomery's attitude
towards
Tedder.
this
point
Eisenhower had decided to oppose Alexander's proposed
appointment.
The jealousy between the Americans and the British, never far
beneath the surface, was even more evident at this date because
both sides wanted their troops to have the lion's share of the
glamour of the final military victory. Eisenhower knew well that
Alexander, if he
should be appointed Deputy
Supreme
Commander, would try and hand as much of the glory as
possible to the British, and this was Churchill's definite intention.
Now, having been briefed by Marshall after Malta, the Supreme
Commander determined to retain Tedder and to keep Alexander
out. Accordingly, he wrote a cunningly worded letter to Brooke
on 16 February in an attempt to quash the British plot. Part of
the letter read:
It is extremely important, in my view, that Alexander
should understand in advance exactly how our whole set-up is
working in order that later he may not feel that he has been
badly used nor his great qualities as a soldier ignored. There
can be no question whatsoever of placing between me and my
Army Group Commanders any intermediary headquarters,
Rows Over Strategy
343
either official or unofficial in character. For many weeks we
have been working on future plans of operations and keeping
them constantly revised in accordance with changes in the
local and the general situation.
Day before yesterday I saw
Montgomery for the second time since his return from leave
and he was most emphatic in insisting that the command
arrangements I have
nearly perfect
circumstances, including diverse nationalities, will
He asserted with particular emphasis that any thought of an
intermediate ground command, or of any interference with
the clear line of authority extending from me to him, should
be carefully avoided. All measures to implement his plans for
the Northern operations (except possibly
equipment) have
projected timing of our several operations to secure the lines
of the Rhine that will permit the
greatest possible
concentration North of the Ruhr, are agreed upon.
other view reaches you, through any channel, I'm certain
such view is not shared by Montgomery.
No fundamental change in plans or command organization
is contemplated, and unless Alexander is clearly informed of
all these things, he may feel that his new position is one of less
influence than he should properly have.
Another factor that has entered the picture is the extent to
which U.S. forces, including relatively high commanders, feel
themselves aggrieved by the unfortunate burst of publicity in
the
London
papers
following
upon
my
placing
Montgomery in temporary command of the First and Ninth
Armies during the
Ardennes battle ...
The upshot is that
should there be any attempt on the part of any newspaper to
interpret Alexander's appointment here as the establishment
of a ground headquarters or the interposition of any kind of
newspapers won't cause us
interpretation
of
events
is
often
faulty.
Such
announcement on my part might hurt Alexander's feelings,
and, in addition, might give the British and American papers
another
opportunity to indulge in futile but nevertheless
disturbing argument.
