432
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
By 14 September 1944 Eisenhower had agreed to gamble
three airborne divisions - almost the whole of the SHAEF
strategic reserve - on the 'Market-Garden' drops, and to give
priority in supplies to Montgomery's northern thrust, thus
reducing the threat to Germany from the American armies. Yet
the following letter to Marshall
shows that the Supreme
Commander had no faith in Montgomery's plan to concentrate
on a northern thrust to enter the North German plain and reach
Berlin. To a certain extent the letter detracts from Eisenhower's
stature as a commander, since in effect he was telling Marshall
that he favoured a different strategy to the one he was actually
carrying out.
14 Sept. 1944
Dear General:
I think that by forwarding to the Combined Chiefs of Staff
periodic appreciations as well as copies of principal directives
you are kept fairly well acquainted with our situation. The
fact is
that we are stretched to the absolute
maintenance both as to intake and as to distribution after
supplies are landed.
From the start we have always known that we would have
to choose, after breaking out of the original bridgehead, some
line which would mark a relative slackening in offensive
operations while we improved maintenance facilities
and
prepared for an offensive operation that could be sustained
for another indefinite period. At first it seemed to me that the
German would try to use some one of the number of lines
available to him in France on which to make a rather
determined stand, but due to the decisiveness of our victory
below the Seine I determined to go all out in effort and in risk
to continue the drive beyond the German border, up to and
including
regrouping and re-fitting.
the Rhine before we began the
process of
While this was going on Montgomery suddenly became
obsessed with the idea that his Army Group could rush right
on into Berlin provided we gave him all the maintenance that
was in the theater - that is, immobilize all other divisions and
give their transport and supplies to his Army Group, with
some to Hodges.
Examination of this scheme exposes it as a
fantastic idea. First of all, it would have to be done with the
Important Eisenhower and Montgomery Documents 433
ports we now have, supplemented possibly by Calais and
Ostend. The attack would be on such a narrow front that
Ranking threats would be particularly effective and no other
troops in the whole region would be capable of going to its
support. Actually I doubt that the idea was proposed in any
conviction that it could be carried through to completion; it
was based merely on wishful thinking, and in an effort to
induce me to give to 21st Army Group and to Bradley's left
every ounce of maintenance there is in the theater.
As opposed to this the only profitable plan is to hustle all
our forces up against the Rhine, including Devers' forces,
build up our maintenance facilities and our reserves as rapidly
as possible and then put on one sustained and unremitting
advance against the heart of the enemy country. Supporting
this
great
attack
will probably be
subsidiary
operations
against the German ports on the left and against his southern
industrial areas on the right. I have sacrificed a lot to give
Montgomery the strength he needs to reach the Rhine in the
north and to threaten the Ruhr. That is, after all, our main
effort for the moment. The great Airborne attack which will go
in support of this operation will be Sunday the 17th, unless
prevents.
It should be
successful in carrying
Montgomery up to and across the Rhine; thereafter
it is
absolutely imperative that he quickly capture the approaches
to Antwerp so that we may use that port. The port facilities
themselves are practically undamaged and we have there
ample storage for bulk oil, something that we critically need.
Le Havre will be developed for utilization by U.S. forces.
During the early and middle summer, I was always ready
to defer capture of ports in favor of bolder and more rapid
movement to the front. But now approaches the season of the
year when we can no longer afford this, especially in view of
the resistance the German is ready to offer in Fortress
defense, as demonstrated both at St. Malo and at Brest.
Every day I thank my stars that I held out for ANVIL in the
face of almost overwhelming pressure. Marseilles may yet be
a Godsend to us.
My
own
belief is that, assuming
continuation of the
Russian pressure at its present scale, we will have to fight one
more major battle in the West. This will be to break through
the German defenses on the border and to get started on the
