266
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
advance into Germany 'with all armies moving abreast'; instead,
the crossing of the Rhine would be accomplished by a joint
assault from both Montgomery's and Bradley's forces. He went
on to remind Montgomery that he had given him priority in
supplies while the other forces had been 'fighting with a halter
around their necks.'6
At this stage Eisenhower was confident that Montgomery
would win a bridgehead over the Rhine at Arnhem, and that this
success would have to be reinforced at the expense of the US
armies, despite the complaints of the American generals, who
were
accusing
Supreme Commander of
Montgomery's pocket. Although the latter tactfully suggested
that he would co-operate if Eisenhower gave the US armies the
main drive, he was supremely confident that he would win his
bridgehead over the Rhine, in which event he would have an
unanswerable case for priority in supplies.
In his letter, Eisenhower told Montgomery that: 'Generally
anning I find myself so completely in agreement ... that I
cannot believe there is any difference in our concepts, and added
that he had never intended to advance into Germany with all
armies moving abreast, and that he would give priority to the
British northern thrust.
Montgomery replied on the 21st: 'Our concepts are not the
same, and I am sure you would want me to be quite frank. He
emphasised that he definitely wanted Eisenhower 'to stop by
binding orders the advance of the 12 Army Group's southern
drive', and to 'put everything
done you will not get the Ruhr.'
into the left hook. If this is not
The Supreme Commander realised at once that he would get
nowhere by continuing this argument in writing, so he called a
top-level conference at Versailles (the new site of his HQ since
15 September) for 22 September. This was the most important
SHAEF conference since D-Day, and Eisenhower hoped that it
would produce agreement over major decisions for a swift
ending of the war. He wrote to Marshall saying that he still
hoped for a quick breakthrough by the British to Arnhem,
although by then the attempt was doomed.
The Versailles conference was the first full SHAEF meeting
since the conference at St Paul's School in May. But, to
Eisenhower's fury, Montgomery refused to attend, sending de
Guingand in his place. Eisenhower's reaction was mild enough,
After Arnhem
267
under the circumstances: 'It is a great pity all of us cannot keep
in closer touch because without exception when all of us get
together and look at our various problems squarely in the face
the answers usually become obvious.'
Although Montgomery signalled Eisenhower that he was too
busy with the critical Arnhem battle to come to Versailles, this
was not in fact true. Control on the ground lay perforce with
Horrocks and Browning, and in any case Montgomery had
great difficulty in keeping in touch with his forward formations
since his front was now a salient fifty miles deep. John
Henderson told me that his general only once got as far as
Nijmegen bridge between 17 and 24 September, but even then
did not cross the Waal, for he stuck resolutely to his routine of
being back at his HQ early each evening, relying on his liaison
officers'
contacts with his commanders.
He himself had little
contact with his troops at the time, and his claim that he was
closely involved at the front was specious, to say the least.
Probably Montgomery's main reason for not going to
Versailles was that he knew that Simpson would be there on that
day - he knew also that he could rely on the latter to put his
point of view more persuasively than he could himself. What
was more, Simpson, an exceptionally charming, able and tactful
man, was on excellent terms with Morgan and Whiteley, the
British
generals at SHAEF, whereas
Montgomery
was
not.
Montgomery
also knew that Bedell Smith would listen more
sympathetically to Simpson than to himself, for the two men
were friends. Simpson was devoted to Montgomery (Brooke
used to tell him 'You worship Monty'), and Montgomery was
convinced that at Versailles on 22 September Simpson would be
the best advocate for his ambitious plans, with the loyal de
Guingand in support.
Even
on D-plus-4, 21 September, Montgomery was still
optimistic about 'Market-Garden', and was most anxious that
the conference should agree to Bradley's Twelfth Army Group
covering Twenty-First Army Group's right flank during the
Rhine crossing.
Still expecting the establishment of a strong
bridgehead over the Rhine, he wanted to get Hodges's US First
Army to turn north to join him, since the gap between the US
and British armies was now nearly 100 kilometres.
To a certain
army and the dire plight of British Ist Airborne Division when,
