108
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
in consequence,
maintaining morale was
never
out
of
Montgomery's mind.
His
perpetual,
supreme
confidence,
coupled with his theatrical behaviour, was a continual boost to
morale, one which
was desperately
required after the initial
exhilaration of the successful landing had passed.
With British infantry in unceasing contact with spirited Nazi
formations from 6 June onwards,
many
soldiers became
mentally, as well as physically, tired. Essame wrote: 'Their stock
of courage could soon be exhausted, leaving them bankrupt and
bereft of bravery. After the first few weeks in Normandy about
10 per cent of Second Army casualties in June and nearly 50 per
cent in the case of one of the veteran divisions were classified as
battle exhaustion.'
Again according to Essame, a battalion
commander himself:
One of the gravest psychological problems was the way in
which one or two neurotics could infect a whole formation.
Sometimes
When incompletely
reinforcements were used as front line troops, and panicked.
Equally difficult to combat was the shock effect when really
good officers were killed or gravely wounded. Such leaders
had usually built up a sense of personal respect and trust
which replacement officers could not quickly re-create. Often
too officers were suddenly called upon to take over in a crisis
and found that they were not able to cope with the demands
made upon them. An example of this kind of thing happened
when a good commanding officer was wounded at the height
of the battle and the second-in-command moved up from the
rear to take over.
At Brigade HQ he was
erroneously optimistic view picture of the situation' and when
'faced by a desperate military situation which would have
taxed the skill of the most experienced commander he became
distraught of course and had to be removed' 21
Desertions mounted, though offenders were severely punished
if caught. The death penalty for desertion had been outlawed in
April 1930, largely thanks to the efforts of the Labour MP
Ernest Thurtle, but in the Second World War both General Sir
Claude Auchinleck and Alexander had been in favour of its
reintroduction. Montgomery, however, stood out against it.
More cautious soldiers in Normandy just reported sick, and
Normandy Assault
109
were soon interviewed by a sympathetic psychiatrist. In July,
Montgomery sanctioned the opening of exhaustion centres for
"battle happy' soldiers in Normandy, so that men no longer had
to return to England for treatment; he also saw to it that a
general psychiatric hospital was set up. (Self-inflicted wounds
occurred less often than in the First World War, in so far as
such statistics can be accurate?) Essame, in common with
many other Great War veterans, thought that there was a lack
of moral fibre in the younger generation of soldiers. 44 per cent
of Montgomery's men in Normandy served in non-fighting
arms, where they rarely came into contact with the enemy; the
infantry were exposed to the most danger. Even in 'Goodwood',
largely a tank
battle, the one-and-a-half infantry divisions
involved suffered heavier casualties than the three armoured
divisions.
There are instances to justify the German assertion, quoted
above, that the British infantry were inclined to surrender or
retreat. The most tragic which can be documented is the sad
case of an infantry battalion in 49th Division. On 30 June the
battalion was withdrawn from the line, and seven days later it
was broken up. The original battalion commander
had been
sacked a few days before, as was the brigade commander six
days later. Montgomery,
having seen the new CO's report,
wrote calmly to Grigg that he had been forced to withdraw the
unit as being no longer fit for battle, and added in his own hand
I consider the CO displays a defeatist mentality and is not a
proper chap.' This was hardly fair. The CO who wrote the
report, a copy of which went to Grigg, had only been with the
unit for ninety-six hours.23
Grigg drafted this reply: I am surprised. What have Brigade
and Divisional Commanders done about it? What happened to
the original CO? ... It is a sad state for a Bn to get into and I
hope you will get an experienced and mature CO to pull it
together? On reflection, however, Grigg decided not to send this
draft to Montgomery. Instead he let the matter drop.
Ir is surprising that Montgomery sent the report to Grigg.
Field-Marshal Lord Carver
suggests
(letter to the
author)
that it might perhaps have been a backhanded criticism of
the state of training of units arriving from the UK; or perhaps
his motive was to
demonstrate, should the Army be slow in
achieving a break-out, that it was not for want of trying on
