92
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
with few casualties. Montgomery had ordered Hobart originally
to offer one-third of his gadgets 'to the Americans', but sadly
Bradley and his staff were not interested, except in the DDs.
The American military historian Russel Weighey claims this
colossal error arose because the Americans, unlike the British,
had not suffered the ghastly casualties in frontal assaults like
those on the Somme or at Passchendaele, and tended therefore
to look on tanks merely as instruments for break-through and
mobility? The contrast between the success of the British mine-
clearing and the failure of the Americans at Omaha proves
Montgomery's foresight in his all-out support for the Hobart
tank devices.
By nightfall on D-Day British troops had advanced for up to
six miles inland. They had not reached all their objectives, and
Montgomery's optimistic view that Caen might fall on the first
day had proved a wild dream. British 6th Airborne's daring
landing had created a bridgehead east of the Caen canal and the
River Orne, and after rushing the guards at Bénouville bridge
they seized unguarded bridges on the only lateral road between
Caen and Sword Beach. British 3rd Division had been given the
task of capturing Caen, eight miles from Sword, while Canadian
3rd Division was expected to take Carpiquet airfield, eleven
miles inland from Juno Beach and immediately west of Caen.
The Canadians nearly took Carpiquet, but the planners had
underestimated the traffic
congestion on roads out of the
beaches:* when, at 1000, a half-squadron of Canadians tanks
reached the Caen-Bayeux road at Bratteville they found no
opposition, and they were almost at Carpiquet airfield when they
realised that they were alone, having completely outrun all the
rest of the supporting Canadian divisions. Such had been the
traffic delays on the beach exits that the follow-up troops were
held up for hours. The isolated tanks had to withdraw, although
had the Canadians arrived at Carpiquet in strength on the
afternoon of D-Day they, with British 3rd Division, could have
taken Caen.
3rd Division landed at Sword and swiftly overcame the beach
opposition, but after that their progress was disappointing.
Montgomery had insisted on battle-experienced troops for all
the landings, and it is possible that their previous experience had
made the troops over-cautious. Not until 1900 did the division
link up with 6th Airborne at the key bridgehead of Bénouville,
Normandy Assault
93
three miles from the outskirts of Caen. Forty tanks of 21st
Panzer Division had counter-attacked 6th Airborne strongly at
1600, but fortunately by then 20th Anti-Tank Regiment had
deployed its 17-pounders, and glider-borne reinforcements had
arrived. The 17-pounders knocked out over twenty German
tanks, while the glider reinforcements had doubled the fighting
strength of 6th Airborne, but with 3rd Division behind schedule
no determined effort could be made to chase 21st Panzer and
take Caen. Nevertheless, Montgomery had a bridgehead over
the river north-east of Caen for follow-up attacks into the best
tank country, although it was not strongly held.
On D-Day, General Sir Nigel Poett (later a DMO) was the
brigadier commanding 5 Parachute Brigade of 6th Airborne
Division. The brigade
crash-landed its gliders within a few
yards of Bénouville Bridge, and General Poett told me:
Our operation on D-Day was a complete success and
Monty's plan to capture the vital Bénouville bridge by a
spectacular air operation was completely justified.
sergeant-pilots of the gliders did a magnificent job in guiding
was in our hands.
full airborne division.
It was well on the cards that Monty could have taken Caen
on the first day, but 3rd Division were late in joining up with
us from Sword Beach. At first light one of my companies
could have taken Caen; in the afternoon it would have needed
a whole battalion, and by night a division.
When I met General Gale (my divisional commander) at
dawn I was able to tell him that my brigade had taken all their
objectives. Our worst moment was at 0730 when we found
21st Panzer moving fast up to their start line to attack us
down both banks of the Orne. Then they realised from the
noise and smoke and lights from the beaches that the invasion
had started so they only left one armoured regiment to attack
us, and
with well dug-in anti-tank guns we kept them off.
