14
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
Viscount, for his kindness and his valuable help,
permission to quote from his father's writings. He has been good
enough to say that he welcomes this book.
Bill Williams is a very old friend of mine: We were both at
Merton College, Oxford, as undergraduates fifty years ago, and
it was a very small college then. It has been for me a great
pleasure to resume our friendship, and the help he has given has
been beyond value. He was close to Montgomery throughout
the period I have covered and, with his acute academic mind
and his experience
in editing the Dictionary of National
Biography, his comments have been most illuminating. I have
included many quotations from Williams as they reveal much
about Montgomery
and
the
other
British
and
American
commanders; he has also been kind enough to read much of the
manuscript.
I am deeply grateful to General Sir Frank Simpson, GBE,
KCB, DSO ('Simbo'), Director of Military Operations at the
War Office during the campaign in Europe. His memory and
clarity of mind are exceptional, and he kindly gave me access to
his important
archives, which
Montgomery. He
of both
Montgomery and Alanbrooke, and got on well with Eisenhower
and Bedell Smith and the other American generals. From his
position at the War Office he had a unique ringside view of the
campaigns, and of the allies fighting them.
I am also very grateful to Kit Dawnay. As head of Twenty-
First Army Group Tac HQ he knew Montgomery intimately,
and was to a certain extent his confidant. He kindly gave me the
run of his archives,
which contain important and hitherto
unpublished material, including the transcript of Montgomery's
speech at the vital St Paul's School conference in April 1944,
where security was so tight that no notes were allowed to be
taken; other historians have had to rely on the memories of
those who were present.
John Henderson, who was Montgomery's ADC from El
Alamein in 1942 to the end of the war, has been most helpful,
and my thanks are due to him for telling me about the Field-
Marshal, for his reminiscences of recorded and unrecorded
events, and for his courtesy and kindness.
My thanks are also due to Major Charles Messenger for his
help. His recent experience at the Staff College and of the Staff
Foreword
15
College battlefield tours has been most useful to me, and he
kindly
read in manuscript my accounts
of the battles of
'Goodwood' and Arnhem and suggested improvements.
t sincerely to than althose who wan given
interest in the Field-Marshal that as soon as it was known that I
was
writing this book I was proferred
considerably
more
material than I could use; nevertheless, all of it proved of great
I am most grateful to the following, whose observations,
besides the other help they have given me, have been of great
value and add much to this book. I have, in accordance with
scrupulously preserving the sense of their remarks: Maj-Gen
Hew Butler, CB; Field-Marshal the Lord Carver, GCB, CBE,
DSO, MC; Lt-Col C.P. Dawnay, CBE, MVO; Richard Du
Vivier, Esq, CBE; General Sir David Fraser, GCB, OBE; the
late General Sir Richard Gale, GCB, K BE, DSO, MC; Brigadier
Michael Gordon-Watson, OBE, MC, MA; Brigadier Sir Geoffrey
Hardy-Roberts, KCVO, CB, CBE; John Henderson, Esq, MBE;
Brigadier A.G. Heywood, CBE, MVO, MC; Brigadier J. Hunter,
DSO, OBE, MC; Wing-Commander Asher Lee; General Sir
James Marshall-Cornwall, KCB, CBE, DSO, MC; The Viscount
Montgomery of Alamein, CBE; General Sir Nigel Poett, KCB,
DSO; Robert Priestley, Esq, MBE; General Sir Charles
Richardson, GCB, CBE, DSO; Maj-Gen G.P.B. Roberts, CB,
DSO, MC; Lt-Col G.A. Shepperd, MBE; General Sir Frank
Simpson, GBE, KCB, DSO; Brian Urquhart, Esq; Brigadier Sir
Edgar Williams, CB, CBE, DSO
Bill Williams and General Sir Frank Simpson kindly lent me
their recent correspondence with the late Maj-Gen
who was contemplating another book on the Second World War
to follow his Victory in Normandy when he died; I am most
grateful to Mrs Belchem for permission to quote from these
Michael Olizar and the staff of the Sikorski Museum and
Polish Institute, Kensington, have been most helpful over the
Polish Army, and I am very grateful to them. I am also indebted
to the staffs of the London Library and the Public Record Office,
Kew; to Patricia Methuen, the Archivist, and the Trustees of the
Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives, King's College,
