184
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
campaign was darkened by his disputes with the American.
On 17 August Montgomery had discussed future policy with
Bradley. For some unexplained reason he had come away with
the impression that Bradley agreed with his plan for a single
thrust on the north front with a combined British and American
force of forty divisions. In fact Bradley had already cooked up a
quite different plan in consultation with Patton. This telegram of
18 August to Brooke reveals Montgomery's thinking, and his
misapprehension about Bradley's opinion:
Have been thinking ahead about future plans but have not
(repeat not) discussed subject with Ike. My views are as
follows. After crossing Seine 12 and 21 Army Groups should
keep together as a solid mass of some 40 divisions which
would be so strong that it need fear nothing. The force should
move northwards. 21st Army Group should be on Western
flank and should clear the channel coast and the Pas de
West Flanders and secure
American armies should move with right flank on Ardennes
directed on Brussels, Aachen and Cologne. The movement of
American armies would cut the communications of enemy
forces on channel coast and thus facilitate the task of British
Army Group. The initial objects of movement would be to
destroy German forces on coast and to establish a powerful
air force in Belgium. A further object would be to get enemy
out of V-1 or V-2 range of England. Bradley agrees entirely
with above conception. Would be glad to know if you agree
generally. When I have got your reply will discuss matter with
On the 19th Eisenhower informed his two Army Group
commanders that he would soon take over command of the land
battle; at the same time he made it clear that he wanted to cross
the Seine 'on the run'. He directed Montgomery to strike north-
east towards Antwerp and from there to the Ruhr, while Bradley
was to advance from Paris towards Metz. Montgomery took a
different view, and told Eisenhower that he wanted the Allies to
concentrate by sending as large a force as possible towards
Antwerp, under his command. They would then, he thought, be
able both to clear the V-bomb sites and open up Antwerp as a
185
Eisenhower Takes Command
supply port.
Shortly before
Eisenhower's signal arrived, Bradley had
informed Montgomery that 'Ike wants to split his force and send
half of it eastwards', that is, away from the Pas de Calais and
Antwerp. He did
not, however,
tell Montgomery that he
favoured this plan.
On
20 August Montgomery
issued his
Directive M520. He still had another eleven days as nominal
overall commander, but now he had to be careful to agree his
orders with Bradley and Eisenhower. He told the CIGS: 'I have
so worded my directive that we shall retain the ability to act in
any
direction.'
M520
ordered
Bradley's
right
wing
to
assemble to the west and south west of Paris but not to take the
city until the Supreme Commander decides it is a sound
military proposition.' After Paris Bradley would advance to the
general line Orleans-Troyes-Rheims-Amiens so that his forces
could operate north east towards Brussels and Aachen with or
without a portion directed due east to Saar' But Bradley and
Patton had no intention of going towards Brussels. They had
plans to win the war on their own, by an advance straight into
Germany far to the south.
On 22 August Montgomery sent de Guingand to Eisenhower
with a memorandum which, with customary egotism, assured
the Supreme Commander that the victory to date had been won
by 'personal command'; it continued: The force must operate as
one whole
Single control
.... is vital for success.
This is a
whole time job for one man. Montgomery considered that the
results of the Normandy campaign gave him an inalienable right
to this privilege.
The memorandum
was dictated on the 22nd, and was
intended to serve as a brief for de Guingand in his talk with
Eisenhower. There is no evidence that the tactful de Guingand
ever showed it to the Supreme Commander, but Montgomery
gave a copy to the Vice-CIGS, Lt-Gen Sir Archibald Nye, who
visited him on the same day, Brooke being in Italy. It displays
Montgomery's supreme confidence in himself, and his belief that
this confidence should be shared by everyone else:
1. The quickest way to win this war is for the great mass of
the Allied armies to advance northwards, clear the coast
as far as Antwerp, establish a powerful air force in
Belgium, and advance into the Ruhr.
