298
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
concentrate our forces on a selected vital thrust instead of
dissipating them all along the front.
Montgomery took Eisenhower's silence for acquiescence, and
reported to Brooke, with considerable self-satisfaction, that the
Supreme Commander had accepted his arguments.
In this,
however, he was quite wrong. Montgomery went to bed as usual
at 2130, leaving the Supreme Commander to be looked after by
Dawnay. On the following day Montgomery remarked that He
agreed to everything last night', to which Dawnay replied that,
from what Eisenhower had said after Montgomery had retired,
he very much doubted it. The Field-Marshal overruled Dawnay,
however, and to make sure that Eisenhower had understood all
his points, followed the meeting up two days later with a well-
written letter, clearly reiterating all the arguments he had made in
conversation. The letter demonstrates a gross misjudgement of
Eisenhower's character:
We have failed and suffered a strategic reverse. We require a
new plan. And this time we must not fail ... Bradley and I
make a good team ... things have not gone well since you
separated us ... to be certain of success you want to bring us
together and one of us should have full operational control
north of the Ardennes AND IF YOU DECIDE I SHOULD
DO THE WORK THAT IS O.K. BY ME.3
Brooke's encouragement of his friend and protégé caused
incalculable harm to Anglo-American relations, and Eisenhower
never forgave Montgomery for the tone of his 30 November
letter. The Supreme Commander, said an ADC, was hot under
the collar'; in fact, Eisenhower
was extremely angry.
managed to write a controlled letter which gave his view that the
only thing achieved by
Montgomery's letter was to put in
writing your conceptions and opinions as presented to me the
other evening?
and went on to say that he did not know what
Montgomery meant by 'strategic reverse', since they had gained
a great victory in Normandy.
To emphasise his
however, Eisenhower, administered a snub by hinting that he
thought
failed in Normandy: 'If we
advanced from the beginning [that is, at Caen] as we had hoped
our maintenance services would have been in a position to supply
us during the critical September days. And, referring to the
The Dreary Autumn
299
immediate situation, the Supereme Commander stressed that he
wanted the dividing line to be the Ruhr, not the Ardennes, and
that he had 'no intention' of stopping Devers and Patton.
Montgomery was shaken by this tough letter, and sensibly
saw that he must mend his bridges with his superior. He replied,
humbly
enough,
that
he
had never
intended to
give
the
impression that the performance of the Allied Army had been an
overall failure, and that his letter was only referring to the failure
of the
November
offensive.
In
reply to this,
Eisenhower
displayed that quality of tact and magnanimity which was
eventually to bring him to the Presidency of the United States:
•You have my prompt and abject apologies ... I do not want to
put words or meaning into your mouth that upsets our close
relationship.'5
Here was an opportunity for
Montgomery to establish
better working relationship with the Supreme Commander, but
in the event he threw it away.
First, he signalled Brooke on 4
December and asked him not to take up the reorganisation of
the command with Washington, but to leave it to him. 'There is
a sporting
chance
we may pull it
off. But any outside
interference at this juncture might be fatal.
Then, on
7 December, Montgomery met Eisenhower at
Maastricht. Tedder, Bradley and Bedell Smith were also present,
although Montgomery had originally suggested that no one
should be present except Chiefs of Staff, who should not speak.
But Eisenhower now snubbed the Twenty-First Army
Group
commander again by saying that he insisted on taking Bedell
Smith: 'I will not by any means insult him by telling him he
should remain mute at any conference both he and I attend.'
There were other clashes at Maastricht between Montgomery
and
Eisenhower.
Montgomery
harangued
the conference,
arguing that the main battlefield must be 'north of the Ruhr', the
only terrain suitable for mobile warfare, and that therefore
everything must be put into a concentrated offensive across the
Rhine north of the Ruhr. All this the Supreme Commander had
heard before, finding it merely a dreary
repetition
of
the
September arguments; the difference now, however, was that he
was even more hostile to Montgomery.
Eisenhower
argued that
"there
were no fundamental
differences'.
He believed that the area further south,
around
Frankfurt and Cassel, was suitable for armour. He still favoured
