134
Montgomery in Europe 1943-1945
firm bridgehead' he had asked for in his order to Dempsey
because they were counter-attacked heavily during the afternoon
by German armour, and VIII Corps tanks could not help them
sufficiently; they had shot their bolt. The Canadians asked for
air support, but a violent thunderstorm removed any hope of it.
The torrential rain continued for forty-eight hours, filling slit
trenches almost immediately
with a foot
of water,
and
hampering any movement.
It was a scene of considerable
desolation. An officer wrote in his diary:
I have never seen such bomb craters. Trees were uprooted,
roads impassable. There were bodies in half; crumbled men; a
tank lay upside-down, another was still burning with a row of
feet sticking from underneath. On one crater a man's head
appeared sticking out from the side. The place stank. 43
With the coming of the storm Dempsey called off his attacks,
and 'Goodwood'
was over. Montgomery refused to admit
failure, and at a press conference announced that 156,000
Germans had been killed or made prisoner since D-Day, a
pretence that all had gone well. Strategically, and like 'Epsom',
"Goodwood' can be classed as a success because it drew to the
east so much of Rommel's armour, and secured both Caen and
a stronger bridgehead over the Orne. Tactically, however, it was
a definite failure. Montgomery always insisted that because of
'Goodwood the Germans retained six Panzer divisions on the
British front, and that they were never able to withdraw even a
single one of these divisions for a strategic reserve, as Rommel
had always intended. Here he is right. Certainly if even a single
Panzer division had been put in reserve, the American break-out
at St Lô (25 July-4 August) would have been far more difficult.
Although the British Government had been informed about
the plot to kill Hitler, its members were taken by complete
surprise when, on the last day of 'Goodwood', the news came
that Hitler had narrowly survived assassination. Overtures had
been
made by the anti-Nazis, led by Colonel Klaus von
Stauffenberg, through Sweden, and as early as May 1942 the
Bishop of Chichester had been sent there to meet Pastor Dietrich
Bonhoeffer, a leading conspirator. So frightened was Churchill of
alienating the Russians, however, that he refused to extend any
Normandy Assault
helping hand towards the conspirators at all, and Anthony Eden,
the Foreign Secretary, firmly told Bishop Bell that he would do
nothing. This was a grave disappointment to von Stauffenberg
and his collaborators, but they went ahead courageously with the
plot, hoping that once Hitler was dead the Allies would quickly
come to terms with them.
Eisenhower had been given no briefing whatsoever about the
July. The blame for this falls squarely
Churchill; indeed so little was known, or had been told of the
anti-Nazis that Brooke recorded
his diary on 21 July:
• Astonished to hear of attempt on Hitler's life.
Both Rommel and his successor, von Kluge, were implicated
to act against the Nazi regime. On 15 July Rommel had sent a
signal to Hitler pointing out that the position of Germany was
grave and that there were no reinforcements of any importance
that could be brought to the Normandy front, whereas each day
the Allies were bringing in new forces and masses of war material.
It must be expected the Allies will succeed within fourteen days
to three weeks in breaking our thin front and will push far on
into the
interior of France; the consequences
will be
immeasurable
I must beg you to draw the political
conclusions without delay. I feel it is my duty as
the
Commander-in-Chief of the Army Group to state this
clearly.44
During the next few days, all that were left to him as an active
commander,
Rommel told his friends amongst the German
commanders in his armies of his démarche to Hitler; beyond
doubt, if Hitler were successfully assassinated Rommel would
have been a ringleader and a key man in the struggle to destroy
the Nazi regime. Unfortunately, on 17 July, when
the Allies
greatly needed to keep Rommel at the helm in Normandy, he
was seriously wounded in the RAF attack on his car as he was
returning from the front line to his HO at La Roche Guyon. At
first he was thought to be dead, and although he recovered he
was out of action on the crucial day,
20 July, when
von
Stauffenberg so nearly killed Hitler and, for a few vital hours,
