pg_0008.pdf:
strong to stand normal use, but it should not be used as a plattorm
on to the edge of which packages and cases weighing over 7 cwt.
can be hoisted indiscriminately without care or consideration for
the bodywork.
Filling Up and Starting
Petrol: Before the truck is taken out on the road, the driver
should make sure that there is a supply of petrol in the tank, the
filler of which projects through the centre of the scuttle in front
of the windscreen.
The neck of the filler, although strong, should
never be used as a support for a heavy funnel into which a full
tin of petrol is carelessly dumped.
The tank holds over eight
gallons, so that four tins of fuel can be poured in when there is
still a half gallon or so remaining at the bottom of the tank.
Warming Up
It is almost alwavs advisable, particularly in the case of a new
vehicle. that the engine should be allowed to get warm gradually
before it is called upon to do any heavy work.
The petrol tap is situated in the centre underneath the tank
inside the driver's cab. and the petrol is normally turned off when
the handle is in the vertical position.
To turn on the petrol the
handle
should be moved one quarter turn anti-clockwise.
To
indicate to the driver that the petrol supply is getting low a two-
level tap is provided, so that when the supply gives out on the
position already indicated, by turning the tap a half turn clockwise.
or one quarter turn clockwise from the vertical position, petrol
sufficient to last until the next filling station is reached is available.
Either Shell petrol or benzole mixture will be found satisfactory.
Oil: The oil filler is situated on the right-hand side (facing
forward).
This filler also acts as a breather
for the crankcase,
and under the domed cap is a fine mesh air sieve, which should be
removed when replenishing the oil.
Inside the filler is a conical
gauze strainer of coarse mesh, which should not be removed when
replenishing the oil.
The dipper gauge will be found on the same
side as the oil filler, but about 6 in. farther back, and is in the form
of a rod with graduations indicating the amount of oil in the sump
If this rod becomes coated with oil throughout its length it should
be wiped, inserted into the hole, pressed down and withdrawn,
when it will register the oil level correctly.
Before starting out,
the oil level should be up to the top mark on this rod, care being
taken to see that the truck is standing on fairly level ground
otherwise a false reading may be obtained.
Water: The water in the radiator should also be inspected,
and if it appears low, fresh water should be added until it begins
to flow out of the overflow pipe.

