pg_0015.pdf:
engine.)
this should be removed and a thin rod inserted which
will
indicate the piston movement
Turn the
engine
slowly fill
the inlet valve has closed ; the rod will now rise until the piston
is at the top of its travel.
Set the ignition lever on the steering
column
fully retard or right back.
Remove the
lever
of the
contact breaker and turn the armature of the magneto in an anti-
clockwise direction till the fibre block rises on the inclined plane
just enough to separate the platinum points.
The carbon brush
on the distributor must be immediately opposite terminal No.
4
The firing order is 1, 3, 4, 2.
Lock the magneto coupling and
check the timing again to see that no movement has taken place
during the setting
Valve Tappets
The valve tappets should be adjusted to give a play of .004 in.
for the inlet, and .oo5 in. for the exhaust valves, between the end
of the valve stem and the head of the tappet adjusting screw,
when the engine is hot.
If the tappets are set with the engine
cold an extra.oor in. must be allowed to compensate for the expan-
sion inevitable with the rise in temperature.
When the valves are ground in, the tappets must be reset. It
is advisable when the truck has run 50 to 100 miles after resetting
to again check the clearance, as valves have a tendener to "bed
down" a little after having been disturbed.
When checking clearances, turn the tappet through one com-
plete revolution and make sure that the figure given above is the
minimum in all positions.
When tightening the adjusting screw
lock nut it is not impossible sometimes to throw the adjusting
screw slightly out of line, with the result that different positions
of the tappet give slightly different clearances.
Camshaft
To adjust this for end play, first remove the fan pulley. Two
holes will be found in this to enable an extractor to be used.
Then
remove camshaft front cover and take out a sufficient number of
thin washers which will be found at the back of it, to allow an
end play of .003 in. to .004 in. only.
This adjustment is seldom,
if ever, necessary, but occasionally a slight knock in the engine
may be traced to this cause.
Crankshaft
It is strongly recommended that the work of adjusting the
crankshaft bearings should be entrusted to a competent mechanic
and preferably carried out at a Morris Service Depot.
Should
the owner, however, wish to carry out this work himself he should
proceed as follows :—
Drain the oil sump by means of the plug provided.
Remove
the oil filter through the manhole provided.
Take down the oil

