pg_0017.pdf:
the bolts between it and the upper half of
the cylinder block and also the set pins in the end faces at the
timing gear cover and the clutch compartment.
A light tap with
a wooden mallet should be sufficient to part the joint faces.
Do
not, on any account, hit the sump with a hammer or drive chisels
between the joint faces, which
are readily damaged.
Having
removed the sump, disconnect the oilpump unions and, having
washed surplus dirty oil away from the crank and its bearings, ascer-
tain which bearing is needing attention. Should the bearing require
only slight adjustment, or the complete replacement of one bearing
only be necessary, this may be carried out without removal of
the power unit, but care must be taken that one bearing only is
dismantled at a time.
To adjust the bearing, remove the locking
collars from the bearing cap nuts, unscrew the nuts and remove
the bearing cap together with the lower half of the bearing, taking
great care to note the position of the packing shims.
The thickness
of these shims may then be evenly reduced the amount that the
bearing requires adjusting. It should be noted that the oil wavs
in the bearing are clear, and also that the feed hole in the crank-
shaft which supplies oil to the connecting rod bearings is also clean.
The bearing shell is dowelled into the bearing cap onlv, and the
top half shell may be removed for examination bv rotating it
between the upper half of the crankcase and its shaft.
When
replacing same, note that it is put back correctly in its original
position. Great care must be taken to see that the bearing is not
replaced too tightly, and atter carrying out the work it should
be possible to turn the crankshaft easily by means of the starting
handle.
Connecting Rod
A similar procedure should be adopted should any of the con-
necting rod bearings require adjustment, but it should not be
necessary to remove the power unit even if more than one bearing
requires attention.
It is recommended that whenever connecting
rod bearings are adjusted, the connecting rod and its piston are
completely withdrawn from the cylinder, and that the bearing is
not tightened any more than will allow the connecting rod to fall
by its own weight when placed in position on the crankshaft and
the nuts fully tightened.
In the case of engines which are fitted
with splash lubrication it is most important to see that the con-
necting rod is replaced with the dipper scoop the right way round
In the case of all pressure-feed engines the correct oil pressure
which should be shown on the gauge is & lb. per square inch when
the oil is hot.
On splash-feed engines, 4 Ib. will be sufficient.
Before replacing the oil sump, all joint faces must be carefully
cleaned and lightly smeared with a suitable jointing material
such as gold size.

