pg_0038.pdf:
the astrouter is of me carbon Drus!
anu any
acposit
should be wiped away; the brush track being cleaned at the same
time by means of a cloth moistened with a few drops of petrol.
The brush in the rotating arm should work freely in its holder ;
if it is clogged, remove and clean it as well as the holder.
Take off the driving end cover, after withdrawing the fixing
screws, and then remove the pick-up, which is secured in position
by means of two screws. The pick-up should be cleaned in the same
way, care being taken to see that the brushes slide freely in their
holders. Before replacing these parts, the slip-ring track and flanges
should be cleaned by holding a soft cloth on the ring while the
engine is slowly turned by hand.
The contact breaker should be examined by swinging aside
the flat holding-on spring retaining the contact breaker cover,
and removing the cover will expose the contact breaker to view.
It is essential that the contact breaker should be kept spotlessly
clean; above all, the contact points themselves must be free from
all traces of oil.
Want of attention to this may be the cause of
mistiring. Instructions for removing the contact breaker, should
this be necessary, are given on page 36.
The foregoing points can be summarised in very few words.
Dirt, carbon, metal dust, and water in any form, are the enemies
of good insulation; therefore keep the magneto clean and dry.
Adjustment of Sparking Plugs and Contact Breaker
The plug electrodes are bound to burn away slightly, therefore
in time the gap width increases; it is a good plan to examine and
clean them at intervals. They should be adjusted if necessary to
the right setting—-this should be from 20-25 thousandths of an
inch, or about twice that to which the contact breaker points
should be adjusted.
A gauge of about 12 thousandths thickness is provided on the
side of the spanner supplied with the magneto for setting the
contact breaker points.
Providing the contact breaker points are kept clean, and, above
all, free from oil, they will probably need adjustment only at long
intervals.
The owner is warned that it is not desirable to alter
the setting unless the gap varies considerably from that of the
gauge.
If adjustment is necessary it can usually be made without remov-
ing the contact breaker. Using the magneto spanner, slacken the
nut "E" (Fig. 2), then, turning the engine round very slowly by
hand until the points are seen to be fully opened, rotate the contact
screw by the fixed hexagon head "F," until the gap "D" is set to

