pg_0021.pdf:
Braking System
Used on the Morris-Commercial Six-Wheeled Truck
T
HE Dewandre Vacuum Servo utilises the vacuum created
in the induction pipe of the engine through the closing of
the throttle valve of the carburetter. When depressing
the
brake pedal the induction is put into communication with a cylin-
der, in which a piston is connected through levers with the brake-
rods. The piston is drawn into the cylinder and pulls on the
brakes.
This device enables the driver to bring a vehicle to a standstill
with considerably less effort than when the pedal is only acting
on the brake system. If for any reason the servo is out of action,
the driver is able to operate his brakes in the usual way.
No special attention is required in connection with the servo,
but from time to time it is advisable to pour a small quantity of
cylinder oil on to the levers. This can easily be done by removing
the top cover.
Method of Operation
The normal positions of the various parts when the brake is not
in use are as shown in Fig. I, the levers "C" and "D" resting against
the stop "M."
When the brake pedal is depressed by the foot, and a pull exerted
on the rod "E," the lever "C" is pulled forward (to the extent
of the clearance at "Hr") causing a push on the rod "J," and so
opening, through the locking lever
"K," the valve "A," which
puts the suction cylinder into communication with the induction
pipe of the engine.
The suction acting on the piston "P" exerts a pull on the lower
end of the lever "C,'
which, using
"N" as its fulcrum point, carries
with it the lever "D," and augments or supplements the pull on
rod "F,
" in the ratio of four to five on the part of the servo to one
applied by the driver.
To properly appreciate this action it must be remembered that
the position of the fulcrum point "N" is maintained by the pres-
sure of the driver on the brake pedal, so that the pull of the piston
is reacting against the driver's effort.
As soon as the fulcrum point "N" becomes stationary (that is,
when no further movement of the brake pedal takes place) the
pull of the piston will cause the lever "C" to turn on this fulcrum
and so release the push on the rod "J," until the valve "A" closes
and arrests any further pull of the piston.
18

