pg_0048.pdf:
To enable the cables to be correctly connected up, the terminals
are identified on a diagram affixed to the inside of the switchbox
cover.
This cover is easily removed by unscrewing the two fixing
screws "A" (Fig. 5). When connecting the cables to the switchbox
terminals, care should be taken that no strands are left straying,
as this may cause a short circuit.
Before removing the switchbox
cover for any reason, other than for fuse replacements, it is necessary
to disconnect the positive lead of the battery to avoid the danger
of causing a short circuit.
Switch Positions
There are three switches of the push "on" and pull "off" type
in this switchbox.
The left-hand one controls the headlamps, and
the right one the sidelamps; at the same time, the tail-lamp is
switched on by the operation of either of these switches.
The
lower switch controls the charging circuit; when switched "on,"
the dynamo is connected with the battery for charging.
The battery, in the majority of commercial vehicle sets, requires
very little daytime charging, as the lamp load is roughly balanced
by the dynamo output (see dynamo output adjustment, page
42). Consequently, in this set means are employed to restrict
the output of the dynamo during the day.
The system adopted by us is to insert a resistance in the dynamo
shunt circuit, so that when the charging switch is in the
"on"
position the dynamo only gives about half its normal output.
It is necessary, however, for the dynamo to give its maximum
output whenever the lamps are in use.
To this end we have inter-
connected the lighting switches with the charging circuit in such
a manner that when either the head or sidelamps are switched
"on" the dynamo is connected at the same time to give the full
output determined by the control brush setting.
Electro-Magnetic Cut-out
The cut-out automatically closes the charging circuit as soon as
the dynamo voltage rises sufficiently above that of the battery.
When the dynamo voltage falls below that of the battery the
reverse action takes place, the cut-out opens, and thereby prevents
the battery from discharging itself through the dynamo.
The cut-out is accurately set before leaving the maker's works,
and should not be tampered with or adjusted.
Should the cut-out
fail to close the circuit on accelerating the engine, the cause of the
damage is likely to be found elsewhere in the system.
The question is sometimes asked whether the operation of the
cut-out in any way depends upon the state of charge of the battery.
There is no such relation between the two; the sole function of the
cut-out is to switch on the dynamo with rising engine speed, and
to disconnect it when the engine slows down to below a certain
speed.

