pg_0075.pdf:
blobs of it are left, for too much of this stunt may result in later
troubles. What is wanted is a nice thin and even film.
Then,
having wiped one's hands to free them from dirt, the gasket is
located over the bolt holes in the evlinder head.
Reassembling the Engine
Next the eylinder head is taken. It is preferable, incidentally,
to try to hold it so that one's fingers do not touch its clean under-
side, and it too is located over the bolt holes.
The cylinder head
bolts are screwed down roughly with the fingers and then, starting
with the centre bolt, and working in the order shown, they are all
given their first tightening down, the amount of pressure used on the
spanner for this first operation being not more than can bé gien by
crooking the forefinger of one hand round the extreme end of its shaft.
This process is continued until all the bolts have received their
hirst tightening, and then the centre one is reverted to and is
finally tightened down, the same order of tightening the others
being followed as before. It is most imperativel not advisable to
tighten one bolt doien hard and leave the others loose.
They should
all be made to take the strain (like a team in a tug-of-war) before
the final pressure is exerted on any one. Incidentally, there is no
need for any more force to be used in tightening Morris-(ommercial
cylinder head bolts than can be obtained by hand. The spanner
most decidedly should not be hammered.
The rest of the assembly is simply the sparking plugs are
replaced, the top water joint remade, and the top water clips
tightened up. Care should be taken to see that the clip through
which the magneto leads run is not forgotten.
There can be no
mistaking which magneto lead goes where, as they are all of different
lengths, and then, the drain tap having been closed, the radiator is
refilled with water. Usually the engine starts perfectly easily after
decarbonising, but before it is taken out on the road it should be
allowed to run fairly fast in "free" for a few moments to allow
the oil to get back on the cylinder walls.
After fifty miles or so it may be found that on going round with
the cylinder bolt spanner again one or two of the bolts can be
tightened down a little more: and usually this is really advisable.
The whole job of decarbonising should not take more than
about five hours even if the operator be quite unskilled.

