INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA,-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
i) Each branch of the stafi in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L.
of C.
(i) Unit commanders.
(iji) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A. - In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NOTE C.-
ny queston or coude whether or not 2 war diary shonid he a
he War Omie, L refere s. trough the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S. .)
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
Pa provide data dian i ceto. ase object is to furnish a historia traini, equipation
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
accis dhu the number of other ranke or
i or followes and bies the a shos an be nots d!
followers and of animals should be
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
scur, or come to notice.
NoTE. — Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close
f each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PaRA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
the war diary.
he war diaey or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Or reterence
(ji) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
r unit, including any sketches or maps
ting thereto, to supplement the
ins furnished in the text of the diar
and each will have a brief descriptive
to appendices will be made in the et descriptive a C aming the author. References
(iv) Copies of important and relevant derni-official letters by commanders of formations,
neluding any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer consider
hey should be included).
(See FAst., Volumeliries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
mA. a dia. Will be entend ted day, each traction tide entine officer detailed to keep it,
rom a war ciary is an oftence under the Offcial Secrets Acts.
that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
OTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commande
r other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical worl
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(*) Importist ons ters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and isued,
i) Daily locations. Movements during the past twenty-tour hours and present dispositions.
arch tabies in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
nt within a period of three months to the
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to records offices at home for safe custody
SPECIAL NOTE.
the unit concerned.
-The time entered should be the time the information or e
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the tex if known
Bradford.
Month and Year.
Isto
2nd.
3r2.
4 tho
5th.
6 tho
MARCH 1944.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Firm C. 2118.
Unit. 635 Bulk Petrol Transport
oy RASC.
Commanding Officer ....
MaJor. LoHe
• RASC..
References to Appendices
Weather Cold Showers.
Sit Cordery & Party detailed to return vehicles as
follows : - To: 503 B.P.T.C. RASC 2 Austin Utilities. 4 Water Tanker
Trailers. Capt: R.H.Butler & Party detailed to collect vehioles as follows
From: - 27 V.R.D. 26 Bedford 800 Gall Tankers. Warning Order for Men of
Coy forwarded to Records.
Weather Cold & Bright.
'B' Platoon standing by for Exercise Thistle
Post In : - 6.Pte Issuers. 2•Pte S/Storemen.
Weather Cold Windy.
Capts: E.R.Webster. & J.Clough arrived to fill
vacancies as Capts: on Comp Pin. Typhus Inoculation of Company commenced.
Weather Snow.
Post In: - 2.Pte S/Storemen.
Weather
Snow.
Post In : - 1.Dvr • 1.Dvr/Mech.
Weather Cold & Wet.
Movement Order received for Move to Walton-on-the-Naze
Advance
Party organised. 40 Personnel of the Coy fired P.I.A.T.S. at
Harden Moor Ranges.
Wt.47724,998 3,000,000 8/48 T. H. & S. 51/6375
26/W.D./A.
cuments in your Bulk Ol
te you have requested,
ents
more of your doc
ments - Enquire ai
e documents are in u
on Desk for full details
