2015/
Remarks on
/16158
(20/1 92
lIbert duar
s. Open
2025 13:49 55
AR 1961
3:4!
rome
BADI
and in these cases thoir
no then entriot people poot on Poet can 2 stop tea to rath
time as the soldion's unit stamp may properly be impressed for future use.
circunstances be taken into any part of IRELAND,
apply to the nearest
Garda (Police) Station in EIRE where they will be issued with temporary ELRE
+ Goverrment ration cards to cover their leave period.
Personnel proceeding to NORTHERN IRELAID or HIRE will be verned to carry
the minimun number of private papers.
It is strictly forbidden to attempt to
carry uncensored letters to or fron NORIHERN IRELAND or EIRE.
Disciplinary
action will be taken in the event of non-compliance.
7. Dress.
111 Leavo personnel travelling to
EIRE will wear plain clothes on the
journeys from and to LONDON and during the whole period of their leave in
They will NOT in any circunstances carry any clothing o
a recognised
military character.
other on detaid into love in the de one plain clothes for
Officers will make their on arrangoments to collect plain clothes en
route through the UK.
SECRET.
APPANDIX 'D' to 2 E Torks Ieave Instruction No. 1.
RATION ALIOWANCE - NOTIFICATION OF ENTITLEMENT.
33. (a) Ey Eat as providod in sub-para (b) belov, A O 1865 will be compied
be rendered by the Officer Commanding of the hospital or depot.
Extension or cancellation of leave will be notified to the OIC No 2 Base
Clearing House on a supplementary AN O 1865.
The entry on AF O 1865 will be
Cancalled
ยง From ....
APs O 1865, in duplicato, showing entitloment to ration allowance for
convenionce, the
LEUB" in the case of men and. "GOODGE STRIN LEIB" in the case of
women and all ranks will
warrants.
(b) When railway warrants for the journeys to and from E'RE are obtained
all ranks will hand in the AF W 3145 for safe custody.
This document
must however be collected in LONDON on the return ourney.
the Regiment or Corps
han on indiano home her on poong an
for vill show
the unit to which attrohod, in sopmento linos, e.&.: -
Rot het 0ty (01020),
8. The following cortifioate vill be rondered with each Improst Jocount: -
"Certified that the nones of Other Ranks entitled to ration allowance
Ho 2 the not an lou have boon notaried to orsion intonarge,
WO 171/1397
