nt to thing pate at grey to sail so predating the do As ties the map
LEGEND
And accult knots would nace to sunnart the Airborne FOrCeS. The obiective of this operatios
was to capture all of the bridges along this route, which crossed a large number of waterways;
so ample reinforcements could pass and secure this route to the Ruhr.
oth Sent: The following WD extracts set the scene for the next phase of my comrades of 79
ASRE and the sister regiments new phase of operations
29* Sept - Races were held between the Troops, in loadin stores, then in ta water course,
leaving the water and unloading. 3 Troop won followed by 1 Troop then 2 Troop.
6-An O GrOUp by CRE for SWITCHBACK, The Troops practiced with the 9 Canadian Brigade.
7-8 - Operation postponed.
9 - There were two echelons. A comprised 77 Squadron then 80; B was 79 and 26.
0020 the first LVT entered the water.
0110 the first 79 vehicle entered the water.
0120 The last 79 LVT entered the water
There was only light opposition.
Throughout the day the Squadron acted as re resupply. 2A, Captain Chariton's LVT, received a
direct hit and he and one of his crew were wounded. 'Sapper Baron also went RAP suffering
from shock - he has been stuck in the mud and mortared for 7 Hours'.
10 - 'Fairly old prisoners are coming in large numbers'
12 - the Operation ended 79, and on 13th it was able to do the necessary 100 hour
maintenance on the Buffaloes (LVT).
22- At short notice 79 heard of an Op on 23/24
23 - 0 Group with CRE
24 - Carried 4 RSF
26 0250, first LVT enters water in Terneuzen
28 - The Operation ended and the LVTs moved to Ostend. Its role was to carry mainly RAMC
personnel and stores at Walcheren.
BRUGES
HOLLAND
BELGIUM
ANTWERP
OPENING THE SCHELDT ESTUARY, OCTOBER-NOVEMBER, 1944
All squadrons of the 5*" f* ARRE were to clear both banks of the River Scheidt and allow the
port of Antwerp to be used. This would relieve the supply problem that had either rationed
supplies when Spr.ead over all the Allied units trying to advance on a broad front or
alternatively only supplying units in a smaller sector to achieve a specific target. As mentioned
earlier that the capture of the various Channel Ports had not resulted in facilitles that could be
used all these needing reconstruction and re-equipping. Luckily; the port of Antwerp had been
captured quickly and without too much damage as the Germans had not had time to sabotage
the facilities before retreating. The 11" Armoured Division both captured and then held the
port against successive counter-attacks while awaiting reinforcements. If the enemy has
succeeded in recapturing the facilities it is sure that the port would have been damaged in
some way, shape or form. Putting a new obstacle in the way of improving the very over-
stretched supply position and while it would not have put in doubt the outcome of the war it
would have increased the 'cost of war' in both civilian and military causalities.
Returning to the actual operations that where now to take place; the first one was the attack
on what was called the 'Breskens Pocket' identified on the map with the position of the town of
Breskens shown on what is nearly an island. This was because the majority of the area was
flooded hence the need for amphibious craft to be able to secure the southern part of the
Scheldt Estuary. This position was held by remnants of Fifteenth German Army who Field
Marshall Model had reinforced with the 64th Div. a first class field formation, 14,000 strong and
made up of men who had fought on the Russian Front. These troops were well supplied with
artillery and ammunition, which with the nature of the country, much of it flooded; making the
very position proof against tank attack. This led to a protracted campaign in the area between
the south bank of the Scheldt and the Leopold Canal; with orders to hold the position, 'come
what may'. So it was decided that the approach would be by water across the Braakman Inlet
to Savoojaards Plaats on the 8th Oct. The map shows the area where Buffaloes were first used
in the European conflict, as also was the introduction of the Terrapins.
The assault on the Breskens Pocket was from Terneuzen and the route is shown on the map as
an arc towards the left. This move was to assist the 3"" Canadian Army; who having met stiff
resistance from the Germans in the area around Breskens, after their assault over the Leopold
Canal. 131. To counter this resistance the attack across the Braakman Inlet was to outflank the
forces holding up this assault. So the amphibious landing on the flank at Savoyaards Plaats -
