No an he 1754as August 194 0y a mor
by Operation Tractable.
ALENÇON
Operation Tractable, which was then put into operation with a shorter arc of encirclement, the
start time, was 11.42 am with a
smokescreen instead of darkness. But the
smoke compounded by the dust thrown up
by advancing armour made navigation
difficult. During this operation and the
previous one 'short bombing', as it was
known caused as many casualties
sometimes as the enemy. In the latter op'
tragic error, some ground troops ignited
their usual yellow identifying smoke but
In jammon
Bomber Command where employing their
yellow target indicators compounding the
friction that had built up between the army
and air force due to the differing views on how each should be used and perform.
81 52
wened mention beck aer to the next piate dour act iD extract shows there was already
the next phase of our activities
August: On the 10" the Squadron began rafting training.
I am also sure I was in the area that the initial Terrapin was either demonstrated in relation to
this incident or we had one to start training. The following picture gives a good idea of its
profile and wheel configuration. The Amphibian
4-ton 8X8 (Terrapin Mark 1) was being
produced as a ship to shore transport in case
AMPHIBIAN 4-TON 8X8 TERRAPIN
the U.S. D.U.K.W. was not avallable in sufficient
numbers to meet the demands of the European
campaign. The U.S. DUKW (Duplex-Drive
amphibious truck), virtually a six wheeled
chassis encased to become a floatation device
that could carry both materials and men.
The Thornycrofts of Basingstoke Company in
the UK were to undertake the design of the
Terrapin Amphibious Truck. This vehicle had
eight rubber tyred wheels; the front pair rose above the line of the centre two pairs and the
trailing pair just clear of the horizontal. This allowed for the two rear wheels to engage with the
ground when driven over soft ground and the two front wheels assisted when the vehicle left
the water via the riverbank. Twin Ford V8 petrol engines positioned side by side in the centre.
Each engine drove the four wheels on one side of the vehicle, turning relying on the throttling
back of the engine on the side to which the vehicle was to turn.
Two rear mounted propellers provided water propulsion, one to each engine, steering by a
single rudder as well as the throttling back technique. Bilge pumps removed any excess water
that came over the front and sides due to the very shallow freeboard when loaded. Its abilities
becoming evident both in the water and when travelling along roads.
Taking into account that the changeover in both the machine and the use it was to be put to
between the last operation in Normandy and the first in the Low Countries was 12 days at best.
Then drivers and co-drivers had to become able to drive these machines on land and water
also performing tasks different in most respects to those on D-Day. During this period of what
must have been intensive training, our Tech' Officer had been made aware of various
shortcomings and to ensure the overall safety of the operation he would reconnoitre the near
bank, placing markers. Then rowing over to the other side in a dinghy and then repeating the
exercise before giving the 'All Clear'.
