2 1030 The 8 on 1 and To lanes Te rumes naina ratic through their lanes
Deny one we, with the for our or menon or out the he we had
was not serving with the 79th ASRE on VE Day I did not receive the book entitled The story of
79 Armoured Division' and therefore I only had memories to base my D-Day sector and the
various actions that took place before the Breakout. It was only when I received Jim Holmes's
book with some positive accounts and records of actions that took place during that period I
decided that having set the scene for the actual landing. I would place a series of events
relating to the comrades who landed just before H Hour. Because their stories and deeds
occurred at least three hours before I landed, they deserve this place in my narrative. Also I
felt that I could enlarge on those actions with extracts from my research material as well as
the letters from those comrades still able to communicate at this time, and give further
substance to this revised account over and above my first and second editions.
I have also taken extracts from an IWM publication called 'The Victory in Europe' to assist me
in giving as factual account of events mainly directly related to my experiences. Because I
landed at 1030 Hrs (10.30am) Plan B had been put into place and therefore it is important that
the reader can compare the changes between the
original plan. Those must realize minute by
minute decisions on the spot relving in most
cases to individual initiatives! So to all those
comrades who where in the first wave; and who
were faced with a new set of problems at every
turn, this was to require sheer determination to
overcome; we who followed, them are for ever
grateful.
Because we that his; the ARV crew were below
decks most of the time, certain of the foregoing
was not seen by us. Some of the later comments came from other sources but should help to
give the reader a clearer picture of the events taking place on this momentous day, when
coupled with both the preceding and following maps and pictures.
56
The in to tele one one no to tang and not aton to the rector of
this mammoth invasion and their calm control had to be seen to be believed. They had a pylon
with four large Tannoy speakers mounted on top, each covering a quadrant so instructions
could be passed in any direction. I've since tried to find a book that tells the story of the
ours was the naval untore old brad and ras buttons, no steel helmet or camouflage for
him. Anyway back to us standing off, because the two stern drives had taken a buffeting under
tow it was no surprise that one decided to pack up, this meant that the only way we could hold
station was to go round in circles.
While this hiccup was taking place two British battleships, the Warspite and Ramillies where
holding station in Roger sector. This allowed them to shell the Sword beaches before the actual
landing and then move the barrage towards Caen, but also be in a position to counter the 16
and 11-inch positioned at Le Havre by turning east to align their broadsides against the enemy
guns. But no salvos were received from these emplacements. Because they where close
inshore each salvo caused us some discomfort, one; from the noise, and two; from the wash
caused by the vessels reaction after each broadside. Our circular manoeuvre eventually led to
the Beachmaster calling out 'Get off that Bloody Merry-Go-Round and come and fight this war'.
His remarks must have had some effect on the wayward engine as it came to life. Our landing
point was La Breche, a small seaside town, but no one was building sandcastles or sun bathing
at the time.
We were about the sixth wave coming ashore and we had anticipated that we would be
clearing derelict vehicles and any other obstructions that were around. But due to the weather
and the higher than expected tide plus the efforts of the first wave of AVREs and their crews,
such as Joe Ingham - whose account has been recorded earlier in this narrative - had taken
over part of our original task. We where then directed along the beach towards the turnoff
point to gain access to an inland road. By the way, the driver was the only one who could see
outside and then only directly ahead through a small slit that was in the viewport. It had three
positions, fully opened it was 10 inch (250mm) wide X 6 inch deep, then the hinged door when
closed had an armoured glass insert that reduced the visible opening to about 6 inch X 2 inch
and finally a second door reduced it down to about 5 X 1 in the battle condition that gave a
limited view ahead.
Our driver was now ex Trooper/Dvr Boxall and he suddenly shouted "Germans" I looked
through my Besa gunsight and saw a column some six wide and stretching back to the turnoff.
My first reaction was to flick off the safety catch on the Besa machine gun, and then I realized
that they were prisoners being marched along to one of the vessels we had vacated. They
would soon be over in England and heading for one of the POW (Prisoner of War) camps.
