sure constipation was not a problem.
just as well. The advance was sre to go.
positions was rather remote until they actually fired, allowing them to select a congested area to
cause the most havoc.
We were halted quite a few times as we arrived at various strongpoint's but when we approached
the railway embankment on the Caen to Troarn railway line, the barrage succeeded in halting the
mortars. Nor wait she rp foots would arrive tole quite mations due lo sue the Control no
arrive 'double quick smart' but due to the R.A.F. Control Post
went to the Typhoon shes They selected one target tom above no direct so ordinate us sing
really choice targets that where well dug in. Normally these RAF officers complete with scarf and
their jeep or scout car they would intercept the tank commanders requests by the short range radio
then call up the Squadron Leader with his assessment of the situation and position as well as the
number of aircraft required. I think that their flamboyant nature and exposure led to excess
casualties.
Besides the Typhoon raid a type of creeping barrage by the VIII U.S. Air Force up to and beyond the
first railway line and Cagny, which stood at the parting of the ways of the 11th and the Guards
including us, was to be obliterated by Bomber Command. But unfortunately there were insufficient
aircraft to reach as far as those guns on Bourguebus Ridge also this lay at the extreme range of the
British artillery as it was sited at that time. Again the differential between the Allies and German
firepower placed advances such as the one in question, in doubt as far as reaching its target.
While on the subject of artillery it must be appreciated that the guns in the defence position
can easily retreat as well as re-site because they are facing the correct way, that is; the tractor
can tow them back to a new position while still facing the aggressor. But in the case of the
attacker the gun has to move forward which requires it to be turned around, coupled up, move
to a new site, turn around and re-site. This operation takes far more time than the defenders
take so they become targets while still manoeuvring. Of course SP (self-propelled) guns
mounted on tracked under carriages could advance or retreat at will but did not have the range
of conventional artillery pieces. The Germans could see the armour and infantry advancing
towards the railway embankment and of course any man or machine passing over this was a
prime target.
on an attack by fighter aircraft, but the location unknown.
to act as support for the infantry to straighten the line of defence. We had advanced to the agreed
post conventional sit reach, wile our nomat practice beling to di a eur eaten one he to antry
inches deep slightly narrower than the inside width of the tanks tracks and long enough to allow for
pologe ane Deaths eno dering ire had been when then the ground unde the tracks had
given way and the tank had trapped those underneath.
Of course the Infantry we where supporting; their defences took longer than our efforts so we were
brewing up and grabbing a bite to eat. Our Driver/ Fitter/Wireless Operator (Tpr Boxall) decided to
shave, to this end he sets up his mirror, an ornate D shaped one from an old fashioned washstand.
Anyway just as he had lathered up we glance skyward at some high-flying fighter planes, as this
was the usual time we saw the Spitfires and Hurricanes returning to base. We did not give them too
much attention that is until they turned into a dive and headed our way. Of course we dived under
our tank to be followed closely by a bunch of infantrymen, the result being a world record for the
number of people that can be accommodated under a tank. I had a close-up view of bullets raking
the ground iust the other side of the bodie wheels. Eddie Beeton from another tank who had
recorded his recollections of this incident said they had British markings.
Friendly Fire as it became known accounted for incidents such as this and generally when there was
no defined frontline. When it was all clear we climbed out and surveyed the scene Boxy's mirror had
been smashed and we (the crew that is) each had an irregular shaped mirror. My piece was to
survive a number of differing accidents until I was demobbed and had returned home. Its fate
afterwards unknown! Supplies and reinforcements were not meeting demand due to the still narrow
beachhead restricting offloading, storage, also the air support was not up to the planned strength
has they had expected twice as many airstrips by this time.
In early August there were more experiments, and the Squadron was ready to support the Canadians in
a variety of operations, notably TOTALIZE.
