one ubt to
and even lay the
posle i have no detals of this i cation bue tam sure a
avalable tower like construction would have been
The charge frame at the lower end of the elevated
she previous how ave harge boxes so vesten assume
rame to its correct elevation. The charge frame would then be lowered and withdrawn.
be a gust bo then the ho are untie in the
correct position for maximum effect. Then the complete
structure would be disengaged by remote control so it lies
against the target. The AVRE would then reverse a safe
distance away before detonating the charge.
I have a copy of the Craft Loading and Craft Commanders
Order and there is no mention of a 'Goat' device being used by
77 or 79 ASRE. The charge was TNT and I guess the quantity
used was effective but also rather vulnerable due to its sheer
size.
It is obvious that while still shown as 'resident' at Thorpness a
large percentage of personnel where being sent to varying
locations to become proficient at their allocated tasks.
Before leaving Instow; and the area in general a particular
development was underway of which I only became aware
of later. Rumours of a Giant Catherine Wheel, this by the
way was a popular Firework pre-war on Bonfire Night (5"h
November). This was a flat coil with a card insert through
which you pushed a pin into any convenient piece of
wood, you then would then "light the blue paper and retire
Immediately" the firework would then spin and propel
itself giving a radial display hence the name 'Catherine
Wheel'. The picture shows two wheels with a number of
rockets around the rim and a centre hub which was to
carry an explosive charge; it was named the Great Panjandrum. The principal being; the device
would roll of a landing craft then its rockets would be ignited and roll the device towards the target
where the hub would explode. During an initial demonstration minus any explosive charge; it went
berserk and headed into the audience, needless to say it was given the thumbs down.
Return to Thorpeness.
sang compete 13e Churchill tank-driving course i returned to Thorpeness village to continue with,
Hallow up to the basic fascin
Gullies through the sand hills were mainly for access to the
beach for the local fishermen, these had large concrete
blocks has shown in this photograph which had at least two
offset to be a barrier for vehicles.
The Small Box Girder Bridge was already in use in the
British Army and was a versatile system being able to be
erected on site and then launched across gaps as well as on.
pontoons. It was decided that it could be carried on an
AVRE and besides bridging gaps it could form a useful ramp
over obstructions that would halt a tanks progress. This
previous picture shows the mini bridge, which uses the
Ramp sections of the SBG system enabling an AVRE to
climb up the obstacle with a fascine, these two sections
had been erected manually. AVREs would have been
earmarked to be modified to match the new
developments and devices.
This picture shows the result of two fascines having been
dropped on the far side allowing the AVRE to pass over
after a cushioned descent, which pushed and squashed
its fascine. The second AVRE having just dropped his
fascine will have a better follow-on has this picture
shows, this AVRE can continue on to join the first one to
carry out their next objective. The AVRE pictured is ae
MKII with its basic fitments shown; the rectangular
pannier door and the air intake towards the rear. Also
not so clear is one of a pair of steel wire towropes with fixed eyes each end. This view is mirrored on
the other side.
Another trial taking place was of Major Lakeman's ARK /II
(Armoured Ramp Carrier). This was an attempt to use a
conventional gun tank as means of bridging anti-tank
obstacles but in this case retain the major armament
available for its intended, though restricted use. When the
following tank mounted and crossed the obstacle the drop
on the other side did not appear to have the benefit of a
soft landing via a full size fascine, or the fascine had
collapsed. Maybe they also paused at the top and tipped
forward standing the tank on its nose. Who Knows!
