12
At 1200 a partially emptied Bosse Bangalore exploded killing Sapper Dewell and injuring &
ohhe evening 7 Boase Bangalore's had been replaced with Plastic 808 or PEz explosive.
June 2 1944.
Further to this incident a recollection by a close friend of Spr. Dewell of lengths of pipe resting
against vehicles and being filled with explosive. I had initially thought that it related to the
single pipe sections that made up the Snake device which would have been subject to the
same weeping problem but has the entry above shows they were Boase Bangalore's.
The Snakes; due to its make-up, it was easy to dismantle by carefully unscrewing the lengths
of pipe and flight sections. While the plain short lengths may have been easier to handle the
need for care and attention that was required for the Gelignite to be removed safely had to be
observed the fatality noted earlier adding weight to the procedure.
While the War Diaries did not show the cause information received from old comrades in the
UK related to the explosion of one of the Boase Bangalore/Sand hill Blaster devices that was
earmarked for No. 2 Troop. At this point I have a differing recollection to one of my
correspondents as to what in fact was used to reach further down the tube; he thought a screw
picket was suggested. This was a steel rod with a loop at the top and a large corkscrew shape
at the bottom. This was used to secure Danita wire, a concertina like coil of barbed wire as a
defensive device but in this instance it looked a suitable tool to remove the plugs of explosive.
My recollection was as follows. One of the team visited the workshop to see what was
available. The Blacksmith who was a Trooper, again this has some bearing on the tragedy, he
made them a harpoon like device to spear the plugs and then withdraw them. This is where the
mix of personnel was a problem. As Sappers we had been trained in explosive handling and to
remove explosive material, non-metallic devices only were used, so instead of the Blacksmith
being approached the 'Chippy' (Carpenter) should have been the one. Of course with all the
last minute work and tension over the forthcoming invasion these matters are so easily
overlooked. Pondering on the two versions I could see that the screwed picket could have been
used because of its ready availability instead of waiting for the harpoon to be made, in either
case the fatal results would have been the same.
At the time of the explosion I was climbing the butts to gather extra electrodes from the QMS;
(Quarter Master Stores) and the blast blew the tin from under my arm and I was Spread-
eagled on the ground; of course everyone soon converged on the scene. The first action was to
assemble everybody to take a roll call and to determine those who could have been out of
camp at the time. It was quite some time before the stand-to situation was resolved, then
Bearing in mind I was still welding various components, and as we now had a loading date it
must, To our have taque & pan & that i be brought to play when to 2 troop hit che
beach on the 6th. Plan B will bene ted RoLe aloe and listed under Killed on Active
Later in this narrative you will see the 'ROLL
Service' Is Spr. Dewell D Gosport 2 June 44 from two letters received from comrades he was
one of the three working on the extraction of the explosive. The date of course left only one full
onghai sh une DAY. The two her Sappers who were working with Spr. Dewell are Shothe
in the next section 'Died of Wounds'
Sprs. Sedgewick R and Winstanley F. UK 8 Aug & 17 Jun
*44. It is obvious they had succumbed to what must have been terrible wounds.
Listed under 'Wounded on Active Service' also on the 2 June were Sgt Sawyer, Cpl Thompson,
L/Cpls Comb, Davenport and Saunders, Sprs. Bird, Ennis, Jack and Riley. This overall disaster
was to have further repercussions a few days later as will be shown in a later chapter.
The following day June 3rd was the original D-Day -2 and it was obvious that we would have
been flat out completing our tasks. We were down to move off during the afternoon of the
following day to the Gosport Hard where the loading of the invasion craft would take place.
On the 3' at 1130 all serials started moving to Stokes Bay for loading off G2 hards. Ten Porpoises are
towed on skids; one catches fire and has to be put out, either from careless packing or from the runners
getting hot.
This entry may have led to the dumping of the Porpoises at this point! None of the surviving
comrades I have contacted with reference to any of these devices, until much later in the
campaign. I am doubly sure I was welding components or attachments right up to last minute
when I became aware of our 'battle wagon'.
This was a Churchill recovery tank or ARV (Armoured Recovery Vehicle) that had been
prepared by my crewmates. Before we received it the turret had been removed and two
armour plated flaps put in its place. They (the crew) had to waterproof it similar to the AVREs
but of course, no turret no balloon fabric. In its place was a sheet-metal box, some 5 feet
(1.5m) high, also metal extensions to the air intake ducts, exhaust ducts and the air outlet
ducts of a similar height. This was to allow us to leave the transporting vessel with ample
freeboard to get through the water on to the beach
also allowing for us to re-enter the water for
salvage or recovery operations. We also carried
two motor cycles and a jeep, the jeep being
straddled across the front above the tank driver
Dvr Boxall and the co-driver yours truly; the two
bikes were lashed to the centre box. This further
added to the use of the nickname that the 79th
Armoured Division had acquired 'THE FUNNIES'.
Having detailed the outer view of the ARV a little insight into the inner layout from my point of
view; the Co-Drivers seat was sandwiched between Oxygen and an Acetylene Cylinder plus
hoses and cutter also a box of guncotton slabs, primers, detonators & cordite fuze together
with Wheatstone bridge and electric detonating device. While the Driver and I were in our
normal seating position the two remaining crew plus one passenger; the jeep driver, were in a
