While still on the subject of food I can't recall what the first breakfast in France consisted of but
I guess we had more on our mind at that time, Wondering what we were to do from then on,
because I'm sure we did not have the new squadron harbour location at that time. I guess we
searched the ether using both our A and B wireless sets, a being the stronger while B was used
for communicating within the squadron. We soon got a feeling of uncertainty when the odd
shot was heard on the other side of the lane where the E. York's were regrouping but were
being harassed by a sniper. They eventually located him. He had tied himself to the top of a
tree that was in a copse they had established their bivvy's in. After breakfast we set to remove
the two bikes and the jeep, the deep-water ducts and the remaining waterproofing, I also took
a walk to the field gate I had patrolled in the night to see what I'd tripped over in the dark. It
was a Plat bomb used as an anti-tank device, already primed for use, of course if it had been of
a more sensitive nature these words would not have been written now.
I've tried to recall who took the jeep; it must have been an additional fifth crewmember as we
normally only carried four on the recovery tank. The crew consisting of Tank Commander,
Wireless Operator, Driver and Co-Driver. I guess we loaded the two bikes aboard the jeep and
the extra member we had on the way over must have driven away to his rendezvous.
The invading force having now overcome the beach defences I would like to add a small
observation. I was not sure what length the coastline was that had both beach obstacles and
fortifications but the total labour force required was colossal; mainly conscripted from the
countries Germany had overrun.
On the following page are three photographs of the beach scenes that match the previous
foregoing narrative to give a graphic insight of the actions noted.
CHEETAH' alourther to
is the namelts number
T172053/C. This one
beloniron the 79th)
proved of the 2md Eat.
or the
ent or
Yorkshire Reg during a
bombardment on D-Day.
The lach phan 58G
to give accest on place
Esplanade (It is in from
the right edge of the
picture). Without it;
AVRES and Armoured
vehicals would have been
denied access.
I met Tom Smith an ex
navy man who served on
a LCT that carried AVRES
and Flails to this beach.
He recalled one AVRE
breaking away from the
in the heavy swell and
finishing across the LCT.
He also provided a copy
of the earlier map on page ?
This particular section of
beach shows the initial
chespal mat with a follow
on of canvas mat. The
logs in the foreground
are being buried in the
next exit way to reinforce
and consolidate the
roadbed. The personnel
doing the task belong to
the Pioneer Corp.
