PORTSMOUTH HARBOUR.
June 1. 1200 Operation OVERLORD (Ex Neptune) is postponed 24 hours, No interference by hostile
aircraft. A press correspondent is with us on 114A,
of course we are now really ready for the off; but I cannot seem to recall whether we finished
one on the dearest ecole tons some ten days tore this ves it to the oxal Marine
Barracks for a shower. The setup was a little like today's auto-car wash, without the brushes,
water everywhere; no need to seek the shower rose! We had been told to make the most of it,
as the following excerpt in the last paragraph of Operation Order No.2 noted earlier states.
(Laundry and baths (neither will be provided for 3 weeks) and what to do about any casualties.)
Up to now we had been training for 'or practicing at' war but we would soon cross the divide to
the real thing. The divide is the water off the South coast of England. But before continuing
with the arrival over the other side I would like to record other events that had, in my view a
big bearing on the success of the beach landings that where to take place in a few hours time.
Squadron AVRE & Attachment strength.
DEVICES
NO 1 TROOP / No 2 TROOP
No 3 TROOP
No 4 TROOP
HQ
AVRES
Boase B/lores
2 (1destroyed)*
SBG Bridges
2 Arrived?
Bobbins
10 Not Allo/d
Porpoises
SWR/Shackle
The explosion mentioned earlier.
The above list shows a total 26 AVREs which was of course duplicated by the Squadrons.
Under Starters Orders!
A very important point that I feel should be repeated here: September 1942: The inception of
the 79*h Armoured Division. So assuming it was early September, it was 9 months of hectic
activity resulting in this massive build-up of this do or die invasion force which was poised on
the start line.
and then joins the large
station
Gosport.
It then
joins with Spithead on the eastern side. It is 15 miles
NOLATIN
(24 Kilometres) long, varying in width from 3/4 mile to
ITER
5 mile which the detall on the following moorings map
that has been divided on the one page with plenty of
overlay.
This is the time to put all the training into practice
and hope the various devices match up to their expectations. But the previous references
to the weather really now comes into play. This extract from 79ASREs War Diary picks up
where the assembly and loading of the mass of shipping that had been organized under
the Operation Neptune's umbrella.
June 4, 1200 Operation OVERLORD (Ex Neptune) is postponed 24 hours. No interference by hostile aircraft. A
press correspondent is with us on 114A.
The above postponement was 30 minutes before the following order would have taken place on
June 4. The deliberations by the weather forecasters were still being considered at that hour.
June 5 1230 All Serials slip moorings. The sealed maps and photos are opened we are due to land at LA Breche.
The sea is rough and most people are sick. The Bridge is reshackled. An uneventful night.
Operation OVERLORD takes over during the crossing of the western end of the English Channel!
This is a convenient place to add comments that relate to the Squadron AVRE and Attachment
strength Table on a previous page. During the accounts relating to the development of the
Attachments and testing there gave the appearance of stopping before any conclusion of there
possible use. This was brought about because the manufacture and size of the Tank Landing
Craft required the Navies input and any limitations would determine the final capacity. This is
borne out by the final assault vessels loading which then determined how many vehicles could
be accommodated within each specific target's armour requirements. This is shown by the use
of the Boase Bangalore effectiveness allowing the AVRE to continue after placing and firing
then lay its Log Carpet through the gap. The following armoured vehicles were able to pass
through and consolidate the Log Carpet to give a firm roadway.
