also one to the north of Wantisden to serve that area.
The SQM (Squadron Quarter Master) was in charge and in view of a possible change of location and
what could have been a handing over of certain hardware due to the expansion of the Assault
Brigade as noted later he must have been doing a major stocktaking. He was rather at a loss to
direct us in our endeavours, we suggested, we being a rear party; that we check all the vehicles to
see that everything was in tip-top condition. We soon checked the track tensions, done the greasing,
checked the oil and water in both the tracked and wheeled vehicles and once more we had time on
our hands, - as most of you know; while the cats away the mice will play - this led to another
escapade. We decided to get out the TPCS (Tracked Personnel Carriers) these were like a Loyd
carrier a lightweight tracked vehicle, with a Ford V8 engine that had quite a turn of speed. This time
we decided to race across the edge of the Tank Park which we later found had been a Rubbish Tip
just before the war, hence the following. Having lined up and been started, we roared across the
rough ground towards the finish line, when one of the other TPCs came to a rapid stop. The rest of
us, three crews that is, pulled up in the winner's enclosure and looking back we try to make out the
problem with No.4. When low and behold what do we see heading towards it but a Humber Staff Car
with pennant flying.
Our first reaction was one of which glasshouse we would be sent to after the court martial. Then we
felt we should face up to the situation and back our mates. Having arrived over there we note no one
has alighted from the Humber; or even a window was open, our mates had their heads down
working on the engine. We tried to approach in a workmanlike manner without guilt, when on our
arrival they stood up and laughed their heads off at our obvious embarrassment. It appears the
Humber Drivers boss had to attend a meeting and told his driver to return and collect him at a later.
come to light really from letters and comments in the last few years (2001/07). Having had AVRE
driving training I still wasn't aware of what else I was being trained for. I had applied to take a trade
test for upgrading in my trade category (Welder Electric) not long after joining 79 ASRE but have
since found that I had been upgraded twice without a test.
My records show I was sent to the REME Command Workshops in Colchester for a test and having
been successful in the various test applications. Having cleared this 'hurdle' I was also given the
chance to have some welding tuition to broaden my skills. I moved on to the latest specialist welding
techniques such as armour plate welding, refurbishing tank tracks by hard surfacing and various
salvage techniques to reclaim parts and general repairs
I can see that the installation and associated welding of the Petard that was carried out during May
1944 was to be my main target. All this was to stand me in good stead through my military service
also it was put to good use on my return to civilian employment. Because we did not have much time
off, in daylight that is, due to the long hours we worked I saw little of Colchester
I was to spend time on a number of assignments, which resulted in me spending further time at
Colchester on the following tasks:
The recently designed (1940) Sten gun had developed a small fault, when fired the barrel which was
screwed into the breech mechanism would slowly unscrew and fall out. The remedy was to secure
the barrel with the minimum amount of weld that would not distort the bore. In conjunction with an
armourer we did some 20 odd guns until we got it right, then yours truly was given the job of
welding, with the armourer checking the bore and the firing pin to make sure no weld splatter had
dropped in the breech.
The next two to three weeks were hectic; Sten Guns arrived by all sorts of transport from the various
units stationed in the area, so I had to keep each delivery separate. This was very hard, due to the
stack's closeness, one stack easily spilling into another. I say stack, because they were just that, a
big heap that required to be disentangled, the guns had arrived in some cases with their straps still
attached. So you can imagine the chaos this caused, anyway I succeeded in completing some 2000.
