welder required to
June 22: 1415 hrs: Preliminary Trial of Minelaying for armoured Sledge quite successful, except
for anchoring first mine, First Trial of Typhoon rockets also promising.
June 22: 1725 hrs: Two Armoured D.7 Bulldozers wit 3 men from 149 Field Park Squadron
rejoined the San,
June 22: 1830 hrs: San Ldr visits 9 Cdn INF Bde Comd with CRE.
June 23: 0930 hrs: San Ldr revisits 9 Cdn INF Bde and from there proceeds to briefing at,
June 23: 1430 hrs: 3 Br INF Div Comd - 2 Tps of Flails, 22 Dragoons placed under Comd of this
unit for the Operation.
June 23: 1815 hrs: San Ldr and 1 Tp Ldr contact CO. STORMONT DUNDAS GLENGARRION
Battalion at VIEUX CAIRON (9774). Observe Brigade Objective from CAIRON Church (9775).
The above extract shows how there appears to be greater cooperation now; between units by
observing an operation that had no AVRE content.
June 22: 2100 hrs: Sqn Ldr and 1 Tp Ldr visit 22 Dgns 'A' Sqn and provisional distribution of
Flails are made with San Ldr in Reserve with Comd Tanks (Flails - end of Sheet 26 of 35.
July: In the first few days the squadron prepared for operation SHERWOOD, objective Lebisey.
Fascines were constructed and trials carried out on laying of mines from an armoured sledge.
The latter showed that some modifications were necessary as the mines were laid too close
together, or were jamming in the sledge.
Instead of SHERWOOD, the squadron was put into reserve for CHARNWOOD, handing over
some of the equipment it had built to 77 Squadron, including the armoured sledges. In the
event the Squadron was not used in CHARNWOOD. More experiments were carried out ('it was
ascertained that a Mark V mine dropped from a height of 1' and landing upside-down would
explode'). Trials were carried out in the lifting of Schumines with Ploughs at Douvres.
I cannot recall an involvement with the laying of mines, which would have been carried out in a
safe area. We seemed to be in this area for some time and all of the squadron was well and
truly established, as were other amenities.
A Field Bathhouse had been erected, similar to our last one in 'Blighty' but with no walls. The
floor was made from duckboards to allow for rapid drainage and to get across to a large tent to
dry off and I'm pretty sure a Field Laundry had also been setup and we were at least having a
change of underwear and a shirt. It is only now that I realise just how small an area we
a spot in Normandy.
occupied at that time, considering the amount of stores, men and machines that were seeking
Another improvement in our life style was that because our harbour was semi permanent we
now had the services of our cooking staff under Cpl Orrocks and with this came fresh
vegetables, meat, bread etc. plus the fact we didn't have to cook ourselves.
we could start to write home of
wounded on the 17th July.
On the 17th the squadron took part in Goodwood.
To ten to are are on or ran a to a gustin here vone here
rent brigades etc
capete che remander a con, he astran
later map shows our
squadron's target of
Frenouville while attached to the Guards
Armoured Division.
The operation started at 0745 on 18 July.
Caen was cleared successfully by II
Canadian Corps, and 3 British Division also
achieved its objectives.
11 Armoured Division started to move
forward, followed by Guards Armoured
and 7 Armoured Divisions through the
very constricted British front lines. The
following routes were taken; the Guards
crossing over the Caen Canal & Orne River
South of Ouisterham - we would have
joined them somewhere after the crossing
as we where near Merville when out of the
line - while 11 & 7 Armoured crossed at
Benouville (Pegasus Bridge). We with the
Guards Armoured Division headed down
the East flank towards Frenouville.
All the preparations for this operation
where being viewed by the German
observers in the two towers at
Colombelles. This gave ample warning for
the enemy to prepare a series of defence
lines. Also by this time the Germans had moved both tanks and anti-tank guns all sporting the
efficient 88 mm duel purpose gun, - which could also be used as an anti-aircraft gun - into this
area.
This map showing the direction of the advance and the towns etc that give substance to my
recollections.
Operation GOODWOOD: The Battle, July 18th-22d.
