an a cord not petch of sand, wire and sand
aldo all not in pro le whand the War rany arrot the number or Boase Bangalore's
The Brains that rule decided that the two torpedoes were dangerous and must be emptied of H.E. To these ends
the two A VREs were separated from the pack and bft iron screw pickets made into corkscrews for the purpose of
extracting the 10 lb. candles of H.E. Useless to protest at the use of metal on metal and what a sapper is taught to
use with High Explosive. I was told if I was scared, to detail one of the crew. Fortunately for us (but not for them)
the other crew were in an advanced state to us, and time we arrived alongside, they had actually started to unload
H.E. Whilst we were starting to unload the 30 timber logs a terrific explosion from the other tank cut the cable
holding our logs (causing them to collapse on Spr. Wanlyn our co-driver) and spraying our tank with blazing H.E.
We freed the co-driver and got him on his feet and Sgt Tom' Sawyer and myself (Ernie) put out the flames. The
whole Squadron must have seen it. A roll call found that Wanlyn was missing but an ambulance coming out from
Gosport had picked him up. The unfortunate chap joined us in Holland in Feb 45 and was killed in his first assault.
Our troop master was at various times Capt Scudamore (Killed D-Day before touchdown)."
These few lines from a letter I received from Joe Ingham at least set the scene after the AVRE
had disembarked and made its way out of the water.
Joe says: "My job was Demolition NCO in Lt. Hutchinson's Tank. We were to carry a log Carpet and a Boase
Bangalore Torpedo. (Remembering earlier comments on the balloon fabric and ring of cordite to clear the fabric
from the turret and hull to allow the Petard to be loaded and the turret rotated after landing on the beach).
"I (Joe) must confess / was not prepared for the rather appalling flash and noise when it did go off on the beach."
This was followed by: "but as I had to dismount and walk along the beach attaching 'Hedgehogs' to the side of the
A VRE, I did not have a great deal of time to worry about it. Looking back, I can only marvel that I managed not
to find any mines - and not to meet any bullets".
This was before they reached the sand dunes which they breached and dropped the Log
Carpet to pass through. I have thanked Joe for saving me the trouble of removing my share of
'Hedgehogs' which at the time I was completely in the dark as to why I didn't move any,
give me a swig from my whisky bottle as I lay on the sand and to give me the good news that
they had sorted out the machine gun that had got me (the whisky was well-meant but could
have been disastrous)".
any fret as pt sed to hing thieference which entered in med lecond bein account by
Capt A. Low, Troop Commander 2 Trp, 77 ASRE: "About 1200 yards out the house known to us
all as Sad Sack Villa was spotted, and the LCT commander set course to land ten yards to port
of the house. We were ahead of the DD's due to touch down before us. All craft were ordered
to stop to allow them through. Approximately 1000 yards off shore the LCT(R) opened up.
Rockets collided in midair, and rained down on craft waiting to go in. One landed immediately
under our starboard bow showering the bridge with pieces of casing. LCT was then ordered to
beach at full speed. Our gaps were hidden by dust showered by the barrage on the beach, but
at 300 yards the building was again visible a bit to port. Twenty yd. from the beach, the craft
was attacked by four planes with British markings, two bombs landing very close to our
doorway. We climbed on to my tank as the ramp dropped. Ahead of us was a gun apparently
concentrating on the troop on our left. One flail flailed straight for the gun. I followed out with
the Boase carpet. Another flailed a second path up to the sand dunes, and this I used to push
the Boase Bangalore into a sand dune about six feet high. I had trouble cutting the rope tackle
on the Boase Bangalore, which had pushed easily into the dunes, as snipers kept up a steady
hail of lead, whenever I appeared. By this time grenades were being thrown at my tank, so I
poked my head out and dealt with the offender, then cut the Boase Bangalore loose. Driving
back from the dune, I saw the Bangalore explode. It made a good gap in the dunes, but I could
not drop the carpet on it as both flails had gone forward. The infantry who had landed right
behind us were pushing forward"
The above excerpt recalled for me the use of rope tackle to raise and lower the device. The
tackle was a multi-sheave block with the hauling rope above the turret hatch. I recall that we
marked the rope with paint one mark told us when the device was in its raised position for
travelling or to be loaded on the LCT, and the other noted when it had been lowered
horizontally. During trials we would put a 'figure of eight knot' to make it easy to retrieve from
the sand hill. The actual operational drill was to lower the device to the horizontal, make 'fast'
the rope until the twin Bangalore's had been fully pushed home. Then release the rope and
then reverse back from the sand hill, this allowing the rope to be withdrawn from the blocks
and establish a safe distance. Then the charge would be blown with a favorable result.
55
