The above was the squadron's first involvement eir w. action using the Buffaloes but most of
my initial records had shown the infantry inhamnent, but no mention of who transported
them through mud, fire and water. Burning have said a few times before the Assault
Engineers don't get a mention for one reasonoustanother but again I will place our/their
Involvement within other Regiments and Corps accounts. The following intormation I have
always based this aspect on was initially in Jim Holmes first book with its causalities from the
those listed under "Killed in Action" around those dates where: Cpl Alexander J, Spr. Davison
J, Spr, Jones A J, and Spr. Mead D F.
Listed under Wounded in Action where; Capt P J Carson, Capt JFG Charlton, Sjt Barningham J,
WM, Spr. Summers DE, Spr. Trimm WJ and Dvr Flegg J.
L/Sjt Gallop FA, L/Sjt Lock L, L/Cp| Bennison C, L/Cp| Bond WW, Spr. Buchan A, Spr. Houston'
This op' was across the River Scheldt to south Blem, do siud again was from Terneuzen, and
25-27th Oct 1944. South Beveland - Green Beach:
was to ferry 52nd (Lowland) Div across to support the 2nd Can Div who were fighting their way
up and into the peninsula towards South Beveland. Both divisions cleared the Beveland
Peninsula by the end of Oct and arrived at the narrow causeway leading to Walcheren.
On Oct 31st the Canadians attacked along the causeway and gained a shallow bridgehead.
Next day they were thrown back, but their initial efforts had preoccupied the enemy, while
another Allied assault came in by the sea to the West. 132. During the assault on South
Beveland, DD tanks had tried to land in support of the infantry, but both steepness and mud
prevented those climbing up the banks after they had crossed the river. This lead to the
development of the carpet layer for the Buffaloes, I recall welding angle iron frames to the
topside of some Buffaloes, this was earlier while still with the squadron; but did not see them
in use. It was only when reading the account of the 100 Buffaloes becoming mechanically unfit.
That alone, meant that each squadron would have had 25 vehicles to fix bearing in mind the
squadron now had some REME LAD (Light Aid Detachment) boys with us it was obvious that
with only 12 days to recover and repair everyone would be pushed. Of course the actual
task.
Buffalo crews had been stretched physically by their shuttle service across the river, no mean
The various changes that have occurred at this time when the present number of Assault
Squadrons had reached their peak, having been progressively joining the fray as the front
broadened from D-Day onwards. Of these some had switched to Buffaloes and Terrapins while
others still had the original AVREs and associated devices to take on the obstacles and
fortifications still to be overcome. A further change in the matter of 'ferrying' led to another
means that had to be brought into play. The earlier Walcheren offensive had used LCTs to take
cable which was shack out
attached to larh. This had
rat to priv the haling he 30n
SWR across. Initially the winch
cables ran through a Sheave
That the sue he the poston the ate on the r Don at the A g
the Buffalo and the Balloon Winch secured to the Buffalo also. On the near bank the AVRE was
the 3" SWRs anchor with the Balloon Winch working in conjunction with the far bank. It would
then be ready to take AVREs and Sherman's as well as the various heavy armourments to
tackle the fortifications and obstacles mentioned earlier.
I have to thank Roland Ward the above information in one of his five accounts, these I will list
at the end of my narrative to help anyone interested in water borne movement also he has
chronicled the various Bailey Bridge configurations, and some American portable bridges.
I felt I should enlighten readers on these rafts having only Balley Bridge experience myself.
Before moving on to the
next operation 79 ASRE
were involved in, the
mention earlier of an
attack from the west
related to Walcheren
island which was
heavily fortified on the
North Sea side and was
now the major obstacle
to the opening of
Antwerp to seaborne
traffic. The island was
saucer shaped with
both dunes and man
made dykes to hold
back the North Sea and
WALCHEREN
OPERATION
allow the centre to be
farmed. Foreseeing that
WEST
"SCHELDT
the enemy would flood
the Podder land within;
in an attempt to
forestall the Canadians holding the causeway, it was decided to beat them to it, by bombing
the dykes and flooding this area that covered some 60% of the island. So on October 3* 243
Lancaster bombers attacked the Westkapelle dyke, within a few hours the sea had poured in.
Subsequent bombing was to flood another 15% and isolated the main fortifications as well as
the towns of Flushing and Middleburg.
