NOW; TO THE REAL BUSINESS
segment will show
input Through to the eventual
defeat of Hitle's Regime, All Practical
solutions would in turn be passed
down the line to be fine tuned in
sun he mat dia to ic or the need of
produce a more robust device.
The civillan population had been
moved from the Orford area of
Suffolk and various structures and
the existing terrain became part of
the Test and Training regime that
thousands of khaki clad personnel
had take over.
CORE MATTING CARPET:
We now start to see what our aim will be in this very new venture in this mans army. The following is
a typical start to a task that would become one of the 'stepping stones' back into mainland Europe
with basic items carried at this time by the Squadron Stores.
One of expected beach sand conditions was to be a underlying Blue Clay which when the tide raised
the water table it became a virtual quicksand that made it impossible for vehicles and tanks to drive
up the beach after leaving the landing craft. Morecambe Bay in the North West of England was a
similar stratum and people would cross the bay as the tide receded with a type of snowshoe, this
allowed the normal footprint to be enlarged so spreading the person's weight over a larger area.
The task before us was to enlarge the strip core matting; this was in 3ft (,9m) wide rolls and used in
tented accommodation such as Mess tents or similar large tents. A group of us where instructed to
produce our own carpet/mat from the core matting. We stitched 3 lengths together using 16-gauge
wire to give an overall width of 9 feet (2.7 m). Having access to the Orford test area we found a
suitable muddy patch and laid out and drove the truck we
had come down on and it was soon became apparent that
some means of keeping the mat taut was required. This
picture shows a small bobbin being used for a plain carpet
and being tested on a beach on which the water line is
receding.
It shows a plain carpet being laid across damp sand as
well as flattening barbed davit wire and screw pickets;
these are the vertical rods with some four loops as the one
on the right hand side shows to some degree.
illusehicles had passed
has the last pian unreals and will be noted as they occurred the c
While not sure date wise but we must have started to receive the Churchill MKII some time before
The fascine by the way dates back to Roman times and the Italian Fascist Party that was in power
lay these fascines has these bundles were called and if need be; withdraw, cut and tie fresh ones
while other units ensured the defenders did not destroy their handy work. When there were sufficient
fascines laid in the ditches or ramps to scale
embankments the overall assault would take. It was
obvious that 'Hobo' had a very broad knowledge of
military history and was going to put it to good use has
will be seen
We were to replicate this method using bundles of
chespaling. Chespaling was a common fencing medium=d
in the UK, consisting of split saplings spaced equally
having been connected by using galvanised 1/8" (3mm)
wire that was twisted alternatively clockwise then anti-
clockwise to make a firm structure when secured to
peposts driven in the ground. This was normally used as a
fence on farms or around sites as a temporary enclosure.
When received it was in a roll and in varying sizes
between 2 ft and 4 ft (1.2m) in 6 INS (15cm) s
increments if I recall correctly. We would re-roll these
into a more compact bundle with a length of tubular
scaffolding through the centre; this allowed us tobar
increase the width to some 11ft (3.3m). These
smaller bundles were then placed in a simple cradle
in which three lengths of at least 2 inch (50mm)
resulting in a 5/8 inch diameter Steel Wire Rope, the
size being the circumference of the either hemp or
steel cable or rope. We would then load sufficient
bundles to give an overall diameter of 8 feet (2.4m).
Then we would place the wire over the bundles to
form a loop then using 'Bulldog Clips' a U bolt which would secure the three loops when the ropes
were placed in tension. This being done with two tanks; one gently backing away and squeezing the
separate bundles tight; until a heat compact circular bundle was produce, A hazard of this operation
was that a rope could be detached from its tank anchorage and whip back decapitating anyone or
anything in its path.
