Much ever T found out the propeller units had the abilty to be staine into la
raised position to ensure that the lenderts had earance was maintained for land
use. I have wondered if the black linder sal actual Pimsoll line or artist's licensead to som
knowledge of this there was not line was card when fully armed which was to lead to some losses
beakuse they where not intended or a free bead hey. Because the very rough seas led to waves
breaking over the 'gunwale produced a excess of water within the structure and the 'bilge pump'
could not cope.
During there floating period the tank commander had to look over the skirt to direct the driver to the
target when the DD started to emerge from the water he would return to the comparative safety of
the turret. When they were launched within the requisite distance the proved there worth giving the
infantry much needed support, having arrived at the waters edge with no real evidence of their
potential until the skirt was dropped and guns opened up.
Of course during operational conditions on the beach and inland the Tank Commander either looked
out of the Turret hatch or through the turret periscope. All the crew was connected to the intercom
and wore large headsets that kept the very noisy atmosphere down to a minimum. This allowed for
interchange of orders from the tank commander and replies. The Wireless Op had to monitor two
radio sets the one that acted as intercom and a larger capacity one to ensure that HQ could
communicate with all the commanders associated with each particular operation.
At this point a brief description of our billets would not go amiss, Thorpness was a pre-war holiday
village. You rented a house or apartment and either cooked for yourself or visited the restaurant, of
course the refinements of holiday living had long gone when we arrived. The only remaining aspect
were the gardens and lawns which were kept in good 'nick' by various fatigue parties and on leaving
I must say it still looked great.
I feel I should record the conditions, billet wise that is. Having mentioned its holiday apartment's
style layout, in which no structural changes had taken place. Most of the rooms had been taken over
for use as sleeping quarters with maybe four or five beds or bunks per room. In my case I had a
single bed with a curved plywood base and the regulation straw filled mattress.
16
jeants Mess would have
es required, as well as simpler construction due do the
14 August 1943: AVRE Drivers, Co-Drivers and Demolition NCOs move to TDS Linney Head's.
15 August 1943: TANK DRIVING SCHOOL Linney Head's, South Wales.
I received a letter from historian Adrian James in mid 1996 who was researching the history of the
Royal Armoured Corps Range at Castlemartin, with emphasis on the development of the Snake
device. Within his letter he stated that the 79th ASRE was there between the 15th August 1943 and
early September. So our sojourn was three weeks at the most with an intensive training period to
become familiar with our new 'battle wagon'. Linney Head was the training area and Castlemartin
was the camp we were billeted in during our stay. Area ringed on map.
AVRE Drivers, Co-Drivers and Demolition NCOs, attended
the Course. This was to become familiar with our new
tanks. The training area had all that was needed to
familiarise us with the skills that were associated with
tank warfare at that point in time with firing ranges,
driving skill courses - assorted terrain - loading/landing
sections around the coastline. Classrooms within Nissen
Huts, here we became familiar with the inner workings of
the tank and ancillary equipment. The tanks were
Churchill's, a forty-ton formidable piece of ironmongery
classed as Infantry Support Armour.
The most 'off-putting' of this course was when you drove up an incline with the visor in the fully
closed position. That is; the view was very limited consisting mainly of the sky; until you dipped
down after reaching the top, the see-saw effect suddenly brought the ground into view.
Firstly you had to mount the slope with sufficient power for the climb and then easing off to ensure
you either didn't stall on the top leaving your underbelly exposed vulnerable to anti tank fire. Or
alternatively misjudge your speed and take off into space with the resulting jolt that would result in
injuries to the crew or dislodge various projectiles stored in various "nooks and crannies" within the
turret and hull.
