3 (Br) DIV
The aim of this operatione us
"This was a pocket of suff
2 CoN. DIV.•
51 (H) DIV.
154(H) Inf.
49 DIV.
tactic was a
movement
to encircle the enemy and force
their surrender
To set the scene I have taken
the liberty to quote a small
paragraph from the book "This
Canadian operation, called
Totalize was conducted by the
Canadian First Army. It was a
bold and unorthodox plan, a
night attack with armour to
attempt to do by night what
had failed many times before
by day. Orders had been issued
on August 2nd with the time
for the attack set for the night
of August 1-8." Now I can carry
on with my own memories,
which had been confirmed now.
The troops available comprised
the 2nd Canadian and 51st
Highland Divisions, the 2nd
Canadian Armoured Brigade
LEGEND
and the British 33rd Armoured
Brigade. These were
augmented by units of the 79th
Armoured Division including
our 79th ASRE with further
Canadian and Polish Armoured
Div. in reserve. I can recall
SCALE OF MILES
moving forward to the
assembly point during the
OPERATION TOTALIZE
daytime and arrived at an escarpment that ran parallel to the road then we headed up the cliff
like face along a narrow incline and came an to a wide plain. It was already had an assortment
of tanks, personnel carriers, half-tracks and two very odd looking devices. When we were all
assembled in what one would describe as open order we were told to cook a good meal, as we
might not have time for much eating later on. For my part I was our tanks cook so out with our
petrol-fired stove and out with the 'Billy can' etc. Just as we sat with our backs to the tank
partaking of the culinary delights we heard the drone of high flying aircraft and we knew that
play new alerted the enemy to
ad started to mes to load everything aboard our vehicle and move into the
riest canks and finally the infantry in Kangaroos
superstructur
mounts, anure unsets, eats so they.
could be used as personnel can
1900 men anded some 200 venice and
190m de by 000e ate 50 fee
195 Start fine
at the Farma
guns firing tracer ammunition to mark
the flanks, - my remarks on one of the
projects I was involved with during my
sojourn at HQ. Workshops some 18
months earlier at Colchester when I
was modifying Bofor guns for
horizontal firing came to fruition when I
saw them in use on this operation - Very
lights and searchlights using indirect
Lighting. With relation to this last device
I recall that they didn't seem to be the
same as the anti-aircraft ones and only
when researching this whole narrative
did I find reference to a Canal Defence
Light (CDL). This was a turret-mounted
device with a shutter mechanism that
Dug in along this fine
on the sth August 41
gave a narrow beam with an
intermittent illumination that was very
disconcerting to anyone looking
towards it. This amount of illumination
plus anticipated Moonlight was thought to
be enough so the only vehicle lights
were dim taillights.
Taking our involvement the following
units also took part: The 4th Canadian
Infantry Brigade, 2nd Canadian
Fataise
Armoured Brigade, 1* Lothian and
Border Yeomanry (Crab or Flail tanks) Squadron A of the 141st RAC (Crocodile or Flame Th-
rower tanks) and last but not least 'our mob' the 79th ASRE. These were to form 3 columns on
the right, starting under cover of high ground north of the vicinity of Beauvior Farm, the fourth
column from a position East of Beauvior Farm. Unfortunately this map was taken from an
operational to a large scale and my highlighting did not help with its reproduction. The three-
column objective was the high ground two miles N of Bretteville-sur-Laize and the fourth
