On August 20" Hobe inspected the Squadren aln emphasised the importance of the ratting train
he waterway bank could be supported on pontoons with als- ors being placed by an
Phe Balley Bridge was the next avallable bridge for both dry crossings and when assembled on
with the AVRE with its attachments was well past the Bailene ating. The need to increase the
where to be encountered when Belgium, Holland and Germany was reached.
afting capacity due to the increase width and tidal cond/as ns of the mass of waterways that
The Third Army's offensive to the Seine began in earnest on August 15th.
The offensivene $ halted from August 16" to 18" with the mira Army on a line Orleans-
chatres-Druex, partly for reasons of supply. On the to nowever, the arive to the seine was
enewed, and by dark the Us 79th Infantry DiviSte 'pamava. repaired a footbridge. By the
evening of the 20" had established a firm bridgehead without interference from the enemy
The rapid advance on Paris and the crossing of the River Seine had led to the Armoured and
other units outstripping their supply lines with fuel being them jor deficiency. To this end it
was necessary to transport Jerricans of fuel from both the Pluto oil terminal as well as
preloaded trucks of fuel being landed via Mulberry. Volunteers were asked for to take part in
this supply line operation and due to the large numbers stepping forward. It was decided the
experienced truck/lorry drivers would take on the long haul because of the distance and
conditions so others like yours truly; would ferry vehicles from terminal to marshalling area.
Then the others would set
off on the longest road
convoy lots of us were ever
to see. If the enemy had
had ample air power at that
SECOND BA. A
time I dread to think what
could have occurred on
these 'runs'.
So early on the 25*h August
IN US.
MANA
FIRSTY'S US legon
the 2* French Armoured
and the 4th US Infantry
Divisions entered the capitol
and took control of the
centre of Paris. With Paris
ARM U.S.
liberated; it was 'well and
where stilubble to gi
This was being done by Canadian sappers of 20*h Field Company, RCE on the 12 August 1944
and shows the versatility of the Bailey Bridge.
But before sappers became proficient at using this particular structure someone had to invent
it. A British Engineer achieved this by the name of Donald Coleman Bailey who was born in
Rotherham in 1901. He graduated from the University of Sheffield; he joined the Ministry of
Supply at the Experimental Bridging Establishment, Christchurch, Hampshire. When WWII
broke out he had developed an idea for a military bridge and in 1940 he present a draft of his
idea. Countless sappers have built Bailey Bridges and they turn up in the most unlikely place
and not just in the domain of Sapper Engineers.
An earlier development initiated at EBE was the 'Christchurch Crib' by which it was possible to
erect piers supporting Sir Donald Coleman Bailey's invention as shown in the forefront of the
above picture.
Later in this narrative mention is made of various variations of the Bailey Bridges and recorded
in Roland Ward's excellent accounts, which are listed in the Bibliography.
