muster where mi elon, hang to sant
muster I
pieces of pipe with a thread on one end, this
exercise alone was difficult because our stores
did not run too much in the way of basic
matenals, Having succeeded in finding a
suitable piece I cut four notches in the plain
end, then bending the four pointed sides to
form a point. I welded these and the finished
article was like a poorly sharpened pencil.
Having secured it to the main assembly a fitter
and myself set to make attachments to secure
the device to the tank but because of the absence of electric welding equipment we had to
make use of existing bolts. Or I had to weld cleats etc to such things as the angle iron step
pieces across the sloping front of the hull and used by the crew to mount the tank. This took
some time because the tanks bulk was a far too efficient 'heat sink'. The chill had to really be
removed to allow for a cleat to be welded to the free edge of the angle. This resulted in long
hours into the night because once you had begun welding in a specific area you had to keep
going and do as much work as possible because of the overall urgency of the work. To get the
device into the raised position for embarkation we used a rope tackle with two to one sheave
blocks. We checked its operation and painted the rope to indicate both the raised and lowered
positions. Then it was time to put it to the test. The Navy brought in a LCT - Landing Craft
Tank - backing the tank on to the craft, its up with the ramp, out to sea and around to the
landing zone. After seeing the tank stowed safely on board and with my mate Geoff Pope in the
driver's seat. I head of with the E.O. overland to meet the LCT and watch the landing. Well the
landing was successful! The tank moved towards the sand hill; the pipe assembly was lowered
ready to push the pipes into the sand but instead of going into the sand, it started to climb up
and eventually came out close to the top of the hill. Not a success.
an one me to rape dames
roues ects during myo Massi
door of the Nissen hut, wor
our overall w
serached to the main pipe assembly the device was a SUCCESSI
pace vice. Tra Deare known as
the Boose Ban pied out of harding.
the Boase Ba
the device
Ahe LT le was ready or the trip back.
o base.
was like a Ducks bill and when
The next phase was to fill the pipe with Polar
Gelignite, together with fuses and cable sufficient to
allow the tank to move back from the device before
detonating it; of course the fixing device had to be
modified to leave the Boase Bangalore in the sand
this time. Our E.O. knowledge of explosives then
ARMOURED
BULLDOZER
ensured the gap made by the explosion was
sufficient to allow for the passage of a tank
or other vehicles. A good job done!
Two machines, the Armoured Bulldozer
(Caterpillar D8) and the designated Carpet
Layer would have followed. The armoured
D8 was being produced in the UK. The
Caterpillar Company already having a
number of factories established in locations
within the UK was well placed to produce this machine.
The various Carpet Layers were already being used testing various roadway
materials including the mat I was involved with while in Thorpeness.
The following excerpt shows the unit was still based in Suffolk.
WAR DIARY - 79 ASSAULT SQUADRON 1944 - WO171/1807 - Jan-Dec.
At the start of this period, the CO was Major JG Hanson and the 2V/c was Captain
Morris.
Excerpts from the above War Diary will be added and underlined within all the following
relevant comments to give added authenticity to this narrative.
January: Based at Butley.
The month was taken up with general assault engineer training.
17 - Exercise MOOSE II, a demonstration of assault from the sea.
18 - Major-General PCS Hobart GOC 79 AD delivered a lecture to officers and personnel
of the Squadron.19 - Left Wantisden Camp, Batley, for INVERNESS; the Squadron
entrained at Wickham Market. They arrived on the 21** and on 29' commenced
Operation FIZZLE.
31
