The Wireles that had to
Another then sutie spect me ground ate a fueer slate had to master as inning looking
ưng is th win on the schi our do viewd ine
de world outside
Infantry Tank Mk. IV, Churchill Mk. /
Wireless operator, Gunner, (Co-driver),
Dimension: Length
Animum honess: Maximum 202mm.
The lustration above of what I would call a basic model and I only saw a few salled without track
A nue an out in go to on the rec, uas the tracks would pick up
At the time I am relating to the taeks turrets were minus any armament asand the but these was a
BESA gun in the front mantel on the Co-drivers side (Lef). The back of his and the Drivers seat was
just forward of the hinge of the rectangular side access known as a pannier door, shown below the
front of the turret in the preceding picture.
Here Troopers from the Tank Corps, who had already been trained in the overall skills on other tanks
but joined us now to become familiar with the new breed. Sappers in the mean time, with the
assistance of the troopers were being introduced to the art of becoming co-drivers, as well as the
daily and repair tasks associated with the tank. Besides the usual daily tasks such as checking oil and
water there was to be those associated with track and bogie repairs. These are the most vulnerable
from anti-tank mines rendering the tank completely immobile, and 'a sitting duck. I guess there was
some initial animosity but we all soon realized that a crew was a team and requiring everyone to pull
his weight to get the team through the tasks ahead. A 'bone' of contention was they where not going
to forfeit their black berets.
The Churchill tanks that were part of a conventional armoured squadron at that time had the normal
guns of various calibers fitted to them. But as far as we went at this stage and for some time after
our main additional training AVRE crews had placement training of packaged explosive; either the
General Wade or the Beehive at this time. This absence of a device in the turret mantle led to tales
of the yet to be revealed secret weapons and what they might be installed in the AVRE.
My most vivid recollection was learning to drive the beast; it had a crash gearbox and you had to
watch the tachometer to ensure you had the correct engine revolutions before you dipped the clutch
and engaged the next gear when increasing your cruising speed. Alternatively you double de-
clutched as you lowered the cruising speed, or if you had to engage a lower gear, still watching the
tachometer. While learning to drive these monsters, well they were then; we came to love them
knowing our lives would depend on them later; the infantry also became to appreciate them.
When driving these or any other tank your view of the world had three options: View 1 was a fully
glass window was put in place.
open aperture approx. 230mm X 150mm. View 2 was slightly smaller when a hinged bulletproof
View 3 was an armoured plate with a very small slit that would give additional protection. In lots of
storms generated by the tank tracks.
cases the driver would require additional directions from his tank commander mainly due to dust
pope le proses the movere nt for ard. the designated ARE towing the Snake to the
start point of
its use; then the shackle would be undone; the AVRE reversing
back to the next pick-up point;
Co-Driver
shackling up again. This
procedure being repeated until the Snake had been push
ed to its
target point.
A further reverse would take the AVRE to a safer position for
firing. The picture shows the pick-up point for the initial towing
point to tow the Snake ashore. In the opposite corner is the flight,
which I believe was for tracking over shingle.
This picture shows Snake stowed along the length of the LCT deck
it would be towed off the craft by a lead AVRE in this case. The
aim being to clear a path through a minefield, which would lead to
the SBG bridge, partially shown on the left and the AVRE with
fascine on the right to safely traverse through to their objective.
The Demolition NCOs would have had a special interest in the Snake has their expertise would be
used during the initial preparation when filling the lengths of tube before being connected. Also
supervising the loaded pipes being assembled by screwing together to give the overall required
lenath with the necessary connections for
firing would assemble these. Then when it
had been pushed into place within its target
area add the necessary detonators to
explode the device.
Later I made a number of short pieces of
threaded pipe on which I welded four
tapered plates or fins resembling the flights
on darts or arrows. The fins having one hole
in each fin and a short welded piece at right
angles to the fin these where used on sand
or arable land to assist in maintaining a
straight path through the target area.
While the Craft Loading manifest did not show any Snakes for the first stage of the beach assault,
they where used extensively afterwards. This picture shows the virtual magazines for carrying the 12
foot (3.6m) 3" nominal bore pipe and the magazine having a cluster of four 4" NBP each side.
Because prior to moving to Fort George I only had random access to Electric Welding plants, Oxy-
Acetylene welding and cutting equipment being on our Stores complement. Therefore I could not
weld anything to the main body of the AVRE. Later I would unbolt and remove sections and make
additional brackets, which would be re-assembled. The above picture shows the track guards etc
removed and the existing bolt or tapped holes being used for attaching the new brackets as
illustrated on the above picture.
