witness to this.
comments related
waterproofing and the access to further books resulted in finding
BIDEFORD,
of a picture showing an
AVRE with the waterproof
(ang. it was the poete dese he strue doc had 400me
about and the result of the detachments' labours. Joe Ingham
who was a Demolition NCO and a member of an AVRE crew; whose other members were Sergeant
Hardman, Sappers Malster (wireless op), New (gunner) and Nevard (driver).
He wrote of his time at Instow near Bideford in North Devon and was kind enough to enclose a map
of the area with the location of the training area he and his colleagues set up various structures to
match certain invasion locations, He had kindly traced and marked a map with the area used, which
is on the next page, with a further extract from Joe's letters.
Taking an extract from Joe's second letter
we can picture the action-taking place to
erect the structure on this page.
"Our short stay in Instow remains one of
my most vivid memories. We were billeted
in the village, our address being. 'Att W
Corps Troops, Cricket Pavilion Instow,
Devon', and we went by 3 ton truck every
day across the bridge in Bideford to
Appledore. Somewhere outside the town
we had erected a jetty made of tubular
scaffolding and planks by means of which
we embarked on a small motorboat and
down the river to one of the sandbanks
which abound in the estuary. It was here
devise means of destroying and circumventing them.
that the mock-ups were erected, and
where we experimented with them to
I have marked on the enclosed map an area of sand dune, which
is still marked as WD land and as an area of natural beauty. It is
quite likely that this in fact the actual area used, although I must
admit that I cannot say for certain whether this is the fact.
At the time, I was completely without any map or information as
to where exactly we were working, and at the time I was under
the impression that we were working on an island. Now I realise
that there are no islands in the estuary: we just referred to it as
'Devil's Island".
and al colde as wits mal vite patches were the preets as these pators in t
theonators were placezontal rows
been ded A cary the charges from the panener
The previous picture showing two saiion No after
placement; they
nd checking t
open in the AVAtE to compete the setona con
Charges lowing tanks to tolo her outral Wade
Memories has shown the meally enlarge all of the
stunted references in some seven publications to the
test to Beach ReCovery. The latter was navating
greater comice in that particular area.
- than any of the ASRE/AVRE and
Having mentioned waterproofing; this picture despite its lack of clarity clearly shows the right-hand
side duct through which the cooling air passed through to side mounted radiators before passing
through the engine compartment and being discharged through the rear duct; this one obscuring the
turret. Two exhaust pipes can be seen; one each side of the rear exhaust duct. While I did not have
any direct involvement in the trials of the Goat device I became aware of it, even though certain
areas where strictly 'No Go Zones". The AVRE not fitted with full wading gear approaching the
defence wall with a Goat device in a horizontal position.
Having left a LCT it must have been a dry launch before
moving up the beach at Instow on its way to deposit the
framed charge which will be raised into a vertical position
just before being placed against the vertical wall that
simulated a blockhouse.
The wading gear on the tanks confirms another activity in
this area; but in the above case the absence of the left hand
side duct was due more too excessive use and the need to
give everyone a trial run to determine who would be best
suited for which device. A more sophisticated Goat device
was being tried elsewhere and will be noted later.
