60-80 varts 20 ell short or missed. 12 did good damage and A failed le
both 77 & 79 Sads
ned, te
get it forol you
exercise. This would have given me ample work on the replaced track plates; the hinge pin
used to join the track plates had a retaining strip welded over each end of the hinge pin to
secure. I must have been fully employed and unable to assist my comrades on the ARV.
While the extensions to the exhaust would have been progressively fitted, as well as the
radiator intake ducts after the AVREs had the Petards fitted and on passed to the crews. Final
waterproofing could not take until all preliminary maneuvers had taken place. This was around
the turret and main body and would prevent turret movement. Also rings of cordite fuse to
blow the balloon fabric off of the turret as the AVRE finally climbed up the Normandy beach and
clear of the water allowing the crews to use the armament as quickly as possible. The metal
ducting that was an extension to the radiator intakes and exhaust vents plus the engine
exhaust extensions would be taken off at a later stage. Of course by now they were also in the
throes of loading up the tanks with the Beehives, General Wades and 'Flying Dustbins' as the
Petard Mortar Bombs were called. There was a considerable amount of other tackle such as
Steel Wire Rope with eyelets and shackles to assist in moving the expected debris.
These excerpts from the Troop commanders with their associated dates show the closeness of
components that had to be assembled to the various AVREs before the loading date.
MAY: On the that Littlehampton there was a gapping race which 2 Troop won.
On the g'h there was a demo to all members of 3 Division who would be landing in the first 45
minutes. By this date the Squadron had 24 out of 26 AVRES. The following day there were
more demonstrations to the 2 East Yorks and 46 Commando.
On the 12th the AVRE crews moved to Camp A19.
On the 16th the Squadron was complete with AVREs and petards. 4 bridges arrived.
20 - Captain Allday became 2IC, Captain Morris being posted to an Airfield Construction
Group. On this day also 2 Bobbins arrived and were issued to 1 and 3 Troop.
This was the first entry of an Officer being posted. I have become aware he appeared to expect
officers to dress for an evening meal after just arriving back late from various tasks that took
place over much extended hours by all concerned. This must have led to 'rumbles in the higher
ranks' leading to his rather rapid departure.
From the 26-29 the units were briefed. ON the morning of the 28th Troop leaders briefed all
crews. Most of the devices were mounted by 29th May.
41
