152.
MOVE SOUTH TO BE CLOSE TO THE START LINE
From the WDs and
manufacture because they normally kept a 'tightly buttoned lip' as a normal course of events,
because of their pride in the things their companies made and outsiders were kept in the dark
to any special developments.
Returning to the installation of the Petards; the only lifting tackle was Chain Blocks; with a
Leyland Workshop wagon which RSJ beam that could be adjusted to protrude out and over the
tallgate. This would allow for positioning by initially lifting the petard assembly with the AVRE's
turret turned to the side, the Workshop wagon could be reversed and the assembly would be
steered through the mantle and secured. The elevating gear would then be wound to lift the
mounting plate to make contact with the inside of the turret roof. Care had to be taken to only
secure with a short ('tack') weld; this was to ensure the elevating had ease of movement
before sequentially completing that weld.
On completion of the first one we had at least 25 more to install. With regards to how much
time we had to complete this side of the preparations I was not sure until I received copies of
the WDs'. But I knew our working hrs were restricted to the long daylight hours in this area,
being down South and too close to the enemy for comfort.
arks from the
or the monot
May - At Gosport (Stakes House Camp).
es hut Bridges
Ten in ta go to you not on me rene to the the ra ted in one bue
perch they revert theirs toge prince. have no recollection of any of the Porpoise sledgese
until later. I found a single picture showing three views of the
Porpoise but too poor to help in relating to its structure. I took
out one view. Hoping this description will assist to show what I
can best describe as something resembling the Punts that were in
abundance on the Inland waterways in the UK and where part of
the College life scene at Oxford and Cambridge. They were flat
bottomed with an identical bow and stern that tapered upwards
from the flat keel to meet the flat deck at each end, the centre
portion was the flat bottom. On this well section passengers
lounged on cushions while a sturdy male propelled and steered
the craft with a long pole that reached to the bed of the
waterway. Of course the purpose of the Porpoise; was to carry
additional cargo and once it had entered the water it would float
readily and not baulk the AVRE when climbing up the beach.
I had hoped to find more details on this but the surviving
members could not confirm my interpretation of the WD entry.
On the 2" the Assault bridges were painted white.
On the 4th FABIUS took place and the GOC 79 AD watched the Squadron's beach gapping and
clearance and stated that it was well done. The following day the Assault bridges were
recovered. On this date, the Squadron had 4 petards installed.
May 6 - At Angmering-on-Sea (the WD stated Aldershot?), on the Littlehampton Golf Course,
breaching crews fired one inert and three live dustbins from newly fitted petards. By this time,
two petards per troop had been installed. Petards were fitted by the unit personnel.
