June 18: 1 TD investates the possibilities of attacking with Sherman's to the rear of AVRE -
this is dropped when it became known that a manufactured WIRE RIpper attachment to final
drive existed. 2 To collect Armoured Sledae and commence assembling trays, 3 TD set up a
target for testing change of range and elevation against turns of the elevating handle. In
addition. possibiles of using Typhoon Reckets on AVRE Is investiated - loan of three ralls and
we rockets from 3205 Alrield Servicing Commandos Is arranged.
Wire Fa ranen were was could he eat described Wiretal kives ated to each.
that vertically cut and tore the Barbed Wire entanglements to pieces has
pad| Welch. These; being an airfield map of Northern France and accompanying squadron lists
and location mao references
The SCU was established to both establish and maintain the airstrips. In this particular case
they gave all the relevant suppor es a wide range of aircraft that landed, Spitfires, Hurricanes,
i his or on mother butti do or of sang superom ne refer let ra mes,
The above information shows I had taken certain extract in books during my research which
because dates were not included have led to a few anomalies especially within pages 103 to
would have been with the exception of Merville. The new information states that the records
show that the records show 183 San (RAF) had relocated from the UK. "11'' Sept 44 to
BS3/Merville" this Merville was in fact west of Lille. The B3 airstrip was at Ste-Croix-sur-Mer
approximately 7 km from Tailleville, which the Diaries show must have been our harbour at
that time. So it would also equate with my mention of the Military Post Office and the receipt of
fresh bread brought over by Dakota before their return with the unfortunate wounded
personnel. Also I guess; if I had not been "Down under" I would have become aware of the
June 18 - Conference on employment of ARE at 2 Army HQ. Meanwhile the Squadron practices
with petards, builds armoured sledges and carries out various experiments - including the
possible use of Typhoon rockets on the AVRE. Three rails and 2 rockets are loaned from a
nearby Typhoon Squadron.
The foregoing excerpt further answers and places a further three of my recollections.
Because of the misuse of the AVREs mentioned earlier two of us had spent time welding loops
to anchor spare damaged track plates in an endeavour to counter the velocity of the 88 mm
firepower we had encountered to date. The aim of the conference was to be more concerned
with the AVRE being used in their correct role after an initial artillery or battle tank assault. The
AVRE would then attack the emplacements to quickly reduce any recovery by the defenders to
use machine gun and small arms fire on the advancing infantry.
The reference in the above WD excerpt to Armoured Sledge's this is where I recall their first
use. The two illustrations I have seen were not as clear as I would have liked; so this simple
explanation will suffice. The sledge principle of two longitudinal bearer's upward raised ends
has runners with a box mounted on the runners. Anything from bundles of faggots for making
fascines through to ammunition was able to accompany the AVRE has they were being drawn
across the muddy fields etc.
I was a party to the last reference in the WD about Typhoon Rockets and rails.
Bie For er toler publica Typhoon their
Sins macer am no
1 Army and Airforce WDs on
es in this ection positier to charactional
Between the beachhead and front line, a number of pockets of resistance had been left behind
o be sorted out later. Since reading accounts of various engagements a comment that
appeared regularly was the fact that in quite a few cases the need to leave pockets of
resistance to be cleared up later was ignored and subsequently the original target was not
achieved, with disastrous results in some
cases. But when the advance went by the book;
emplacements could be by-passed without too much of a problem, one being a radar station at
This had mainly been constructed underground and while the surface details had suffered some
damage the occupants where able to pass on up to date information on troop movements.
Another active item, which was giving some trouble was a single flamethrower that covered a
junction in the road, though the rest of the complex was inoperative it caused inconvenience.
The control of the road was restricting the movements of 'soft' vehicles.
Because the flame thrower (mentioned earlier) was
niggling all and sundry our Tech Officer Captain
Charlton decided we would have a chat with the
Typhoon boys to see if we could use what was in fact
to be a very low level attack using two of their rocket.
Due to the position of the flamethrower, surrounding
anti-tank ditches and damaged pillboxes it was out of
range of our Petards. It was felt it would be feasible to
project a Rocket at low level without fear of it passing
ASSEL, GO. 1 130% SID 30 1 1 1
over the target and perhaps landing amongst our own
troops on the other side of the command complex.
The Typhoon Squadron C.O. was very receptive to the idea, dispatching two armourers, with
two launching rails. These were normally attached to the wings of the aircraft has shown on
the earlier picture. When they arrived at our site yours truly was instructed, what, where and
how various brackets were to be attached also DVR Boxall was making up the firing mechanism
so it could activate the rocket from the comparative safety inside the turret. Just to confirm
that in this case as with others we produced the 'bullets for someone else to fire' by fitting
extra attachments to the tanks as the above picture shows.
While on the subject of Typhoon I have located a picture of two
Typhoon rockets mounted on a Sherman tank. The rails are
elevated because the simple horizontal mounting we initiated
was over simplified when the aircraft launch is from a Typhoon
aircraft in a steep dive would be giving the Projectile a 'kick
start'. But on reflection the problems of launching would still
apply 'more so' with its additional elevation.
69
