PRE WILL APREASEMENT
Two personal events occurred during the above perlod, which knew; where far from beling Isolated.
and proceeded to picket the Drill Halls and outside Rifle
the following consequences.
ears older than I and had volunteered for the Teritorial Army (British
major cause was the fact they faced the German Alpine Corp who had special white uniform's and ski's, resulting in the
most effective camouflage and aid to movements compared to infantrymen in Khaki uniform's 1914 style and the
standard leather boots to traverse snow covered terrain In a very short time their contingent where either killed, wounded
or captured and Noel and his comrades languishing in POW Camps for the rest of the war in Europe.
I found another associated account of the lack of preparation pre 1939 in a small account entitled 'So
an or on: is for the Terior let and eng sued, in steere, restos and 65s
Mask only. Because they had to wear their 'civvies' shoes they soon reached their "Used by Date'. They
received a cash grant to purchase some suitable footwear from local shops, so as to be able to Drill and
March. He made no mention of uniform or associated webbing equipment. This triggered a memory
relating directly with this particular deficiency. Included in this account was a remark that the Dunkirk
evacuation, which rescued the manpower but had lost the 'tools' that any army needs to do its job. To
correct this anomaly civillan transport was commandeered, by adding a few military markings to
distinguish the new acquisitions, but the soldiers Tools of trade' were missing.
or millions aned erithe less a vital
ance to the various a for the armed forces
This was to deple bot the man the arme force sent urocuton and aling to part mould
declared non-essential production and calling for part time
the erecting of them. Of course there was no shortage of fourteen or younger; to seventeen year old,
both male and female, keen to help after working each day myself included. Later working days
would cover 12 hours placing demands on every enterprise however small.
1940: A Major-General Hobart was prematurely retired after forming the 7th Armoured Division in
the Middle East. This Division was to become known later as the 'Desert Rats',
The main reason as I saw it from my limited view; relates to the transition to tanks and the transfer
of Cavalry Officers and men to the new medium in WWI. Cavalry charge philosophy may have
worked at the latter end of that war, but during the time between WWI & WWII the anti-tank guns
had been developed with the above philosophy in mind.
3rd June 1940: Last British troops evacuated from France (Dunkirk). While manpower was saved,
equipment was lost. Tacticians had to now concentrate on how and when to return to the mainland
of Europe also the replacement of equipment put a further burden on the available industrial
resources.
June 1940: Major-General Hobart (universally known in the British Army as 'Hobo') recalled to the
service by Winston Churchill to make use of his experience in both training and armour. He was
given the task of forming the 11th Armoured Division, but when this became operational he was
relieved of his position because it was felt he could not serve actively in the field.
