Or been the bie to make the one to the Avat.
had withdrawn from the SE corner of Cambes and
SECOND PAGE OF ORIGINAL. Public Records Once; Ref.: W0171/1807
AVRE Comd
2078193
L/Sgt. QUENBY
W Operator
2000936
MERRITT
co-driver
14259296
SPol. BAY
MAYNARD
K. A.
F. L.
Driver
Of the other two AVREs remaining in the wood - no further action was taken actively against
the enemy.
Major R. E.
4 July 1944.
PS. The 'armoured car' has since been inspected and has proved to be an Mk IV German Tank.
A summary of this operation shows that recognition of friend or foe' was sadly lacking which
resulted in the losses noted above. Another aspect that is not always highlighted is the rather
what could only be described as 'gruesome' was the Padres attendance and the Medical Corp
personnel who had to both attend to the wounded and of those who had died.
Finally the length of time taken to confirm and cross check before the CO signed it off!
Before continuing with the various actions the 79 ASRE was involved in; I found mention of
AVREs in mainly infantry historians' accounts. But no squadron numbers or names and so it
became apparent that they were more or less being plucked at random by unit commanders in
the field. On numerous occasions there was mention of the bad weather and its effect on the
reinforcements that where scheduled to land and relieve what were by now battle weary and
depleted units who were also running short of ammunition.
A further problem was the number of strong points that had been overrun and were still active.
These of course needed to be captured or neutralized for a number of reasons. Besides their
ability to harass forward moving troops they where still a source of intelligence on unit
strengths and direction of movement as noted in this action report.
The rest of the squadron would have arrived by now so the arrival of the Workshop wagon with
the petrol driven electric welder meant I could make inroads into both repairs and additions.
One of the additions was the attaching of track plates to the front of the AVREs as well as
round the turret the aim being to try and reduce the impact of the 88mm shells that the
Germans had introduced into this area of conflict. I recall that we would cut the reinforcing
rods from the damaged pillboxes to weld on to the tank then place on the track plate, heat up
thou some photographe depiced them bathe in Sherman bogie wheels to the tanks,
JUNE 121 / 13" first 10 V1 missiles launched one only reaching Londen!
This map shows in the
TAL I 12 4,130 Jun area more detal
Tailleville, which will be mentioned later in
respect to 79 and the ARV crei
The date (6-17 JUNE) notes the time taken to
she were invaived the he hitath tune, 26
Das not successe. The particular enemis
" 5er ail levill
In Anquerny area assembly of un to now 200
enemy tanks with transport echelon facing
south".
| 6 - 17 JUNE
Also earlier in the day the radar station had
signalled "Continuous movement heavy and
medium tanks towards south east. More than 80 tanks counted within one hour".
From the above excerpt it can be seen that while the enemy aerial surveillance was minimal
these radio reports where vital to the German commanders. In this case the 7th Armoured Div
was aiming to do a 'right hook' in a drive to encircle Caen from the west through Caumont and
Villers-Bocage under the operation name 'Perch'. But the radio messages noted above were to
nullify this attempt at considerable loss to both 7th Armoured and 50th Northumbrian Infantry
Divisions.
June 12 - Up to this date the 79 Squadron had lost 7 AVREs and 14 crew were missing.
JUNE 15th / 16* in the first 24 hrs 244 V1 missiles launched but due to the earlier false start
the RAF fighters and anti-aircraft defences and soon.
became effective against them. Bomber commands also
were able to readily identify the launch sites and mount
an offensive.
June 17: Sqn rests whole day.
June 17: 26 Sqn takes part in reduction of strongpoint and
RADAR station nearby and many people look on. Over 200
prisoners are taken and 26 Sqn has eight causalities. 1
Spr. is evacuated to UK with shrapnel wound in eye,
sustained on D-Day.
Later on the 17th June it was captured as noted above by AVREs from both the 26 & 77 ASRE
who by now where well below strength and again being given tasks they where not equipped to
do? Because the firepower of this target had been reduced to the flamethrower mentioned
earlier the AVRES here able to do the task they where designed to do.
