Battle of Arnhem and 'A Bridge to far'.
The very nature of the terrain required some
form of amphibious vehicle. The American
vehicle
Chat was orgynaly develope priore vehicle.
It was a private venture by a Donald
Roebling and it was intended for rescue
purposes in areas of the Florida Everglades
not accessible to boats or ordinary vehicles.
From this amphibious vehicle, which was
propelled on both land and water by its
tracks, the L.V. T.1 (Alligator) was developed,
bring eventuali used during wil in the Pacific area fols. Tate pia eino able to transport
mended enately s from ship to shore over the coral atolls his picture shows a typical layout
or the is tone lets fred a Mark Il but without the guns. Also you'll note that it had a similar
of the first ul, ele a matching the Terrapin in this lew ve. this led must either bulldozing
a ton the too the Lt hul for load the and ortoad now vehicles to match their talgate to
I recall working on a task similar
to the one illustrated below. This
was to allow for a 17 pdr Anti-
Tank Gun to be
carried on the
top of a Buffalo Mark II. This
again was illustrating the
continual innovations taking
place. As can be seen in the
following picture loading and
unloading could be carried out quickly. I recall we used the lightweight steel piles and made a
stiffening strut on the underside of the ramp. This particular photo shows the later ramp that
would have been a boxed structure to carry weight of the 17 pounder.
The earlier WD entry that loading of transporters commenced on the 13/09/44 would mean I
could have been at another location that may have been near Bornem on a stretch of water to
prepare for the arrival of the main squadron strength. This is further substantiated by the
following account of my accident.
I must have also been in an either the advance party or seconded to assist with some
modifications to Mk Il as will be shown prior to the squadron moving to Bornem on the
17/9/44. This would account for my absence on some of the internal squadron operations
noted in the earlier WD accounts.
On the 15/09/44 it must have been the Approx' date of my accident! I was away from the
squadron harbour has where a number of others where exactly I have been unable to find out.
I recall moving in a small convoy of 3 or 4 vehicles, which included the Leyland Workshop
wagon of which I was the driver. We where travelling down a narrow road when what I could
only describe as an almighty flash and bang I must have been dazed all I know I was told to
stay put' and await a recovery vehicle. I must have fallen asleep and when I awoke I saw this
lady and a small child, She asked me "drink Tommy", I must have said "yes" she came back
86
on tong enth chan pere to one me, Rey straining say care at ayamaus
Bounce a to were delad unders, and Bren carriers; l' was found that the 17
On the 29* Sept. Races were held between the Troops, in loading stores, running a water-
course, leaving the water and unloading. 3 troop won, followed by 1 troop then 2 troop.
While researching the squadron's activities after receiving some chronological information,
especially the time between the 'Breakout' and the first operation in the Low Countries I was
able to tie up a few vague ends in my memory.
Having earlier mentioned a special petrol delivery; I found frequent mention in various books
to the further shortages of fuel, ammunition, spares and general stores occurring with some
regularity. Bearing in mind that even though when the British reached Belgium the supplies
were still coming from Bayeux; 250 miles (400km) away. The Americans were extended even
further. Transport or the lack of it was the major problem as the supplies were getting ashore
but because the original bridgehead had been so narrow priority had been given to supplies.
With transport a poor second; the speed with which the Allied forces moved across France,
transport became number one in the armies 'pecking order' but most of the reserve vehicles
were still in England.
Another problem was all
MONTGOMERY'S
the Channel Ports from Le
PLAN
Havre to Ostend where still
occupied by the enemy.
General Crerar's First
Canadian Army which
consisted of six Canadian
and British divisions had
been given the task of
capturing those ports.
Dieppe and Ostend without
a fight but the other ports
had orders to fight to the
last and demolish the
harbour facilities. This
operation took until
FIRST COM ARMY
SECOND B? ARMY
FIRST U.S.ARMY
THIRD U.S. ARMY
October 1st; it took some
four weeks to open them
all to sea traffic.
