The room to peter to the enth.
June 6 0715 hours: All Serials have to ae full speed aster as the rocket salvoes are falling
short and one or two very nearly hit Serial 114.
ON on the landing on
the dame pes esh the heaviest possible bombardment from the but i can i 5.
bombardment compels the enemy to get their heads down under cover, but it cannot hope
Anally to silence shore batteries. Only a direct hit on a gun can put it out of action for certain,
this is virtually impossible except by luck. It is therefore necessary to have supporting fire until
the very moment that troops land to prevent the enemy getting his head up again. Naval
gunnery is not sufficiently reliable to continue to the last moment, and has to be lifted from the
beaches to targets inland at about H-20 minutes. The biggest problem is to fill this awkward
and most important interval.
Rockets fired from converted LCTs, which
accompany the first wave, and fire at H-10
and H-3 approximately, achieve this. At this
time the DD tanks, Sherman tanks fitted with
compressed air operated canvas flotation
screens, should be swimming ashore, and
should have touched down. These remain on
the beaches to deal with strong points as the
infantry lands".
I have also taken the liberty to correct an
error in the next paragraph by inserting the
corrections in brackets.
"The first wave of craft comprises LCTs
carrying the Assault Vehicles Royal Engineers
(AVRE) which are mostly Churchill tanks fitted
with flails to detonate mines.
50
COCHRANE'S of 2 TD Is also knocked out and the Bridge AVRE receives a direct hit and the
Bridge drops flat.
On this area can be seen a series of obstacles the first row being 'Pit Props', the next two rows
are 'Hedgehogs' then a further two rows of 'Pit Props' are just faintly visible. In some sectors
there could be up to a further three rows.
The original plan was to
commence the landings at low
tide when these devices would
be visible, but it was not to be
on the day. The strong offshore
winds prevented the tide
retreating to its normal point
and this in turn caused a drastic
change of plan. This
ntervention by Mother Nature
increased the odds against the
Allies but in turn the enemy
could not believe that anyone
would mount an attack under
these conditions, so the odds may have been
shortened a little.
In this picture the 'Pit Props' had either a Teller
mine (A/T mine) or a naval shell primed to
explode on contact.
The next obstacle was the 'Hedgehog'. There are
no prizes for guessing why it was called
'Hedgehog'! The device had a large square plate
attached to one of the steel members by a long
rod so that when the plate was buried in the
sand it would prevent the waves moving it.
There are signs that one at least in the picture
has been uprooted. The cruciform style would
ensure that if disturbed it would still present a working face to snare tanks. So when it came to
removing it; it would be dragged away to form a dump, thus clearing more of the beach.
51
