No. 10. HORN 2A A 45. Unable to pinpoint either location.
BARNEVELD
April 25 0550
April 26
April 27
April 28
a preparatary to roving. one
Man tap Bot 916086
With only one more recorded operation to be added at this point it would be advantageous to include
one more map of North Germany showing the advestce towards the River Elbe, and the move North
and North East to the Baltic Seaports. The R. Elbe was to become part of the frontier between West
and East Germany with the border leaving the Elbe South of Schwerin and Wismar, to give access to
Kiel and the Baltic.
Of course this splitting of Germany was to result in what became known as the
Cold War. Another story entirely!
The distance across from the Rhine
To Nor domAn, March Apil 759,
to the Elbe was some 350
kilometres and was mainly poor
agricultural land. Also there were a
large number of concentration
camps with one of the most
notorious Belsen, located at Bergen
Belsen (underlined on the map)
NNE of Hanover. It became obvious
from the remarks in some letters
that I received; a number of
servicemen had seen the results of
the untold suffering that the
inmates had endured.
No.11. RIVER ELBE 1-2 May 45.
gUS)
British and Canadian forces; had to
cross the River Elbe near Luneburg
N/Gp П
and clear points North through Hamburg and the estuary of the Elbe. Luneburg with the nearby
Luneburg Heath where Monty had his HQ was to witness the arrival of German diplomatic envoys,
led by Admiral Hans-Georg von Friedeburg on May 3. On the following day he surrendered all
German forces in Denmark, Holland and Northern Germany; three days later he repeated the
forces took place in Berlin. The war in Europe was over.
process at Eisenhower's HQ and on the 9th May a formal surrender of all the remaining German
Engineer Squadron RE.
The following WD is the first one to have the name change and the ASRE becomes ARE - Armoured
DEVENTER May
May S
May
May 6
and roomal, of stores fron aren
May to
May 11
May 13
I pagaing half-lp AVES over concrete obetaalo,
DEVENTER May I5
May 16°
May 17
May 18
May 19
May 20-23
May 25-27
May 28-31
