DEDICATION
This book is dedicated a group of men that I was proud to become part of; they had
joined pre-war in the Territorial Army as volunteers, being aware that war with
Germany was inevitable. They would have joined the local unit in the area they lived
in, which was a Royal Engineers Chemical Warfare unit which at the time the use of
poison gas as had been used in the 1 World or Great War, 1914-1918. After the 2nd
World War declared; the Germans had developed very advanced what could be
labelled conventional weapons and defences as they overran the European mainland.
This approach to warfare was to change the strategy of mainly the Army. It was
decided the Sappers training and its vulnerability to causalities would be given some
armoured vehicles; this led to the Assault Squadrons Royal Engineers being formed.
Not long after this decision was made; additional Sappers who had been 'Called Up'
and trained progressively since War had been declared and had the three months
Sapper Training of which one.
The task we were formed for; required us to be self-starters and Do-it-yourself
enthusiasts with minimum instructions, this was to become a constant one of
expansion and evolution. We were virtually an assortment of tradesmen that were
given various tasks that were to become tools of war to spearhead Second Front to
liberate occupied mainland Europe. I am sorry to say that due to our initial structure
which never gave we and others within the 79*h Armoured Division their true
recognising within the recorded annals which I hope this record will go some way to
correct.
The task we were formed for; required It became evident that the devices would
need to be taken right up to the enemies fortifications' and the need for armour
became apparent. Before long we were introduced to the Churchill Tank seemed to
fit the bill complete with crews from the Tank Corps that were to become part of
Royal Engineers Corp under the Assault Squadron RE Units. So versatility and
integration was achieved as we all understood each others skills.
The following narrative besides highlighting the development and then the use of our
innovations that will show that besides making the devices we took them into battle
and continued to develop innovations has we advanced across Northern Europe.
