Saper. to compen 99%
Ase wrani refered in the
following narrativists N. W. Europe
Overseas
From 4-6-44 (D-DAY-2) to 25-10-44
when I was injured, agall
later. After I had recovered I was
down graded to Bine from 155-45
release. This was a means by which
your original employer could
need or alienal la due to ther
post-war demand because I
accepted same; I was placed on the
Reserve List until 30-6-59 being
recalled once during that time.
Contents of the short note were not
recollection of my Army Service.
Address showed no longer valid, as
I reside now at 29/42 Acacia Street,
MT. MARTHA, Victoria 3934,
Australia.
19M Deceabar 3980
i am, Aney and Air Forens Reserve dot 1959
Sarries with the Coloural Area 2.1,43 to 2.10.46
7b: 59: 3.94
1aT Parastatal Record Officer
That to an an in do going Camp on
another story once again.
Below use on take 2ur Apri 996 A MA By my departed
Milnd Eddie Nicholls who is mentioned under
acknowledgements?
While I cannot manage the Anzac March now '2008' I
still join the veterans that march in Mornington, our
neighbouring town. While it is not as large a gathering
never the less it culminates in a very moving service
on a very pleasant Memorial Park that is dedicated to
those who served in all theatres of War.
The following account centres to some degree on the
79th Armoured Division and its formation and activities
before and after the D-Day landings with an emphasis
on 79 ASRE and my involvement. Initially I was
recording general memories to pass on to my children
and their children. When I came to seek clarification of my war service I sought out publications that
I thought would assist in ensuring I would be giving as close an account of fact to match or correct
my memories.
Initially I sought details from a number of publications, the first book I read was The Longest Day';
this only had a brief mention of the special tanks that were in operation along the British/Canadian
sector of the Normandy Coast. This was not a good start and when I gave vent to my frustration
when talking to a friend Eddie Nicholls who offered me the loan of a series of weekly magazines that
had been grouped in a three volume hard cover under the title 'Images of War'. Again the search
was long; until I found a picture of an AVRE passing through a French village, which gave me, hope.
References at the end of the third volume started me on the trail of some 15 books to get some
confirmation of details I recalled; so in amongst the actions etc. of the 79th Armoured Division I
hoped to find some reference to my old unit the 79th ASRE. (Assault Squadron Royal Engineers)
later became 79 Armoured Engineers RE.
Afterwards I was encouraged by various Australian friends who had served in the RAAF having been
members of the Empire Training Scheme, and served in the UK to produce a book of my memories.
This I did in the original edition recording what I had done or seen done; which in turn would be a
variation of what a thousand others in the 'Div' did, but are not now in a position to re-tell or recall.
Further comments give the reason that I decided to revise and add to my original Narrative.
Hoping the contents within may help readers' to appreciate why the Second Front - as it was initially
called - took so long to be initiated and what steps were taken to ensure that it was a success.
