of the tank and laid a roadway
Then ed the rest of throalls aff
the velant on the can ased by
passed over them. This first
attempt was successful laying
some 12ft (3.6m) of roadway.
Tracked and wheeled vehicles
were able to use it but
pedestrians had to step to match
the rail spacing, not always possible, but again later when the Carpet Layer was developed a
mat could be overlaid to accommodate them and motor cycles. Later we developed a different
stacking technique that gave additional laying distance, some 30ft (9m) to match beaches in
some areas; this created a problem due to the combined weight on the bogie suspension. The
anti-tank traps noted earlier were being tackled elsewhere and it was much later before we
became aware of how this problem was being overcome. Having completed the loading a
problem arose when the weight of the complete loaded mat was found to be tipping the AVRE
so much it was virtually unsterile far worse than the SBG Bridge.
The next picture also gives a clear indication of the fitments being part of the MKIV AVRE. The
curved component forward of the pannier door and a stub and mounting plate above the last
two bogies on the right are what is required to mount the Bobbin.
During the Dieppe raid Sappers had endeavoured to get ashore with the preloaded lengths of
BT, which they were to screw together and push through the barbed wire that closed off
various gullies which the Commandos, had hoped to scale. The very rough seas meant that as
they disembarked the need to stay erect and move inshore caused the carrying of the pipes to
take second place to the one of not being drowned. This picture
highlights two problems besides the shingle beach for the
Churchill tank; the angle of the tank shows it was climbing up a
bank of shingle without much headway. To the right the roll of
chespale carpet had been pushed to one side and the drum that
may have carried it ashore was perhaps destroyed by shellfire.
The use of hand laid Bangalore was superseded and was detailed
within the earlier section of this narrative under the tank driver
training course at Castlemartin were we were trying to produce
the leading AVRE.
fixed lengths of BT that could be stowed on LCTs and attached to
36
Keep it close before yours.
to seat spotted it.
preparations that had been underway.
The final leg of the
journey from Fort George
really set the scene for
what was to become the
epic return to mainland
Europe. I have visions of
travelling through the
New Forest passing
thousands of vehicles.
Tens of thousands of
troops were under canvas
with bell tents hidden as
much as possible under
trees with camouflage
nets filling in the gaps.
Also as this picture shows
Long rows of steel bays,
each holding 32 tons of
artillery shells, flank an
English country road
concealed by trees.
These conditions were
repeated across Southern
England; colossal dumps
of all the military items
that would be required to
support the needs of an
advancing invading force;
while to the East dummy
installation with inflated
rubber copies of vehicles etc, giving the impression that the awaited invasion would take place
across the narrowest distance between England and France.
