/sible ships far to the East, there would be scores of Navy and Army personnel giving
thanks afterwards; when they became aware of this operation.
These three E-Boats could have had
quite an impact on the proceedings
because just as dawn was breaking,
they loosed their torpedoes and turned
tail. Two torpedoes passed between the
battleships Warspite and Ramillies, but
another torpedo sank a Norwegian
destroyer, while a fourth shot under the
bows of the Naval Force commanders
(Rear-Admiral A.G. Talbot flagship,
H.M.S. Largs, the Combined Command
Centre for SWORD Sector.
During the time the invasion fleet was
sailing towards the various landing
points two Navy midget submarines had
already moved inshore to establish the
far left or Eastern extreme also the far
right or Western extreme of the
British/Canadian beachheads. Because
of the 24 hour delay mentioned earlier
the navy submariners had to lay
submerged an extra 24 hrs. The
following short paragraph from an IWM
source gives more graphic detail of the
one that was fixing the position from
which the landing craft etc would take
their bearings.
The British and Canadian sectors (Eastern)
of D-Dicked ug hours.
4 Poung due rot the orner,
l other to much t
become involved later in the
This action with others on the
Past rank by the Air-Pe us on winted eare a buffer zone that would prevent the enemy
attempting a pincer movement.
While the 'Armada' was crossing the Channel the Air Force where attacking a broad range of
targets to further confuse the enemy. They would give greater attention to the actual battle -
front when the landings were well underway. While most of this narrative relates to Sword
Beach other related events elsewhere will be noted.
The following pictures and pictures of models produced from photographs taken by Allied
reconnaissance aircraft during numerous low-level sorties over the coast of Normandy. These
photographs were in turn transcribed by a core of draftsmen, geologists, photographic
technicians and geographers, they where the Inter-Services Topographical Unit located at
Oxford University. From their efforts Maps and Models were produced for use by all those
requiring accurate data from the naval personnel who would lay down the initial barrage, to the
tank commanders to plot their way up the beach and then attack the designated targets.
adel oi the Queen and Roger Beaches at Sword gave officers due to land there an in-depth sense of the problems ahe
This is a photograph of one of the many scale models made of the Normandy coastline to give
as true a picture of both the beach and the immediate area behind it. The model would have
been on a table set at a suitable height to view it in perspective. It is obvious that the model
was placed against a wall. Not the Atlantic Wall!
June 6 0600 hours: Little enemy interference except one destroyer is seen cut clean in half and
sinking amidships. All Serials are up in two columns.
49
