HOSPITALIZED
operation MARKET GARDEN was taking place at the time and my injury was not improving also I had
a fever, the medico decided to send me via a field ambulance to a Field Hospital near Antwerp,
where I was examined and then passed further down the line to BrusselS. Here the major hospital
nad been commandeered and on entering it, an assessment adly injury took place, then a large
abel was attached to me prior to being parked in a wide corridor. Here a row of trolleys lined each
side and, what can only be described as a fast lane' down the middle. This was for the very urgent
cases that were ariving at regular intervals. I am not sure how lon. I was in this passageway out
my next recollection was waking up in bed without the nagging pain. I was unsure of what had
occurred but slowly became aware of a lot of bandage around my middle. But of course there was no
one ured see to have time to answer questions; everyone wis i as of a meal in medications
etc. Sleep must have taken over again because my next recollection was of a meal of sorts, before
someone checked my pulse etc and said evacuate, this was followed by a couple of orderlies lifting
me on to a stretcher and saying "Blighty for you lad".
I was loaded into an ambulance with three others and we set off for our next port of call, an
aerodrome, here we where placed aboard a 'Dakota', our stretchers being hooked into loops hanging
from the roof of the aircraft, then, when the craft was full we took off. This was the first time I had
flown; but my only other recollection was a nurse waking me up to say we are coming in to land',
land; being somewhere in Oxfordshire, England.
We were offloaded from the plane on to various trolleys and proceeded to pass through a series of
Nissen huts where the labels were read and the corner of bandages were lifted. In my case it
disturbed a drain device that was inside my hip but attached to the dressing, later I saw what the
drain looked like. It was similar to a small 'pipes of pan' this incident leading to secondary infection. I
guess these problems were understandable, taking in to account the number of patients passing
through these establishments during that period.
Having traversed the Nissen course it was over to the next conveyance to the Hospital Train. How far
or close it was to the airfield; I am not sure.
Once aboard we had light refreshments, it could have been the 'Salvo's'. I know there were a lot of
volunteer organizations aboard checking on such things as; did you require paper or pencil to write
to your folks or if you were not able to write yourself they would do it for you. Eventually we arrive
at the end of our rail journey still not sure where we are; unloading of stretchers is commenced and
where we are loaded into the field type ambulance to be transported to a hospital. Shortly after
leaving the railway yard the driver said "you lads don't want to go to the military hospital do you?"
no need to print the answer. He took another route to the North Staffordshire Royal Infirmary in
Stoke-on-Trent were we where welcomed and bedded down before urgent checks took place on our
My CASUALTY CARD shows the date as 25/9/44'. No clear description of my original accident
appears to have been noted when I entered the UK Hospital in Stoke-on-Trent, their records only an
ted earller with applying liniment and dulling the pain with various
Hang prod at the relina horal we were l on ested down and a medi arived as each of
then Breaking a wake
This was fast, after which l with a cup of tea at 6am, Bottlek over
very varieollowed by the Doctorbeds where made ready for Matrons inspects ave in any order,.
which were a godsend in treati
allella med to get out of bed.
ng the infections and wounds. After some ten days I, together with
as the delivery and collection
we felt we should assist the very overworked nurses, with such tasks
of bottles and bedpans, from this task we were promoted to assistants
to the nurses. One very interesting task was to hold the kidney shaped dishes below an injury while
nurse sprayed Hydrogen Peroxide into it to clear away any foreign matter. The interest, from my
point of view was when two similar shrapnel wounds, that were initially the size of an average boot
polish tin and the
was only the size of a thumb nail.
result of this treatment was to steadily reduce the size of the wound until the scar
Because of our mobility we were asked to visit the children's ward to do what we could to pacify new
patients who had just arrived. We would be there in the morning and because the children's meal
was served before ours we would help serve the meal. I was soon to find out that the rice pudding
had the skin of the top taken off before it was served to the children, I took made short work of
having a liking for same.
Back then parents were not allowed to stay on the day they where admitted and only able to visit on
a Sunday afternoon.
CC date '26/10/44' when I was transferred to the Loughborough (my hometown) General Hospital in
Leicestershire until my infections and external injury healed. After a 9 days leave I travelled to a RE
Reception Centre in Halifax CC date '18/11/44". Next date 19/11/44 shows I was examined by an
Orthopaedic Specialist in York he notes "Please advice". On Part 2 of the same Report I must have
been examined again and a Recommendation stated "In accordance with the latest A.C.I., this man
should be transferred at once to 105 Convalescent Depot, Halifax, as he apparently returned direct
from hospital to the DBRE. With graduated exercises he should rapidly be fit for Al duties. This was
dated '13/12/44' a follow up one were dated '16/12/44' and Part 2 shows a 105 MCD stamp dated
'20/12/44' as the Admission date.
During the above period I must have been billeted at 'D" Coy, 3(H) DBRE Halifax. Here I was put on
Cookhouse duties, which were on a 2-shift roster; early shift was from 5am or 5.00 hrs to 13.00 hrs,
with the second shift taking over until 20.00 hrs. The early shift was the hardest, Sandwich making
has well as breakfast, I was to find out more of what the sandwiches were for later. Later I was
readmitted to hospital on '16/12/44' to the Halifax General Hospital. This must have been for one of
the examinations noted above. The CC had this extra note stating 'Adm. Hosp. #Gt Trochanter Lt
Femur'.
On the '20/12/44' it was off to 105 MCD (Military Convalescent Depot) Overton Park in Yorkshire,
north of Halifax, where we were given remedial exercises. While there I was invited back to 3(H)
DBRE Halifax on Christmas Day for Dinner followed later by Tea. I did what I thought! Booking out of
camp when my transport arrived returning about 1900 Hrs same day but I was put on a charge as
being AWOL, found guilty and forfeited 3 days Pay. On the 7/2/45 I was downgraded after another x-
ray and confirmed by a Medical Board 9/3/45 to Grade B2. On '2/3/45' I went on 9 Days Leave and
returned to 3(H) BN Halifax This was the same Barracks I stayed overnight on the way from Fort
George to Gosport area.
At this point I have to say that the various entries in the foregoing account in the various copies of
the paperwork I had received from Army Records Edinburgh which ran to some 56 pages. They left a
