he hout 20 hours, and the rope be a to ra semble for the move
heavily, about 150 all ranks killed or wounded. The French doctor was among the dead, killed
by a burst of fire from the Casino as he was tying up someone.
I remained in Ouistreham for the rest of D-Day. I drove around the town in a jeep collecting
the wounded, becoming increasingly cautious when it became clear that the only troops in
town were the Germans.
Eventually the Germans became very frisky, shooting from the direction of the Casino, the lock
gates and the battery area I went to the beachhead with a plea to clear them. Soon a column
of AVRES came down the road, and following my directions, discouraged the Germans, most of
who had surrendered, except for about fifty in the Casino area. These were rounded up in the
morning, As soon as it was dark, the Boche began air attacks on the beach. I dozed rather
itfully in a shell hole on the edge of the road". The preceding account fits in well with the
excerpt from the 79 ASRE dispatches relating to this event.
At about this time, we (ARV crew) would have been ready to disembark but I will place that
event after I have given a further account of the squadron's involvement on this: DAY1. By
1200 hours the 79 ASRE had been ordered to rally at the farm in RIVA BELLA after opening
further exits but not able to make anymore Inroads into the beach obstacles. The tide having
peaked way above the normal seasons High Water Mark.
June 6 1200 hours: Squadron was ordered to rally at a French Farm in RIVA BELLA.
June 6 1400 hours: CO 4 Commando and remnants return from OUISTREHAM having put the
Battery out of action, but falled to take it. CO reports Lock Gates and Bridge held by the
enemy, CO is wounded badly and in view of the poor state of his Unit, Sqn Ldr promises to look
89 Assault Squadron is ordered to do this job Itself,
after the matter, Lt, HUTCHINSON Is sent to Beach HQ to request Division for Infantry Support.
June 6 1530 hours: Sqn Leader and ten AVRE move off, 1 Tp working left handed and
remainder right handed under Squadron Leader. Enemy is surprised and the near bank is taken
easily, but enemy could not be prevented from blowing the East Span of the Bridge,
San Ldr's AVRE
Can dis sustained drack hammed cy SwaR and Shackling Operations were:
1D and Lsit NYE's crew lost complete with a Sqn Fitter as passenger.
wound arde of crew wounded, Co-driver to Bulldozer missing. 2C Comd 2/LE NICHOLSON
3 Troded and died later.
Capt AYRES killed and two of 1C wounded. Co-driver to Bulldozer
Capt POLLARD one killed and three wounded.
And in the attack on OUISTREAM. Lt HUTCHINSON was wounded.
Total:
2 Offrs and 1 killed, 1 Offr died of wounds, 1 Offr and 10 wounded, 10 missing. 4 Offrs and 21
lost from Sqn Strength.
** Having corresponded with Tony Nicholson I have his account of his injuries and his
evacuation back to England. This was highlighted earlier on Page 54!
Of 17 AVRE taken into action, three were burnt out or drowned, and one (1D) repairable
The above statement more or less confirms why we the ARV crew was not called on to assist.
22 Dgns lost six Flails and had three more seriously damaged out of 13.
OUISTREAM LOCK GATES:
June 6 2000 hours: Four AVRE under Sjt SAWYER move off to support the 2 WARWICKS at
BENOUVILLE.
RIVA BELLA:
June 6 1600 hours: Capt POLLARD establishes Sqn Harbour in Farm to South of Lateral. 2/Lt
PHILLIPS endeavours to find our DUKW with 3 tons of petrol.
June 6 1830 hours: Sqn Ldr returns to Harbour and makes Major FERGUSON now A/CRE and
clarifies the situation.
While our progress was going as planned another aspect was underway which I feel is worthy
of note! All the Fitters (Armoured) had gone over with the early waves and had been deposited
at specific spots with their tool kits; these were a two-man load as regards weight. The aim
was to ensure that sufficient expertise was available for any breakdown that would delay or
deviate from the planned progress.
In my earlier edition I recalled an incident naming a Spr. Lorrimer who was debussed in
Ouisterham and was isolated for some few days before returning to his unit; but this must
have been a myth as he was shown to be missing in the final squadron casualty lists.
