was rather brief.
Part over espera member weathere the rest still on Walcheren.
The single line above must relate to the involvement of the squadron in the next operation.
The folke a mict i Day with a ton bresken, No. 4 remedian a seaborne
delayed spotting planes leaving their airfields in England.
The overall action was successful when an amphibious force 37/anked the defences of
Middleburg and sailed into its streets to the great relief of the 37,000 Dutch civilians who had
on November inthe Royal Navy began sweeping the estuary of the Scheldt. The dearing of
been trapped in the upper stories by the flooding.
the 70-mile channel from the
North Sea to Antwerp took more
than three weeks and was to
occupy a hundred minesweepers
before the first convoy reached
Antwerp on the 28th November.
This picture of the actual assault
gives an indication of the scene as
the various craft headed for shore.
A Buffalo can be seen in the
foreground with minimal
freeboard. This was the
Westkapelle sector on the
1.11.1944. ASRE No's 26, 77 and
79 were in this action, it lasted 13
days, resulting in many of the
men becoming exhausted and
having to be taken out to
recuperate.
Another brief WD statement on November 14** again records what to me a flippant remark are.
Nov 14 - The remainder of the Squadron returned to Wenduyne. This is when the Diary learns
but in good spirits.
of the death of 6 men in Lance Sgt Coley, L Cpl Town and crew on a mine. 'Everyone very wet
RIVER ROER: Nov-Dec 44. On this
map can be seen the town of
Roermand and the River Roer on the
right hand side. The river also cuts
through the Siegfried Line shown as
a black saw tooth line up the map. A
point worth noting here is that the
French Maginot Line also finishes
ANTWERP®
BRUSSELS!
COLOGNE
oded at will by the
the River Mer
hey retreated over
27th Dec 1945. Thi the
operation was depicted in
film called the 'Battle of
the mual This vas the
last great counter-attack
to be fought on the Second
Front. By now the winter
WORLD WAR Il', shows clearly the Allies counter-attack launched on Boxing Day 1944.
All the above goes quite some way to explaining why there was nearly three months between
the Scheldt Estuary action (9 Oct-13 Nov 44) and Millingen-Leuth action (9-18 Feb 45).
After the Walcheren/Scheldt operations were completed the Assault Squadrons took on a
garrison/supply/civilian rescue role, as the area was mainly flooded. The need to supply the
needs of all within this zone would require the use of amphibious devices to cover some duties
that in the normal course of events would be a civilian function. This led to an increase in the
number of Buffaloes required for this duty and the anticipated advance across Holland as well
as Germany.
During autumn every attempt had been made to bring up both sufficient consumable supplies
and bridging equipment with some thousands of tons of Bailey Bridge components which where
needed to either replace damaged bridges or erect new ones across the mass of waterways.
Squadrons of the 4 and 11 RTR (Royal Tank Regiment) where to change to Buffaloes and join
the other 'Ferrymen'. I say ferrymen; as the accounts I have found in various publications gave
only brief details 'ferried from A to B'. At this point it should be noted also that further
squadrons of ASRE or AES (Armoured Engineers Squadron) as we had become known, also
changes from 5th Assault Regiment to 5 Armoured Engineer Regiment.
The month of December closes this Chapter
