later when I was to see its use has described above.
We would have received our first Bobbin or Carpet Layer, which was a large device, which
required work some work on our part to match both beach and inland terrain on the local area.
This picture shows the size we received and shows the last portion of Mat dropping to the
ground.
We also tried using chestnut fencing (chespale) on the drum with some success but the
chespale was already earmarked for a more important role that we would be involved with.
I must have made a number of Boise Bangalore's because the following War Diary entries for
differing date show them have being used.
February 17 - 1 and 4 Troop under Captain
Pollard experimented successfully with
destruction of a sandbank up to 12'. They
concluded that the most effective sequence was:
Boase Bangalore - 12' of each tube with 58Ibs of
PBG
General Wades - Crews of AVREs double up to
the gap and place 6 Wades on the top of the lip
left by the blown torpedo.
4 Wades then reduce the lip and 2 provide Bren
gun pits who will cover the Bulldozer.
The Bulldozer ascends the cutting, does a neutral
Good don
about turn, pushes out the sand to the foot of the
slope, and then evens it out for the log carpet.
The Bren gun carriers man the side craters. A second AVRE then lays the log carpet
aiming of naval expeeir contential and reco
then dico run to round the hong at 6o, n
i to the the ing of di the forces me capacity which
March: At Fort George all month.
From the 1-6 the Squadron was engaged in intensive individual training erg in demolition
The reference to petards I am sure we did not have even one while there but there could have
one sited for use to demonstrate under closed conditions for acquainting senior officers. We
deso the rete heet Troop then used duve an aire end dropped a log carpet in the
breach in almost perfect style" shows how the protracted 'dozer' in the earlier breaching of
the Sand hill was not required and the two devices were able to be carried by the same
AVRE.
At the end of the month (March) there was more training, during which Captain Bell is badly
injured under the OC's AVRE whilst sleeping and later dies in hospital. His loss is very
grievous'
While we had been made aware of the risks of sleeping under any vehicle especially tanks
it was to become common practice after we landed in France.
The picture earlier in this narrative of a Churchill Tank appearing to be marooned during
Dieppe raid had shown another shortcoming. The Churchill tanks that had been sent on the
raid had found trouble from anti-tank structures in the sea; also the shingle caused problems
in making the necessary progress up the beach. The Shingle prevented forward movement up
the beach tending to cause the tank to skew. Also on the same picture the shingle beach was
very steep, and the LCT was able to get close in but the tanks and the Commandos found the
steep incline a formidable barrier to get ashore hence the following strategy.-
The next project was how to stabilize a shingle beach. Our first attempt was using Somerfield
track. This was a heavy gauge wire netting with 3/8 or 1/2ins diameter steel rods across the
width; this was used to make roads over fields or cleared ground. It was not successful so we
had to put our 'thinking caps on'. We had abundance of old railway lines and crane rails; or
RAILMAY LINE SPECED &
more correctly we knew where
there was some in the sidings of
COPS TO SIER WRON
the local railway goods yard, the
necessary form led to its
acquisition. Having cut the rail to approx 11 ft we tossed some on to the shingle and found that
upside down it, i.e. railhead down, stabilized the shingle so we selected for some ten or so;
and cut them as before. The width is being suitable for the width of all tanks at that time. Then
after burning a hole through the vertical section of the rail we spaced them out and threaded a
