ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The en, ThAt To. in a or ten deto cued when boring out.
Also to the nolowing people who have assisted with the amendments and additions to this revised or
me the names
the ic then to rout my co, it course cope do in they moreo to
te toly the main reason for this edition: edition: I have found as much time has I can for this third edition:
due to the confirmation data supplied by Paul Welch and Roland Ward (Major RE Retd).
Paul having a great interest in the activities that had occurred in the area he lives now went to
considerable trouble seeking the relevant map and War Diaries to confirm my recollections. I am
deeply indebted and felt duty bound to complete this account despite my age (84 years).
He in turn has gathered a considerable amount of accounts under the title 'Armoured Royal oH
Engineers in Suffolk.
Havre' followed by 'Ferries on the Rhine', then to "Cap it All'' Armoured Engineers in Battle.
Also while still keeping me in touch with related events in the UK and the welfare and the inevitable
sad passing of old comrades, has Jim Holmes and Tony Nicholson do also.
While the following 3 sources are mentioned under the BIBLIOGRAPHY Section I feel they should be
mentioned here because the photographs and drawings appearing in this account, most had
originated via the following sources:
Imperial War Museum, London.
RAC Tank Museum, Bovington
Futter, Geoffrey W. excellent scaled drawings under the title of The Funnies: The 79th Armoured Division
& its Specialized Equipment.
Ashley Ackehurst of IT-Tech Mornington; who kept my various computers and accessories "firing on all
four cylinders* over the years resulting in the three editions.
PREFACE TO THE 3rd EDITION
detore and after D-Day. This Third Edition Is a
a no the my nai shang:
transparencies that would Illustrate the devices an
fellow Probians would find them of interest especially
f was are to give mid talk on the sonth antiversary of th-Day to the alcome Probes club in the r.
Community Centre, Mt Martha on the Mornington Peninsula, South of Melbourne, Australia.
the europle as not a commercial publication be any means. Hating the eat ed astrad dody because
Computer and a Star LC10 Dot Matrix Printer, Old fashioned Cut and Pasting the pictures, then
photocopying. I guess the contents over shone any other shortcomings has I had sent a copy to the
Historical and Heritage Society of the Royal Australian Engineers who meet monthly at Oakleigh
Barracks, Melbourne, Victoria. I was invited to join the Old Sappers Association who also holds a
lunch and meeting every month. This resulted in having the honour to be asked to give the Third Sir
Clive Steele Memorial Lecture on Friday 3 November 1995. Afterwards I was asked if I had contacted
the Royal Engineers in the UK.
Having obtained the following address from the British High Commission in Canberra I forwarded a
copy of my original book to the Institution of Royal Engineers, at the Brompton Barracks, Chatham,
<ent, ME4 4UG England. Colonel M.R. Cooper BA passed the copy to the Secretary of the Assault RE
Reunion Society to draw it to the attention of other assault engineers with a request to return it to
the Corp Library. This was to become the first link in what has now become quite a comprehensive
account over and above my first account.
The Secretary, Peter Leslie, forwarded to me the addresses of old comrades of the 79th ASRE who
had attended or contacted the society at the 50th VE Reunion.
I wrote to them and took the opportunity to seek answers to some of the doubtful or grey areas in
my narrative. Initially it was seven old Comrades whose addresses Peter had given me and from
these Mike Allday, Jim Holmes, Joe Ingham, Gordon Jones and Tony Nicholson were kind enough to
reply and from their letters I have been able to tidy up my original text.
Jim Holmes had access to a particular book that he had taken extracts from the book with regards to
79 Assault Squadron Royal Engineers and produced a book mid 1996, which had Battle Honours,
Squadron records, Casualty lists and dates. This became the first time I had seen my name in print
re my 'membership' of 79 ASRE. I could now get my post D-Day incidents into chronological order to
be further enlarged by the replies from the old comrades noted above. Ironically, in early 2006 -
these accounts are being 'penned/typed 2006 onwards. I was fortunate to having met a Peter Bishop
who had served with 141 RAC (the Buffs) with their Crocodile flamethrowers. I then became aware
of the origin of some of the items in Jim Holmes first hand, when Peter Bishop who kindly loaned me
his copy of the book entitled 79th Armoured Division. This had been produced shortly after 'VE Day'
8th May 1945. This was because there was talk that the Division would be disbanded; the structure
and content was not applicable to the war in the Pacific against the Japanese. The book was printed
and given to everyone in the division serving at that time, Jim Holmes being one of these who had
used it to extract details relating to the 79th ASRE into his book together with additional details he
was privy too. He was kind enough to forward me a number of amendments when he became aware
of my address. I had been injured during October 1944 and was unable to rejoin the Squadron;
hence I missed receiving the book.
