106
DEVOTE NE
Juse 10
June 15
Jase 16
KLECKEN June 23
June 26
June 27
June 30
TE rotured to thie Squaren a a aix masa Signala Sourse at
a CABAN edvillan mus arranted by the curd far boing out of doors 15 minutes
Then searabed he was found to be in possassion
of an
Little time, r Joldod this Siuadron and is golas to Live with us for a
A fither arders have yet been roceived for disburdent af the Squadron,
An also modiat *11 happen to tho remining personnel of the
It la possible that all personnel or Age
KLECKEN July 4
July 6
July 7-15
Infarmation recetyad that this San is nor under commad of 6 Ard Angr Ragt
* consequent upon the disbandment of 5 Ard ingr Regt RS
Orders for disbandment of this Unit-vere recsivad today.
The Squadron 1e
to be disbanded by 15 July 1945.
Preparations far and procoeding with disbandmant,
IT-ANTO 14/ Vehicle
Composite platoon comorising personnel of 77, 79 Amd Engr Sqna and REQ
5 Ard Boge Ragt R8.
19 ORa hava been posted to 222 Arnd Bagg Squ-RB, and
the remainder have received individual posting authorised by HQ Socond
Bohelon.
Posting orders have been received for Major E MARCAl, who is to ocumend
294, 1R3 Goy BB, It PR. HERS-FILLIPS who is in comand of the Sqn PlatooR,,
Captain ES POLLARD is attached to 26 Arted Enge San RB.
As yet no posting
instruations heva been recedved far Capt IT AZDAY, Capt.-BCA -CUNNINCHAM-MO,
Capt HA STAOY-MARXS, Lt G BENINCS, It AM CHIEN, It AP PrUZSTIONS
107
on the the ey 105 Armoured Regiment Royal Engineers along with Its 4 Squadrons; 26, 77,79, 82
The evere them among the wide shown within June WDs which are shown here has I was not
nagazine w.
This was shownt the rear
nonstrated by
descried ence certion and uses that,
accompanied the first viewing. I guess
in the first instance it was deemed
'SECRET but later it was returned and
the AVRE drivers obtained hands on
experience. Also it may have been designed with the Siegfried Line fortifications In mind, but has we
now know; the fortifications had not been updated since 1939, the northerly was able to bypass the
end that stopped at the Netherlands border.
The PaBaing Pure as a BMB ready
to move into position. This again was
developed to make it possible to
assemble a Balley bridge away from its
launching site. In the past they where
assembled on river or gully banks which
in an endeavour to build during the
night, but trying to keep the lifting and
fitting of steel panels without causing noise and alerting the enemy was definitely nigh impossible.
MAB= MOBILE ASSAULT BRIDGE:
Basically this was a SBG that was mounted on a two-wheeled axle that could be towed by an AVRE
during an advance and easily be transferred to another AVRE for mounting in the raised position for
a shorter distance to its 'drop zone'. It had a King post attached to assist in raising.
The previous page closes down 79ASRE/79ARE has a part of the British Army and those who
survived the operations listed in this 3"* Edition account go their separate ways. Those of us who
where part of 79 but whose time was cut short; when they paid the ultimate price will be
remembered by those who survived. Those of us who survived have a varied accounts of our active
service that in some cases had left scars either physical or mental, I was fortunate in as much that I
seem to be able to pull the blinds down on what I call "the nasty bits". Also my injuries suffered by
an explosion encountered while traversing a road some way short of the front line where corrected
eventually and I continued to serve as a sapper in Egypt and what was then Palestine until my
release. I have penned my account here to give the reader one of the incidents that was part of
being either wounded - if this occurred on an operation - or in my case an accident moving to a
recently liberated area.
