De oled by an apiece she
is ves to be tasted to A
April 1943: Major General Percy Hobart moved headquarters to Hurts Hall Saxmundham, Suffolk.
3 June 1943: I was posted to Depot Coy 3TBRE awaiting a Posting after a spot of Leave.
From my research Leiston had been home to a number of RE Units
on coastal defence. Major Roland E. Ward (Retd) was 2IC
TASSAULT BRIGADE R. E.
communicated and he kindly sent me
souperon, the hos account cented on ted hast anast endue to this it mentioned a numer
of places around Leiston before I arrived in that area, one being Theberton Hall, north of Leiston
describing it as very uncomfortable without light or heat. I recall a large stone built house with a
number of Nissen Huts having been erected in the grounds. If this was my 'home from home' the
only time I visited the actual building was to visit the stables to fill my mattress with straw. It
appeared that a Holding Unit was there andras the various existing units where remustered as
Assault Squadrons selected personnel were being channeled through Leiston as I was, though my
Army Records stated Thorpness as my 'home'.
Having arrived on a Friday I was dispatched to the cookhouse for the weekend. Sunday dinnertime -
midday in the British Army - I was duly serving out one of the 'Veggies' and when all comers had
been served only a few scraps of meat were left. Not favouring a main meal of vegetables only I
Once bitten twice shy.
satisfied the 'inner man' a big serve of steamed Treacle Roll. I never let this situation occur again.
can han a a to the entire one, it wor echoes her much utens.
After I had moved on from Leiston the Armoured Corp personnel where joining the ASRE Sappers at
a steady rate other pure tank squadrons were being formed into their own specialized vehicle
squadrons, tan and sea been note
loted earlier. The overall aim being to develop and change the way
conducted. Some have been mentioned earlier in this narrative
but because we were now at the stage of more intensive training with those we were to be involved
with later it sets the scene for those events that were to unfold in the not to distant future. This was
to be confirmed by Dvr Mech Triolo.
The following is an extract from David Triolo, Dvr Mech 14374704 Account:
"I was called up Dec 42 did my 8 weeks training at Colchester, then posted to Bury St Edmunds with
the 157 Hampshire Regiment RAC which was a Cavalry Regt. When later 40 of us drivers and Co-
drivers were seconded to the RE to form and make up the assault squadrons for D-Day. So I was at
all the places you have mentioned and the names, I can see Geoff Pope now, and it was at Leiston
Hall that the RAC and RE came together.
It was Capt Charlton that sent me on a mission with my tank, when I got back after 2 weeks I was
posted AWOL because no one knew where I was, since then I have wondered 'Who was Capt
Charlton?' It wasn't until I read your book; I learned where I'd taken my tank, it was the Firs. My
crew was Jack Bigwood Cmd, Bernard Newell CO-Drv and Sqd Carpenter Len Parkes Wireless Op,
Fred Lear Turret Besa Gunner, Les Lovall Demolition NCO.
I can imagine old Brad having a go at Cunningham he just wouldn't let us rest in Normandy, always
off looking for trouble". (This last comment relates to a remark that I had made in an introductory
letter after Paul Welch passed his address on to me).
Another account was from Ernest (Doc) Kitson, which this account shows was also a Territorial
volunteer from Jan 1939 and had a 'stint' in France.
"I was wrenched from 26 ASRE, about the end of April 1944 to replace a very popular Cp Bunny Roberts. This was
when the 79 ASRE was camped in the woods of Waterlooville.
