the mentored m the
concrete
attempt to move them
pushing them they would move left and
right requiring much slewing to get
them out of the way. Eventually
Armoured Dozers were found to perform this task better.
All the above devices were along the Queen beach sector but other sectors also had two other
obstacles. One called the 'Belgium
Gate', which from an illustration I saw a
three side frame similar to steel gates
on a sledge that allowed it to be towed
by horses into position but for what
purpose I have been unable to
ascertain. The other was termed the
'Toast Rack' and was easy to interpret;
it consisted of curved steel sections that
were able to be secured in a continuous
form after being placed against sea
walls so the curved form was tangential
to the sand and secured to the wall. The
upper section curved back towards the
sea so acting as a barrier to both man
and machine.
I feel it is very important to get the feel of the defences completely in perspective to fully
appreciate the task that lay ahead when the Allied forces struck the beaches.
The next picture is of a bunker and the aspect that the gun that is visible; and the fact that it is
pointing along the cliffs and not out to sea as one would expect if it was to repel invaders
arriving by sea.
sting aop of short wooden tre trunks sighty angled towards the sea because attempts to
bury mines in the conventional manner on beaches was more than useless. Due to the changes
that occurs in the depth of beach sand sometimes unearthing them or burying them too far to
defence works to match the terrain along the British/Canadian sector, but the following WD
excerpts records SWORD Red sector showing that the best laid plans will also require
adjustments.
June 6 0805 hours: Lt ALLEN'S Flall in 4 Troop lane is also knocked out - Four out of eight of
the 22 Dens Flails are put out of action before getting to the hedgehog.
June 6 0830 hours: 1 Tp and 4 Tp have received a Flall from the Beach Clearance Teams. Sit
MANNING's Flail in 2 Tp gets a track blown off by A/Tk Mine in his lane. 2 Tp lane is completely
stopped with both Flails out, the Bridge out and the Troop Leader Capt DESANGES killed - The
Tp Officer is wounded. 1 Tp is doing well.
June 6 0832 hours: IOK reports SUNRAY killed (Capt AYERS). San Ldr's AVRE commences
jamming Reinforced Concrete Tetrahedral successfully, bur after first row steel wire rope cables
for Beach Clearance get firmly wedged in tracks and Sqn Lars AVRE is temporarily out of
action. Sqn Led and part of crew dismounted and after close examination of Beach Obstacles
decide that in view of depth of water task is now impossible, and that craft will have to risk the
remaining Teller mines. (Later it was shown that neither Teller mines nor Obstacles prevented
Landing Craft from beaching and taking off.).
June 6 0845 hours: 1, 3, and 4 Tp lanes progressing with Infantry (2 E. Yorks) attacking across
3 and 4 Tp lanes whilst 1 Tp fights and gaps.
June 6 0905 hours: 1 Tp reports CLEAN having made a gap and cleared the lateral right
handed as far as 3 Tp 77 Sqn. 3 Troop is progressing but having difficulty. Sit WOOD 22 Dens
(Flail) is supporting Infantry (A Coy 2 E. Yorks) into COD whilst Cp| JOHNSON flails up to lateral
when in attempting to break through a wall, strips a track and breaks his jib. A DD 13/18
Hussars Tank has slipped on the bridge and blocked it. 3 Tp quickly by-passes the Bridge with
a Log Carpet, but the lane is again blocked by a DD driving too close to the side and going up
on a mine.
Sqd Ldr and Lt HUTCHINSON checked a detour round the disabled tank whilst Infantry
attacked the houses to the EAST. French Lt Anti-Tank Mines were found and blown in situ using
Mine Detectors and 808 Explosive.
4 Tp lane was also progressing steadily - the Log Carpet had been used and as a reserve the
Bridge was dropped under Sqd Ldr's orders, to one side. Sit SAWYER further to one side
