NO TIME FOR PARIS! EVER EASTWARDS
ois map, strates e deserted boey is the German's Industrial heartland the RUHR.
ANTWERP-
EAT ARMY CREA
Inter dany Group Boundary
ARMY GROU
THE ADVANCE TO ANTWERP
SCALE OF MILES
September
St Honorine was noted as the new base.
Early in the month there were more trials with devices, including the assembly and handling of
a 400' butterfly snake, and the use of Bailey bridges.
There is a close support raft competition with 80 Squadron, which 79 won.
Brussels liberated September 3" followed by Antwerp on the 5t.
This was only 8 days after the fall of Paris. This rapid advance again placed a further strain on
the already stretched supply situation that was to change strategies. The comment regarding
supplies especially petrol and it's affect on the planed operations, was raised in a number of
articles I have read over the years. A comment in an excellent book 'The Struggle for Europe,
by Chester Wilmot stated "By the start of September all the transport reserves of 21st Army
Group were on the road. Imports were cut from 16,000 tons a day to 7,000 so that transport
companies could be diverted from unloading ships to forward supply. This gain however was
almost offset by the alarming discovery that the engines of 1,400 British built three-tonners
(and all the replacement engines for this particular model) had faulty pistons, which rendered
them useless.
This excerpt was taken from page 472 of the book and gives a clear account of this problem.
Seter bene
lots of our anton seeded by a number ot
number of personnel making up the base harbour with
Sept 7 - The Squadron begins to take over LVTS and Terrapins. The Squadron was reorganised
Into 3XLVT (4) Troops, the Terrapin Troop and a Technical HO; a rear party would look after
the AVRES.
I have received a number of accounts compiled by Roland Ward and in the one covering 42%
ARRE relates that the 42nd where the second echelon and was down to be following and
supplementing the 5th ARRE. But the tightness of the area occupied by the first wave on Sword
and Juno beaches delayed their need to land. Eventually they did have the following except I
have taking the liberty of extracting from a small paragraph headed "Normandy at Last"
"The Regiment embarked at Lee-on-Solent early on 16th August 1944, sailed at midnight and
landed at or near Arromanches soon after noon on 17*h August 1944. The B vehicles ashore on
the Mulberry Harbour at Arromanches (a surprise to us as well as the enemy) and the tanks
landed on the beaches to the East dry-shod. Because there was no time to allow landing craft
toke. On tating the Regimen comprise 0 42 1 5 58E, 2 prE and ng In a
ASRE". Roland Ward was 2V/c of 617 ASRE at this time.
Meanwhile the operation to liberate Le Havre took place between 10th and 12th of September
and was a complete success by all, as the co-operation was 'by the book.
Ras pat or the 42 REsult eiren t had complied an excellent account of the operation to
Liberates LE Havre; under the title 'REMEMBER LE HAVRE', with a 'broad brush'. The reason I
used the modern idiom 'broad brush' was to illustrate that the contents have given a broad
overview of the units involved, something that I have noticed has been lacking in lots of
military accounts especially when the Assault engineers played a supporting role.
While 42"* ARRE had joined the fray the following WD excerpt shows 79 ASRE's new machines.
Sept 10-11. The vehicles and equipment are collected - 19 LVTs (17 MKIV and 2 MKII) and on
11-12 the vehicles are painted.
While these squadron activities where underway two important advances were undertaken one
being a French and American operation. But I am sorry to say that within the period early
September confusion between Eisenhower and Montgomery with delays in Eisenhower's reply
to Montgomery's proposal about his advance. Any reader who would seek to read the full
account of this event seek Chester Wilmot's excellent book on 'The STRUGGLE FOR EUROPE'
Chap XXV.
AACHEN 11th Sept. The first Allied ground forces enter Germany VII U.S. Corp had made a
quick breach in the main defences of the Siegfried Line south of AACHEN but had been checked
in the industrial wilderness east of the city. A second and larger operation was to follow 5 days
later. The map on the previous page shows Aachen in the top right parallel to Brussels.
