From this debacle we learnt that the sea and tides can change the shore approaches and upset
the best laid plans, Anyway after this upset, we took extra care in our landings, which would be
wheeled vehicles to the condition of the beaches, did they stall or get bogged on leaving the
LCT, and these results were to determine our future experiments.
Sometime during the foregoing activities some members of the squadron where aware of the
waterproofing components and techniques to affix pieces of balloon fabric to both turret and
hull in a satisfactory manner.
While on the subject of waterproofing Jim Holmes recalled driving up to Fort George before
Christmas /43 with exhaust extensions this was to complete the full waterproofing gears'
arrival at F.G. The cases of balloon fabric, complete with Bostik black adhesive compound,
asbestos grease and asbestos gaskets for the exhausts, had arrived in covered railway wagons.
Air intake and exhaust ducts were in open wagons sheeted down, when I consider the complex
bends in the exhaust extensions it was better to load once and travel by road to ensure their
arrival in good condition.
Jim Holmes recalled that on arrival at Fort George he shared quarters with a Sapper Bolton
who was an Armoured Bulldozer Driver who he described as tall and well built. Also the fact
that Sapper Lorrimer was the AB Co-driver who I recalled in my earlier book but since I have
received conflicting accounts of his D-Day activities.
The mention of Sapper Bolton rang a bell with me and triggered the memory including the fact
he was a 'big fella'. When the waterproofing gear arrived at the nearby railway siding, I was
one of a detail sent to unload the consignment along with the 'big fella'. During the unloading
one of the cases was damaged and Spr. Bolton took a fancy to the scissors that fell out. I
remonstrated forcefully with a few well-chosen adjectives. Also reminding him that without
these scissors the particular crew receiving that case of parts would not be in a position to cut
unioading dar
correctly to the points of anchorage. Then secure with chains and turnbuckles. This was a risky
business because even inshore at the 'Hard' - a strip of concrete similar to a boat ramp - the
craft would have to stand off to allow for the increased draught as the loading proceeded. We
had to contend with the swell which caused the vessel to pitch and roll which could result in
movement by the tanks because the steel tracks would slide on the steel deck which could
crush people and result in injuries or death. When it came time to disembark the unshackling
procedure was even more hazardous because we would be out on the open sea some way from
shore ready to move off after the ramp was lowered. It became important to decide where you
would crouch to tighten or loosen the turnbuckles.
After loading they would move out into the Moray Firth to get the feel of the conditions we all
would undertake later. This included resting, eating, rechecking the waterproofing and the
inevitable seasickness. I only went to sea once while at Fort George; during which time aboard
I'd stand amidships when not performing a task; as that seemed to quell my nausea, also I'd
eat my meal there as well even though I got saturated, it was the lesser of two evils.
This aversion to sea travel has stayed with me since then, so much so that we - the family that
is - decided to take the flying option when we left
England and migrated to Australia. Though I have
taken a few short sea trips since living in Australia
when the sea looks very calm.
The next phase was to fill the pipe with Polar
Gelignite, together with fuses and cable sufficient to
allow the tank to move back from the device before
detonating it; of course the fixing device had to be
DARE C ENTEC STIN
NI 7I MODE HUND
modified to leave the Boase Bangalore in the sand
this time. Our E.O. knowledge of explosives then.
ensured the gap made by the explosion was sufficient
to allow for the passage of a tank or other vehicles.
A good job done!
