110
to be desiren, to an i our the ate on a sore pered to hire aurore number on
Construction Regiment TA.
on in recent me a more he do one not an out have brn tho
Labouring Jobs for alfa contractors so me helping to deliver coal be methods eti but our gang
went to work each day by train to arous alway stations. There les mer by the toiled contractor
who in our case had a unrel of rareles where various bulk supplies contracept stored. Our first
assignment was transferring ergs or pice a a truck/lorry driven by rahe cagons, and no took the first.
load with the unloading party to a rallway siding to off load into the rail wagons, and returning for
another load. The downside of this task was finding Rats and Mice that had gorged themselves and
were too blotted to get out of has naged sacks had to be placed ready to be incinerated after being
duly noted on Ministry of Food approved paperwork.
During this period the European conflict came to an end, this was noted in the previous chapter in a
related War Diary:
Luneburg with the nearby Luneburg Heath where Monty had his HQ was to witness the arrival of
German diplomatic envoys, led by Admiral Hans-Georg von Friedeburg on May 3. On the following
day he surrendered all German forces in Denmark, Holland and Northern Germany; three days later
he repeated the process at Eisenhower's HQ and on the gi May a formal surrender of all the
remaining German forces took place in Berlin. The war in Europe was over.
Also in the relevant War Diary entry May 8 & 9 VE Day Celebrations and Church Parade.
I cannot recall any startling event during this period, except for a visit to a large park and a horse
ride in which I was nearly decapitated when it decided to trot under a low branch. Needless to say I
never attempted to become an equestrian afterwards.
So to return to the fray and the job in hand, another task was raising nickel ore packed in small
barrels similar to the ones that apples used to arrive in the UK from overseas. These came from
Canada and where stored in a quarry that had a number of tunnels, our job was to bring them out
and place in a Skip, which was raised using a derrick crane with a hand winch. Care had to taken
with any damaged barrels has the contents where precious along with other imported Ores, for the
War Effort.
An interesting sideline to these was our visit to factory canteens for our midday meal, which in the
UK at that time was dinner. It was a welcome meal has we were on the move having to catch trains
anywhere between 0630 and 0730 hrs and we would have eating our midday sandwiches mid-
morning. During these trips odd times we would have an odd tin of Spam, Sardines, and Slab cake
left over, which we would sell to our fellow travellers.
The main Canteen we visited was at Appleby Bridge part of a large Laundry and Dry Cleaners
factory. We would all pile in the back of one of the trucks that we would load and unload; we would
not very conducive to safe travel.
all to squat on the floor, there being no canopy only 2.5 feet (70cm) high side boards, on reflection
On 28/05/45 I was posted to A Coy No2 (P) DBRE. This was the same Barracks I stayed overnight at
when travelling South to Gosport from Fort George in early April 44. While there I visited the medical
orderly one night to see if he could give me something for my cough, he gave me some medicine
11125
if the authorities
"pastures new' as I was!
On the 15/07/45 proceeded on Draft Service. Before we entrain from Hallfax, I was one of four
selected to escort four prisoners who had gone AWOL,
(Absent without (official) Leave).
Each escort
ana rehanded then over to Mope on board me accomotion Lot of Sat deter oi er ess
being in the Holds, we where allocated an area on each deck with hooks to secure the hammoriks.
We would parade on deck each morning, just to check no one had fell over board. LIfeboat Drill was
conducted to make sure you remembered whether it was a Lifeboat or Carley Float would be your
water transport if we had to abandon ship.
The records briefly state; 'Embark. UK TOS MEF: Followed by 'Disembark ME Alexandria, Egypt'.
'Entrained to RE Transit Depot'. Arrived on the 26/08/45 at 162 Transit Camp, Ismailla. Posted to
542 E&M Coy near Tulkarm in Palestine as it was in 1945, on 26/08/45.
My stay in Palestine was interesting despite the two terrorist organisations that was organising the
arrival by sea of illegal Jewish migrants to land at isolated beaches, while keeping the Palestine
Police and British Army 'busy' by causing disruptions in major centres.
But this is another story!
I remember those times recorded in this Narrative; feeling we did a good job in helping to bringing
the enemy - Germany, Italy and Japan - that had caused such overall suffering during World War II
to a satisfactory conclusion. So I hope that people remember as I do; those who paid the ultimate
price during the conflict and those that became invalids and there hopes and dreams where not to be
fulfilled.
I have to admit that I was fortunate in as much that my Health and Wellbeing after this was good. I
have stayed active though now at a "reduced rate of knots'
111
