Day 2
zune 7 0400 hours: One platoon of Infantry from Beach En at last reinforces the Lock Gate
position. During the night the position was mortared and bombed.
June 7 0900 hours: Sit SAWYER and four AVRE return from BENOUVILLE for replenishment. To
South of lateral.
June 7 1130 hours: Lt CUNNINGHAM having handed position over to the two platoons of the
Beach En, returns with 7 AVRE, more prisoners and two civilian lorry loads of Lt. French A/Tk
Mines - These are placed later in 15 Fd Pk Coy RE Dump.
June 7 1430 hours: Petrol, Dustbins and Besa Ammn arrive in DUKWS.
June 7 1540 hours: 2/Lt PHILLIPS with four AVRE move off via COLLEVILLE - SUR - ORNE 0876
- BEUVILLE 0674 to rejoin 2 WARWICKS. Four AVRE are 1A, 3C, 4C, 4B.
End of War Diaries 3 to 13 of 35.
Other random copies relating to my involvement as this narrative unfold.
To close this chapter I would like to reflect on a few of the criticisms I have seen in the score or
more books that have helped me adjust my original narrative chronologically as well as
matching the units we supported in the various operations. One was the fact that on the first
day, units tended to dig in! Instead of moving on to their targets, from my observations the
overall plan had been put in jeopardy by the bad weather and extra high tides. Some of the
commentators at that time with access to that well-known panacea 'Hindsight' have become
'Tacticians.
Over the years I have been asked what I recall of this day and has you see by the above I
have not said too much of what must have been 'Pandemonium' resulting in 'Mayhem', but it
had to be. I must have witnessed at first hand some horrific scenes, and has a conversation
with civilian ambulance officer years after; he said he was able to literally "Pull the blinds
down" which I guess I am able to do the same.
JUNE 8* BEST FOOT FORWARD
Sauadron was the
QUEEN RED BEACH LA BRECHE
6 JUN 44
OUISTREHAM
6 JUN 44
The above two operations have already been documented on earlier pages!
The following operations will be progressively recorded from now on.
LION - SUR - MER
8 JUN 44
9 JUN 44
GRUCHY - CHATEAU DE LA LONDE
- 23 JUN 44
HILL 112 - ESQUAY - EVERECY
10 JUL 44
FRENOUVILLE
20 JUL 44
ROCQUANCOURT
8 - 9 AUG 44
The above, lists the place names of actions with dates that were undertaken by the squadron
between D-Day and Breakout. That is between the 6th June and 16th August some nine days
before the capture of Paris and the arrival of the four Allied Armies level with the River Seine
In the overall plan for the British and
Canadian operation, the objective was to
both capture Caen and contain as much
enemy armour, artillery and infantry
within this Eastern zone. The Americans
CON.
where to capture Cherbourg from inland;
followed by the Cherbourg peninsula
before moving south and East.
The concentration of the enemy forces in
and around Caen also had a series of
strong points between it and the sea.
The map on this page shows the gap
3 BR
DIN
between Sword and Juno sectors that
would have to be closed by forces from
either beach if the enemy was to be
prevented from reinforcing its strong
points in this sector. The 3 CDN DIV
shows the eastern end of Juno sector;
Lion and Hermonville show the western
DIV
edge of Sword. The actions undertaken
to close the gap will be described later in
21 P2
this chapter.
To better appreciate this chapter of events this map taken from 'The Struggle for Europe' By
Chester Wilmot it shows the situation on the evening of D-Day.
63
