-attacks that
a i han an eat they home, 1.
the Them To the sus
vessels
y: as other empty vehicles were loaded for the
cause there was a reusonable number of LSTS
The number of vehices seemed to be ample so the supply
ad shaly improved to meet the demand.
This picture stows Mulberry 1 back in working order.
Some 700 ships and small craft ran aground causing chaos Mulberry 1 was repaired but
Mubey 2 was a write off. The following two excerpts, taken from many recording what was
indeed a very great storm; giving an ample description of the scene. Squadron Leader Hill
stated On the beach just west of where I was on Juno, there was utter chaos; literally
hundreds of small craft were washed ashore by the gale at high tide and lay on the road which
treversed the beach, rather like a cargo of timber logs'.
By the 21* the Squadron was down to 10 AVRE and the ARV.
ate BE SOUR on ali under done carmand of 9 Canadian Infantry broade to
And no quote that age both the cention no the boat to une to anal, re on o
by the desolation, for it vastly exceeded that on
This resulted in the American sector with only a three-day stock of ammunition in as dumps.
That meant that the planned breakout in his sector would be delayed, and that meant in barn
that the British must
continue trying to fight the bulk of the German Army in Normandy to a
standstill for longer than had been originally contemplated. Because of the delays caused by
the gale to their own build up, the British were, when the storm abated, short of three divisions
against core chen we, done ne, par that and meant as rat there would be more e
German divisions in the line to oppose it, when finally it did go in. We, that is; those ashore
prior to the storm had no idea until some of us where sent down to the beach to carry out
Salvage and clearance. Until that had occurred we would have been back to worst conditions on
the beach than on D-Day, unable to get men and supplies through the storms obstaces.
A further hazard had been laid by the Luftwaffe during the height of the storm, a new pressure,
or 'oyster' mine. These were deadly, because they were un-sweepable by any known method.
The pressure change caused by the movement of the ship's hull through the water made the
'live', after which the normal magnetic and acoustic fuses would fire the mine. From 22nd to
29th June Admiral Vian's flagship Scylla, together with four warships were sunk and seven
damaged, plus four other vessels sunk.
20 - 23 JUN 44: GRUCHY - CHATEAU DE LA LONDE
The next action was some 2.5 miles (4km) W.SW of Cambes at Gruchy on the 20th June and
was to include the Chateau-de-La-Londe and was not completed until the 23rd June. Casualties
were light; two wounded. No additional details of which we were supporting or the objective
77 Sqd had been involved earlier in an attack on the Chateau-de-La-Londe on the 122th-140h
June, again no additional details.
This was a number of sorties that occurred when our AVREs where deployed in support of the
Infantry to weed out pockets of resistance, we were called upon to recover or repair in the field
our stranded AVREs. This led us (ARV) to see a lot of the area and the devastation caused by
both the naval bombardment and the aerial bombing. Also the various fortifications installed
for coastal defence. It is only since receiving list of actions that I realized the large area we had
covered.
Our trips into battle were passive on our part having only our 5 Besa gun that was never fired
in anger by me. A few days after this sortie the occupants surrendered from choice as they
could have held out for some week's food and water wise. Caen was still in enemy hands and
the countryside around it to the west was typical "bocage' or box-country with sunken roads
and high dense hedges that greatly restricted visibility, making armour very hard ta deploy and
control. Also it was very vulnerable to attack at short range by panzerfaust the German
equivalent of the American bazooka (a hand held anti-tank rociet projectors) and static tanis
as well. It was ideal for defensive warfare being likened to trench warfare in WW1.
