NEPTUNE PLANZ
OVERLORD
Aring on the we to the test in emer could be best described as and or bie misition and
a "Do or Die' mission.
uneventful night.
orses been eat underway have taken the bet top a paragraph out of Chester
ite a see fatiment of Britain's destiny under tr
earlier, almost to the day, the Royal Navy under the direction of Ramsay (Sir Bertram Ramsay
C. in C., Allied Naval Forces) as Vice-Admiral, Dover, had rescued the B.E.F. from the beaches
of Dunkirk. Since then under his command other expeditionary forces had been successfully
landed in North Africa, Sicily, and Italy, but none of these could compare in power or purpose
with the vast armada that now salled in full flood of strength and confidence back to France.
Above the convoys swarms of fighters wove a protective screen. On the flank aircraft of R.A.F.
Coastal Command, The figures shown within the last page are hard to comprehend but it would
have been a sight to behold from the air. Some RAF and RAAF personnel who I have met and
was involved around that time say it had to "be seen to be believed".
While on the subject of the Air Force it is a suitable time to bring in the operation carried out
by the Dambusters. The operation could best be described in today's (1994) parlance as
dramatic choreography. Lines of bombers would fly a given distance forward towards the
French Coast before pealing off and returning to the rear of the bomber force. During the
forward movement 'windows' would be dropped. This was aluminium foil in thin strips that
would give an image on a radar screen of a seaborne force approaching. This was achieved by
the low flying approach to drop the
'windows as well as the continuing
peeling off to reduce the forward
movement of aircraft and match the
overall speed that ships would have
been advancing. I believe the bomber
crews felt this operation was not in
keeping with their potential; but when
you consider; that only three E-boats
actually attacked the Invasion fleet on
D-Day. The rest searching for those
invisible ships far to the East, there
would be scores of Navy and Army
personnel giving thanks afterwards;
when they became aware of this
operation.
British and American warships patrolled
far and wide searching for U-boats and
E-boats, reinforcing the protection
afforded by the minefields which they
had already laid. Early that afternoon
flotilla of mine- sweepers began
sweeping ten clear channels from
'Piccadilly Circus' south to the Bay of the
Seine. They encountered fewer mines
This is the Western Sector where Ehe Americans Tanded.
than they expected; though at that time they did not know the reason. The coastal waters from
