10ft drop was not translated into a serious injury; a
twisted ankle was the only injury plus a sinking
feeling during the free fall. This was another back to
the drawing board and the need to put in some anti-
roll bars to prevent this occurring again. With
hindsight it was obvious that our stacking and binding
oroduced a nice round bundle when an irregular
shape might not have rolled away. Our next fascine, when it was loaded on the AVRE; we added two
lengths of scaffold pole each side to form a cruciform. We must have estimated the position to allow
for fascine No1 to roll forward slightly. This was to match the nose position of the AVRE has it dipped
when passing its point of balance; repeating the retro fitting of the scaffold poles to fascines No2 & 3
as shown. The drawn shapes are a fair indication of the deformation of the original circular shape
after the passing of 3 AVRES.
Of course we used only one AVRE to perform the above tasks and the wooden launching ramp was
not jettisoned, as it will be when it is on active service. The ejection of the launching ramp in practice
was to assist in both preventing the 2' fascine rolling away and add to the bulk of timber where it
was needed. There was talk of scaling higher obstacles and using more fascines but as the foregoing
results show 3 AVREs would be required before the support armour would have been able to join in
that particular sortie. The last picture help's to show why this was shelved before too much
additional was spent and the reasons why. It soon became apparent that at least 3 AVREs would be
used to get the exit ramp operative but no Sherman tanks had been trailed in climbing this device,
so we stopped this idea. It became apparent that there were limitations.
ard to stetron
that required how the fint bogles hiden
relop the level of the ground, rd tee
causedly ether allied
temporary-bridging solutions to maintain the advance of armour, infantry and supplies etc while the
major routes were repaired.
minus turret on which two adjustable hinged ramps
allowed for a number of uses. This photograph
shows the ARK (Armoured Ramp Carrier) Mark1 in
use against a typical sea wall with a sloping side on
the seaward side. The very nature of this style was
its mobility. Having assisted the initial attacking
wave to readily leave the landing craft
and gain
ground by
pushing the defenders back from their original defence
positions and allowing the support forces to establish more
permanent access ramps.
A further modification was to increase the versatility of the
ARK now becoming Mark 2. The picture on the left shows it
in the mobile position - you'll note that the two sets of ramps
in the raised position - with the near side ones twice as wide
as the backside ones. This was to accommodate the varied
vehicle wheel widths, which was a drawback with the SBG
and ARK Mk1 especially when a tractor and field gun tried to pass over with little or no margin for
error. In the following picture a number of variables are
shown. The mobility of this device was to be two fold; after
its initial use Sappers could make a more permanent
structure without to much interference from the enemy and
the ARK could either proceed under its own power or
loaded on a tank transporter for a more rapid transfer.
A final point that requires mention is why waste a tank on
such a device! Because of the developments taking place
with the add-ons to the AVRE the number of early model
Churchill MKIIs had become surplus to requirements.
TYPICAL USES OF THE CHURCHILL ARK
