on the loan day i so continued three after the capture of Lion-Sur Mer and helped in
and pushing the enemy back out of the breech he had originally held; to the
vitage of cambes which
lenest coe to eate on the Voic pokes of stance in an endeave ur To endide
Caen which was still resisting all direct forward advances.
This action resulted in 3 killed, 11 missing (four reported later as Prisoners of War) and 6
wounded. One being my old 'partner in crime' Geoff Pope from the early days when we had
recelved our first batch of Churchill tanks.
From the foregoing comments it can be seen that the number of damaged AVREs was quite
high and so attempts to repair those that we f.e. HQ Workshop Troop could cope with became
a priority. Our capacity at that time was either mechanical or electrical repairs that could be
Axed without too much involvement by our fitters. By that I mean that the simple repairs took
priority so as to get a tank back on the road. The ARV crew had a similar target as will be seen
in the next paragraph. We had to get a tank back on the road and to do this we would replace
damaged tracks providing the AVRE was able to be driven or replace bogies and repair the
tracks. Again an assessment had to be made of each tank and decide how long our salvage
attempts would take; normally the tracks would be broken along with damage to the bogies.
We would remove any damaged bogie and not replace, unless it was one of the three leading
or trailing bogies or if more than one on the horizontal row was damaged. The main aim was to
get our tanks back to the harbour as quickly and safely as possible for overall repair and return
to service. The AVR was not meant to tow damaged tanks any distance.
When a mine or an AT round had damaged tracks there would be some movement after the
impact. If this occurred when travelling it would result in the bogies rolling along the broken
track and off of it. This would require the track to be dragged to either back or front of the tank
and realigned with the bogies, Then jacking up the tank and place a canted balk of timber to
allow the tank to be dragged forward or backwards on to the laid track, The track would
protrude past the horizontal bogies to allow the spare track to be hooked over either the driven
or idler sprocket, then using our ARV to haul the track to whichever end we rejoined the track
plates. No mean feat when the conditions were not your placid Sunday afternoon breakdown.
After pulling the two ends together and inserting the track pins we would then tighten the
adjuster on the idler to the required tension but we were not able to weld on the pin retainers
in place until we were back in the harbour area.
Because the so-called frontline was in a state of flux all our efforts were at the 'double', Of
course we would move any tanks that were to be picked up by the Recovery Transporter so
they could reverse for loading and drive on to a metalled road for a rapid trip back to base
workshops.
the extent of
the Involvement of the 7
1530 - VREs REs moved into the wood. Sat Sawyer's AVRE gets a direct hit in the rear and the
2190 to test rega fe Sier reco andy to Eat ena scan,
with wounds.
After inquiries lasting over several days it is now clear as to what happened to all the AVREs.
Five AVRE after a delay were rallied ANISY 017758 Zero hour was 1500 hrs. On the success
signal of the two Assault Companies being observed the Sad. Ldr. sent his runner {L/Cpl.
Gent} back on a bicycle to order the AVREs up to their forward rally point at road junction
017744. The AVREs came forward well dispersed under fire from the South West, and turned
into the wood down the road leading S. W. from the road junction. They halted in this road
being well screened from the South by a high wall. The Sad. Ldr. having moved ahead of the
Bt. Comd. Contacted the two Company Commanders of Coys about to pass through - Lt.
Philips and two AVREs were placed with the right hand Coy and Sgt Sawyer and two with the
left. The plan is being to follow the infantry through the woods and houses, and deal with any
obstinate centres of resistance.
To do these two breaches were made in the wall by ramming it, and the AVREs then deployed
- the infantry seemed to be holding back unnecessarily - so the AVREs took the lead and
gained the South East Corner of Cambers with only little opposition. By this time Lt. Philips
AVRE had broken a track and L/Sgt Archer's AVRE had its' Besa jamming.
After a quick 'recce on foot by Sgt Sawyer and the Sqn Ldr, the Sad Ldr ordered Sgt Sawyer
and the three remaining AVRE to take up a hull down position in the dead ground, surrounded
by a semi-circular thick edge about 50yds South of the road at the South East edge of
CAMBES. The infantry were on their final objectives.
The three AVRE having been seen to take up their positions, the Sqd. Ldr went back to join the
Bn. Cmd - frequent bursts of Besa fire were heard from that time.
tracks mended.
OC. 'C' Coy 2 R.U.R. (Major de Longey) relates that he saw a German Mk IV tank and an
'armoured car' hidden near the S. E. corner of CAMBES. He did not see the Mk IV 'open up'
with its main armament, but the 'armoured car' did and it is this that we believe knocked Sgt.
Sawyer's tank out.
Both these vehicles were seen by the OC. 'C' Coy attempting to get away - the Mk IV retreated
up the main avenue from the Halt to La BIJUDE and the 'armoured car' made its retreat to La
BIJUDE across the open. Its' retreat was, however cut off by one of the AVRE which was seen
at about 50 yds range to 'knock out' the 'armoured car' with one dustbin shot. After that the
two AVRE gave intensive Besa fire on to La BIJUDE.
Later the Sqd. Ldr. found he had lost touch with the two AVREs, and Besa fire had ceased. With
the runner he went down to the halt and was able to crawl out to Sgt. Sawyers AVRE which
had stopped on the railway line - it was only burning slightly [this blew up at 21.00 hrs that
One of the other AVRE could be seen up the Avenue with flames coming out of the turret and
the third further away in the field with flames also coming out of the turret.
