Some of the non-welding aspects I became famillar the course related to power take-off that had
need are it not hope ox 8 he oth han real en donkey elime inat the
part of bulldozer's mechanics and hydraulic pumps which coupled to PTO's on the Armoured
Bulldozers, I cannot recall any other work we did outside of the course training. Just as well perhaps!
We had a serious accident when due to the pressure we were under with both training and work that
safety measures suffered. The case in question was when four tradesmen were cutting up material for
tank traps and the oxy/acetylene hoses crossed the floor and someone burnt through a set which
resulted in some very serlous burns. The earlier remark regarding being under pressure is highlighted
thus I have only a vague recollection of the city of Colchester because we did not have much time off,
in daylight that is, plus we were whacked out due to the long hours we worked.
While I have had much conformation to my various earlier recorded memories the dates I had hoped
to find when I received my military records from the Army Personnel Centre. It had a number of
omissions such as general lack of places I knew I had been seconded to as well has I didn't appear to
have had any Leave. While I had hoped to be able to really tidy this 3" edition chronologically this is
one time when I'm sure I've got it right. I left Colchester before 20/12/43 and had a 48hour pass to
visit home on my way North to Fort George having a very clear memory waiting with three other
people on Nuneaton station for the train to Inverness which was crowded with passengers.
The four of us could not board the train anywhere the carriages being either full or locked. Either the
Porter or Guard opened a reserved compartment to let us board saying we may have to vacate at the
next station has two carriages where reserved for a contingent of military personnel. We decided to
check the next carriage and noted some floor space in the corridor; noted it for future. Fortunately the
new arrivals at the next station did not require all their reserved seats, so we had a comfortable
journey before we all went our separate ways when we reached Perth in time for Breakfast.
and eng the Squrginally at least
and re fem on a selles dows
electric lights, not too
FORT GEURGE TRAINING AREA
strategically placed; hanging
from the ceilings, which in some cases where vaulted. The nearest town of any size was Nairn.
but Liberty wagons a suitable name for the vehicle one could leave camp by to seek out the
high life in Inverness - it would be a three tonner and the passengers would strap hang from
the canopy tubular frame. Sitting on the side or backboard was a 'No No' because then the
canvas canopy would bulge and the roads to and from FG were narrow and the chance of being
struck when two vehicles passed was 'on the card'. Or in my case when we passed another
vehicle those of us on the nearside of the road where thrown against the canvas on a bend and
we all felt a blow about kidney level from a tree branch leaving us sore for a few days. If we
decided to visit Nairn we had to walk at least two miles to catch the bus at a junction near the
village of Ardersier.
It was obvious we were well and truly the Advance Party with a single Nissen hut being
sufficient to hold the tools and stores that had arrived by road. Of course we each had our set
of tools that where contained in one box, but required two men to carry or load it. So when
one was alone anywhere it was a matter of dragging the box with you. I recall our only hand
transport was a Wheelbarrow and a Handcart. The latter had two large steel rimmed wooden
spokes wheels with a Tee bar handle to push, pull or steer, it was much in demand especially
when scrounging for material which we became past masters at.
Initially my welding equipment was an H.D. (Heavy-Duty) Oxy Acetylene Welding Plant with
only one cylinder of each gas. This was sufficient for pipe welding and angle ironwork but later
the excessive time taken to weld some components was to become a drag when coupled with
the cold winter weather we would encounter later. I can't recall what promises where made on
when we would receive an electric welding plant. It was to be a nice surprise when it did
eventually arrive. Because it was some time since I had done any gas welding having
concentrated on gas cutting and electric welding at Colchester; I was glad that I had a few
simple jobs to do initially to get back in the swing of things. One was the manufacture of
minefield clearance markers. The pointer was made from the 4 Gallon petrol tins - these were
filled at refineries etc and you cut part of the top away to pour out the petrol - after flattening
the empty cans they would be cut to shape.
29
