book to tha
explosion would take place above the
The following paragraphs give another insight into the Operation by my old boss:
APPENDIX 'B' REPORT BY NO.2. TROOP ON OPERATION 'TOTALISE.
Capt JWG CHARLTON RE.
Having six AVRE on the road, we planned to move in the column in half troops with myself (2A)
in front between L/Sjt PENTITH on the left (2B) and Sjt SAWYER on the right (2C).
We were to be followed by Lt DV THOMAS in (2E) in the centre with L/Sjt GALLOP on his left
(2D) and L/Sjt LOCK on his right (2F).
As the column moved off to the start line 2F came on the air and told me he had broken down
and I ordered him to catch up as soon as possible. However he did not appear and I was
unable to contact him on air. (I subsequently found that his batteries had gone flat through an
electrical fault and he was unable to use his wireless or start up.)
This necessitated a change of plan and as I had the same coloured lamps as 2F on my AVRE 1
ordered 2C to drop back and move over to the right, leaving the necessary gap between 2B
and myself. We therefore moved off in the following formation:
On crossing the start line
I gave the order to commence
marking, and 2B and my
own AVRE (2A) began to lay
the 3-inch white tape
from the outside revolver ports
and place a green traffic
lamp at intervals of 50 yards.
The tapes lay very well and for the first mile or so the lamps were of good use, but I gather
these were run down by tanks coming on behind and not by my own troop who I could see
steered over them.
Visibility decreased as we proceeded to 25ft at times and it was with difficulty that we were
able to keep station.
In front of my Troop were five Sherman Tanks, four abreast and one behind. The single
Sherman wandered back and forth across the lane and the drivers and commanders of 2B and
2A were only just able to keep station. After about three-quarters of a mile this single Sherman
drew out of line and disappeared down the column, and a few moments after one of the four,
remainder.
which were moving abreast, stopped. We swung out round it and caught up with the
A few shells landed in the area, but the Troop suffered no inconvenience.
I ordered my driver to go slightly left
arrossing the ditch, swung left and I followed. It
but we carried on, thinking the
est of the Troop would be able to follow our rear lights. My
twice with no result.
By this time we had reached a party of Flails and Sherman's who were lined up right under the
Bofor tracer shots which were given the column direction, and going in the correct direction.
I heard some Churchill Tank's In the distance and passed this on to Capt CUNNINGHAM (1A)-
These turned out to be two of his Troop but no one else was following them.
While coming from the orchard Capt CUNNINGHAM had laid a tape out on his right and I had
laid the rest of my tape on my left but this soon ran out. The column did not move far forward
before it was stopped. A tank 'brewed up' about 400 yards to our front, and a gun duel
appeared to be in progress about 300 yards to our front and left.
After contacting the Squadron Leader on the air I decided to go forward and to speak to the
Commander of the Sherman in front of us. I got out of the turret and walked along the left
track to the front of the tank and jumped down. As I landed on the ground my tank was hit by
some projectile under the back-driving sprocket. I saw the flash and smoke or dust, and ran to
the far side of the Tank to wait and see if anything else was coming. I waited about a half a
minute and decided to drive up to the Sherman in my tank. I climbed up to the turret and
found the Wireless Operator (L/Cp| MARRIOT) getting out to come and see what had happened
to me as the explosion had occurred just as I jumped from the tank and the crew thought I
had been hit.
I drove up to the Sherman and found it to be commanded by Capt DICK of 'A' Squadron 27
Canadian Armoured Regiment with whom I had been working and whose tank I had been
following all the time from the start line.
Capt CUNNINGHAM had found FLAILS Officer and arranged to move off with him in the
direction of the dispersal point. 2B came on the air and told me he had broken down, so I told
him to follow as soon as possible with any fighting tanks that came through to give him
protection. We moved off and a Green flare fired by the Squadron Leader gave us direction,
and we were directed into the Harbour area.
