TO BE HANDED TO EACH OFFICER PROCEEDING
ON CLASS "A" RELEASE
On disembarkation in the United Kingdon you will proceed to a Military Disembarkation Camp
Unit.
The location of the Military Disembarkation Camp Unit and the distance of the camp from
your port of disembarkation will depend on:—
(a) the accommodation available at camps on the date of your disembarkation which is related
to the total numbers arriving from overseas at the same time;
(b) the port of disembarkation;
(c) the overseas Command from which you are travelling.
If this has not already been done, all baggage in excess of II2 Ibs. will be forwarded through
MFO (Release Embarkation Camp) direct to the address desired in the UK. The railways in the UK
cannot deal with your heavy baggage from the port of disembarkation to the disembarkation camp
and dispersal unit.
If you try and evade this ruling you will find considerable difficulty in getting
your baggage from one station to another owing to the absence of porters, etc.
Camp kit and bedding will NOT be required at Release Camps.
At the Military Disembarkation Camp Unit you will be required to hand in to stores all arms,
ammunition and equipment which is not your personal property.
This, thetefore, should be easily
accessible when you arrive at the camp.
5.
You are likely to stay at the Disembarkation Camp Unit from 12 to 36 hours, the actual
period being dependent on train timings and the size of the draft which is to be handled.
6. From the Military Disembarkation Camp Unit you will proceed to a Military Dispersal Unit.
7. The Military Dispersal Unit to which you will be sent will be the one which serves the
area in which the address you have entered on page I of your Release Book is situated. Your
permanent address should be shown on all other pages if it be different from that shown on
page I. The Railway Warrant on page Io will only be issued for a journey from the Military
Dispersal Unit to the address shown on page I of your Release Book.
8. You are again reminded that as the whole procedure from the time you arrive at your
port of disembarkation to the time you arrive at your home is only approximately 72 hours
you should carry with you the minimum amount of baggage, which should include:
(a) the arms, equipment, etc., which you have to hand in at the Military Disembarkation
Camp Unit;
(b) the essentials you require during the 72 hours of release procedure;
(c) such items as you may require for your own use immediately after release.
Should you become a casualty on the journey, ensure that you obtain your Release Book
from your draft Conducting Officer.
PSS 2788 9.45 10m
