NOTICE to
MEM
transfer to the TARO is in accordance with para 2 above.
The substantive rank quoted in para 4 of the letter now granted to you on
equivalent to any war substantive rank held, but not above the rank of major.
the
Reservist of Cas "7",
letter overleal, are therefore similarly being granted substantive rank
TA officers
transferred to the TARO in accordance with the decision referred to in
not above major.
rank equivalent to their war substantive rank
Released officers being appointed to the RARO are now being given substantive
AT OFFICER ON THE ENEMPLOYED LIST TA
non-regular officers still serving.
availability for recall should the need ever arise.
This mas done to keep released officers aligned with regular officers a
release if subsequent to
ARMED FORCES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 19%5
TROTTARO
1. You are hereby requested as an officer en the Unemy
rank above major
"Z(0)", "y" o "W(T)", to complete h
this form even though you may have completed a similar form previou
substantive
2. The object in asking you to supply this information is to enable the Min:
of Labour and National Service to reconsider, or consider, the question of joa
It is important that you shock
complete Part I correctly and return it promptly: failure to do so may mean than
by all released officers on 1 Peb
you will be regarded as being available for recall whatever your occupation
Under Arty Order 127 of 1948, war
may be.
NOTE
3. It is emphasised that the isue of this form is a purely routine measure fo
enable records to be kept up to date, and does not necesarily mean that you will
te recalled in the event of an emergency.
4 Wben you have completed and sigmed Part I and obtained the signature of
your employer (l any) at (5), detach Part II, then fold Part I so as to show the
camped address of your Personnel Branch or OIC Records and post it.
3. Pent Il of the form should be CAREFULLY retained by you, then
ampined and posted only when you change your employer, bevome employed in
= differas capacity by your present employer, or commence or cease an
appeninstip or fil-tine course of study. Part II will then enable your
anitably for reall to be rossessed in the light of your changed employment.
Stamp of Personnel Branch or OIC Records
WAR
8 anssi
Captai
