Signode.re.
NOTE.-On original and triplicate forms, the stamp and signature will be
9 MArCH 1950.
a few months' ago,
Sir,
I am directed to inform you that, as announced in the Press
it has been decided to remove from the Active List of the Territorial Army all
officers who have not been absorked into a unit of the reconstituted Territorial
overseas service leave
Army by the time they have completed all their release
or after three months from the date they were released, whichever is the later.
2. In consequence of this decision I am to inform you that you have been
transferred to the unattached list, Territorial Army Reserve of Officers.
the Regimental List of the TARO is under
The question of appointing
consideration and should it be decided to do so, all TA units will be informed and
officers will then be able to apply for posting to that list.
I am to express appreciation of the service you have rendered on
possible to
List of the Territorial Army and to say it is hoped that you may find it
resume this in the Reconstituted TA in the near future.
Unless you have applied to be posted to a reconstituted unit before the date of
this letter, your transfer to the WRO will be effected from / SEPT. 1948(date),
rank of LIEUTENANT.
You will be liable to recall until the
and you are being appointed in the substantive
to suspended when an officer is recalled to
"an officer of the TARO you are eligible to draw pay for voluntary training
in peace-time under certain conditions and
should you be willing and able to
undertake this, particulars of Camps and Course may be obtained fron the nearest
Officers with Provost experience are invited to apply (to the War Office AG14)
for transfer to the Corps of Royal Military Police
(TARO).
Your attention is drawn to the fact that as an officer of the TARO you must
report in writing to the War Office annually.
This report should be addressed to
the Under Secretary of State, The War Office, London, S.W.1, and rendered on
1st January each year.
You shculd also report any change in permanent address.
War Office records regarding officers of the TARO are now being brought up-to-
date and I am to ask you to complete and return in the enclosed envelope the slip at
Appendix A to this letter.
10. If there should in future be an emergency which necessitates the recall of TARO
Officers, you will receive orders as to where to report.
If you do not receive such
orders, you should await then and take no action other than to keep the War Office
informed of any change in your address.
Ofticers who on recall are found to be unfit for service will not be re-employed.
If there has been any change in your nedical fitness since you were last at
dut..
should give details on the annexed slip.
I am,
•
Ledger
ISSUE
Army Form G. 10-
Voucher must ace
Вощо
Stamp
footnote)
