In each group of C.O.Ds. one depot was organized as the "parent»
depot, the others in the group being called "shadow depots.
The main
objects of this organization, apart from that of providing adequate storage
space for the immense stocks received and issued, were to ensure flexibility in
meeting the work load while facilitating the control of stocks, to insure
against the possibility of a depot being put out of action and to minimize the
risk of destruction of stocks by enemy air attack. At the same time, the
system enabled individual depots to be kept to manageable proportions, and
to be sited with due regard to transportation facilities and to the availability
of local labour.
In addition to the parent and shadow depots, numerous, smaller, sub-
depots were formed to cope with the overall physical problem of storage
accommodation.
The main functional difference between a parent depot and its shadow
depots was that the parent depot carried out for the whole group the duties
of provision and stock control, other storekeeping functions being common
• to both parent and shadow depots. Initially, shadow depots operated their
own provision review system, in order to demand replenishment stocks from
the parent depot, but this system, which required special additional staff,
was superseded by a simpler, more economic process of central stock control
exercised by the provision branch of the parent depot on the basis of periodical
stock statements from the shadow depots.
Shadow depots normally carried
the same stock range as their parent depot and were allotted a proportion
of new receipts from manufacturing contracts, making issues to specified
field formations and units and to static units in defined areas in the United
Kingdom.
They also shared the overseas issues load under the control of
the parent depot, which distributed the work over the shadow depots to accord
with the operational requirements of the active theatres of war.
Within each
C.O.D. the storekeeping commitment resolved itself into the four main
functions of: —
(a) provision (or procurement) of stocks under War Office policy direction,
from all approved production sources, viz. contractors,
Royal
Ordnance Factories, lend-lease supplies from America and Canada ;
(b) the receipt of new stocks, including identification, checking and the
physical handling into the appropriate storehouses and storage bays;
(c) the storage of stocks, entailing systematic arrangement and location,
necessary repacking, preservation and identification marking ;
(d) the issue of stocks in the form required, in bulk to overseas depots
and command depots, in special operational packings for certain
operations and in detail, as required, to units and for certain main-
tenance projects.
In this chapter a description will be given of the war development of the
organization and methods used in central depots to carry out the receipt,
storage and issue functions.
a subsequent chapter.
The function of provision will be described in
following: -
The broad outline organization common to all parent C.O.Ds. was the
Headquarters, including the Chief Ordnance Officer, later re-designated
Commandant.
WesAer/14
WO 277/21.
Provision Office, which dealt with all questions relating to the replenish-
ment and disposal of stocks.
Cash and Establishment Branch, which dealt with the employment and
pay of the civilian staff.
•Ledger Branch responsible for maintaining the store account.
Receipt and Issue Branch, which dealt with the registration of store
vouchers and all questions relating to the issue and receipt of stores
and discrepancies arising thereon.
Traffic Branch responsible for inward and outward traffic.
Store Groups for receiving, storing and issuing stores.
The heavy responsibility involved in commanding a C.O.D. in which the
personnel, officers, other ranks,
A.T.S. and civilian employees
thousands, and the stocks received and issued amounted in value to millions
of pounds sterling was recognized by upgrading the Commandant to the rank
of Brigadier. In the exceptional case of the Chilwell C.O.D. organization
which comprised not only a vast depot with shadow depots and sub-depots,
but a huge tank and vehicle organization, the rank of Major-General was
approved for the Commandant.
A distinction was made, in the method and channel of issuing stores
from C.O.Ds. to the troops, as between the Vote 9 depots (M.T. and warlike
stores) and the Vote 7 and 8 depots (clothing and general stores). The clothing
and general stores C.O.Ds., in the main, made only bulk, or wholesale, issues
to the smaller command ordnance depots, which made the detail, or retail,
But the M.T. and warlike stores central depots, besides
making bulk issues to bases and garrisons overseas, made issues in detail
to units at home consigning the stores either direct to units or in transit through
command ordnance depots. There were important reasons for these different
methods which may be summarized as follows :—
(a) in war the expansion of production of M.T. stores and warlike stores
is relatively slower and many such technical stores remain persistently
Consequently there is greater need for central
control and for the minimum dispersion of stock holdings.
is greater need also to ensure that in warlike stores, operational
priorities of issue, as between theatres of war, between formations
and units, are strictly adhered to ;
(b) the storekeeping personnel dealing with warlike stores need lengthier
and more specialized technical training and the relative shortage
of such trained personnel necessitated concentration in central depots.
Generally speaking, these factors did not apply to clothing and general
Furthermore, the vast bulk involved in war-time issue and receipt
transactions of those classes of stores made it virtually essential to eliminate
detailed unit issues from the Vote 7 and 8 C.O.Ds. to allow them to concen-
trate on bulk distribution.
Evolution of C.O.D. Organization for Vehicles and M.T. Stores
At the outbreak of war, the M.T. organization consisted of one C.O.D.
at Chilwell, where both " A" and "B" M.T. vehicles and spare parts were
hold, and three vehicle depots at Handforth, Harlescott and Derby holding
