With regard to ammunition supply to the Ist Armoured Division, initial
issues were made on 22nd May and a mobile reserve, (A.S.E.) was sent for-
ward; this A.S.E. was loaded also with ammunition for 51st (Highland)
Division.
By the second week in June, 1940, when the Ist Armoured Division was,
for equipment reasons, no longer battleworthy, and when the 51st Division
had been completely cut off from its proper line of retirement via Rouen, new
reinforcements, the 52nd (Lowland) Division and the Canadian Division were
arriving in France.
Arrangements were made for their ammunition echelons
to fill up at No. 2 B.A.D. (Plouaret) and No. 4 B.A.D. (Rennes) and one
brigade (157th) of the 52nd Division went immediately into action without its
divisional artillery and under French command.
With this development in the operational situation the administration of
ordnance
services had become an even more confused and conflicting a
problem.
All available information pointed to disintegration and evacuation.
The main ordnance activity was in fact the evacuation south to Nantes and to
England,
of vast quantities of ordnance stores, the evacuation of large
tonnages of ammunition and the movement southwards of vehicle parks.
When the German occupation of Paris appeared imminent on 9th June,
1940, large stocks of winter clothing, blankets, etc. on hand at the dry cleaning
establishment in Paris were destroyed by the O.C. R.A.O.C. detachment,
which was ordered to evacuate to Bordeaux. The French contractors offered
to carry on the service in the Bordeaux area.
But, simultaneously with the general evacuation activity, the arrival of new
divisions denoted the need to organize a new phase of ordnance maintenance
service and, on 11th June, orders received at No. 1 B.O.D. Nantes, direct from
the War Office instructed that 50 per cent. of all warlike stores and 50 per cent.
of all M.T. stores were to be packed as soon as possible, carefully marked and
held ready for transfer to a new base south of the River Loire.
This work was
at once begun with 22nd June, 1940, as the target date for completion.
It was
on 11th June, also that orders were given by the Commander, L. of C. area
that Ordnance were to be
prepared to meet
the
of having to re-equip the 51st Division.
possible
eventuality
Two days later the orders for
stocking a new ordnance base were confirmed in a letter from the Q.M.G.
War Office to the Commander, L. of C. area with additional instructions
to be prepared, if resources allowed, to
equipment of a B.O.D. a B.A.D. and a B.O.W.
provide both personnel and war
These requirements could not have been met from B.E.F. resources,
because, under earlier orders, much progress had already been made in
evacuating surplus R.A.O.C.
machinery.
personnel
and
equipment and workshop
This conflict of requirements undoubtedly impeded progress on
the main ordnance task of the moment, namely, to save and ship to England
as much army equipment as possible.
An enormous amount of effort and
work were in the event entirely wasted owing to the swift disintegration of
French transportation
services.
Trainloads
ammunition,
machinery and various valuable stores were left standing and vast quantities
of stores evacuated to Nantes from Le Havre were never shipped to England
as they accumulated far too rapidly to be handled by the available labour
and shipping.
160
WO 277/21
18
