egin. During that period, which in the case of a B.O.D. should be 60 to 90
ays, there should be an alternative means of maintaining the force.
In France
here was no alternative. The resultant dificulties placed on the B.O.Ds. were
erious and were, moreover, greatly intensified by the fact that formations
nd units, despatched from home with seriously incomplete war equipments,
alled on the base depots to make good their deficiencies as soon as they
unded.
With regard to layout, the first B.O.D. set up in France was widely
ispersed to safeguard stocks against enemy air attack.
Sub-depots were as
r as 20-30 miles apart, an excessive dispersion which complicated super-
ision and operation; a less dispersed layout was therefore adopted when
le second base depot formed a few months later.
Another weakness in organization, which was quickly noticed and
medied, was that the main work of the B.O.D. was much hampered by
merous, daily demands from local, base units. To deal with these demands
e B.O.D. threw off a small subsidiary depot, stocked mainly with clothing,
commodation and expendable stores, which was placed in charge of the
.A.D.O.S. base sub-area.
The original war establishment provided a B.O.D. with a headquarters
d three homogeneous ordnance store companies.
To staff the three sub-
pots with the correct tradesmen, entailed splitting each store company for
ployment between the three sub-depots, an arrangement which
made
cient regimental administration
impracticable, especially
Where
-depots were located far apart.
This was later remedied by abolishing the
nogeneous company and substituting specialist companies to fit the stores
-divisions of the B.O.D.
The remaining main fault in the B.O.D. organization in 1939 was that,
nough no allowance was made in the war establishment, the B.O.D. had
find the R.A.O.C. personnel required for duty with R.E. transportation
ts handling stores and ammunition at the ports. This arrangement not only
ravated the man-power shortage in base depots, but produced the anomaly
R.A.O.C. detachments working under the orders of the docks operating
vice while remaining under the command of the Chief Ordnance Officer
O.0.) base depot concerned. This led to the creation of separate R.A.O.C.
d units designated
port ordnance detachments
(P.O.Ds.) and port
munition detachments (P.A.Ds.).
It will have been noted earlier in this chapter that the war establishments
base depots provided detachments for railheads.
Experience proved this
ve an unsatisfactory system of staffing railheads, because, in practice, the
ots made up the detachments from "unwanted "
personnel and, where
heads were distant from the base, in some cases hundreds of miles, the
chments were neglected in matters of welfare, delivery of mail, promotion,
This gave rise to the formation of a new unit, the ordnance maintenance
pany, one for each army, each company consisting of a small headquarters
a number of self-contained detachments for deployment at railheads or
heads within the army area.
The company commander was responsible
general supervision of all detachments, for their welfare and for the
change of personnel.
The 1939-40 campaign in France did not provide adequate opportunity
to test the organization of corps ordnance field parks.
Until the Germans
attacked in May, 1940, the field parks had remained in their original loca-
tions, in most cases with all seotions concentrated at the headquarters of
the parks.
Each section had a separate function: the reserve section held
artillery equipments, small arms, signals equipments and reserve vehicles,
and the corps and divisional sections stocked spare parts.
More and more use had been made of the parks to hold increased forward
reserves of vehicles, weapons, etc., so that when operations began they had
become quite immobile, operating as static field ordnance depots to meet
urgent demands from workshops and units.
It was considered that the field park organization lacked flexibility, but,
at this stage in 1940, no clear ideas on reorganization had emerged.
mental changes were being tried out in the Middle East and the organization
was under examination at the War Office, resulting in the following year
in the new organization described later in this chapter.
The first R.A.O.C. mobile laundry units were devised while the B.E.F.
was still in France, but no experience of the working of these units was
obtained from operations in that theatre.
It was after the evacuation from
Dunkirk that the decision was taken to transfer responsibility for mobile
bath units from the Pioneer Corps to the R.A.O.C., and it was this decision
which led to the obvious step in amalgamating mobile laundries and mobile
Mobile laundry and bath units (M.L.B.Us.)
were provided on a scale of one for a division, corps troops, army troops
and L. of C. sub-area.
A number of independent mobile bath units were
retained to meet the requirement for this type of unit in certain circumstances.
FEREE
A war estab-
lishment for a base laundry was already in existence, but, except in the
Middle East, it was not until the final campaign in North-West Europe
In other theatres, either local resources
existed or mobile laundry units were used in a static role to serve the needs
It was in March, 1941, that the growing importance of army equipment,
and the need to develop an adequate organization and system for ensuring
the efficient maintenance of ordnance services for the increasing forces at
home and overseas, led to the introduction of a new appointment at the
War Office styled Director General of Army Equipment (D.G.A.E.).
D.G.A.E. assumed the responsibility for all R.A.O.C. field organization and
operational questions, including
ordnance workshop repair and recovery
services, later to become R.E.M.E.
It was in the Middle East that the first real opportunities occurred of
getting to grips with the problems, under actual modern war conditions,
of keeping mobile fighting forces adequately supplied, during operations,
with war equipment including vehicles and ammunition, and clothing.
Warfare in the desert presented its own peculiar problems of supply and
maintenance.
During periods of rapid movement, the organization needed
67612
C2
WO 277/21
