ICTED
and the D.O.S. assumed full responsibility, under the Q.M.G. for the pro-
vision, storage and distribution of all ordnance stores, including M.T.
ammunition.
A Controller of Ordnance Services (C.O.S.) was appointed over
the D.O.S., to relieve the latter of broad policy and planning.
Two deputy
directors were appointed; D.D.O.S.(A.) responsible for ammunition, signal,
armament, etc. stores, and D.D.O.S.(M.T.) responsible for vehicles and their
spares.
The Ordnance directorate assumed control of various branches previously
under the D. of A. and the D. of M.
The old M.G.O. branches became "Ordnance Services" (O.S.) branches.
The new layout was then as follows :—
Old Branch
Responsibility
New Branch
Mobilization equipments and war M.G.O.7(A)
D.O.S.
D.D.O.S.(A.) ... 0.5.2
O.S.3
U.D.4
D.D.O.S.(M.T.)
P.O.O. ...
U.U.s.
P.O.M.E.
Provision, distribution and storage
0.52A
Ammunition
Provin, de ruin and storageo
MG: 112 & 3
O.S.3A
Engineer equipment ...
M.G.O.11
M.G.O.1a
0.S.3B
Signal equipment
Provision, distribution and storage
O.S.4A
Coast defence armaments ..
M.G.O.1
Field armaments
M.G.0.2
0.S.4C
Small arms
M.G.0.3
O.S.4D
A.A. equipment
M.G.U.14
Provision, distribution and storage
of:-
05.6
0.S.7
"B" Vehicles
Provision, distribution and storage
of clothing
Dress questions
O.S.8A Provision, (
distribution and storage
of general stores and equipment
O.S.8B Design and research, etc....
O.S.9
Civilian employees
M.G.O.5
M.G.0.6
M.C:0.76
M.G.0.9A
M.G.0.9B
M.G.O.8
O.S.10 Provision of machinery for work-
shops
and laundries inspection
O.s.11 Mobilian of Ormance work-
shop units, etc.
M.G.O.10
M.G.O.15
The diagrammatic lay-out is shown at Appendix 1.
Developments after the Outbreak of War
Although the 1939 re-organization had the effect of putting the R. A.O.C.
on a much better footing, giving the Corps direct control over its own
affairs, it was evident by early 1940 that a further step was necessary.
Among the reasons for this were the tremendous increase in the work of the
D.D.O.S.(M.T.) consequent upon the mechanization of the Army, and an
equivalent increase in the work carried out by the P.O.M.E.
It was also
decided at this time that the control of clothing and general stores should
be segregated from warlike stores, and that a Director was required for
each of these two major departments.
Accordingly, on 24th March, 1940, the Ordnance directorate was re-
one director (D.O.S.) responsible for clothing and general
stores, another (D.O.S.(W)) for warlike stores, including M.T. and ammuni-
tion, and a third (D.O.S. (Engineering)), for workshop services, the C.O.S.
being answerable directly to the Q.M.G. and responsible for all policy matters
affecting the Corps as a whole.
The senior R.A.O.C. appointments at the
War Office, and their functions as re-constituted, were then as follows:-
(a) Controller of Ordnance Services (Major-General Hill) was respon-
sible for general policy of all ordnance services and inspection of
all ordnance services at home and abroad.
(b) Director of Ordnance Services (Major-General K. M. Body) assumed
control of all matters connected with the provision, distribution,
receipt, storage and issue of clothing and general stores; scales
of clothing and equipment; war organization and establishments, in
conjunction with D.O.S.(W); war equipment tables and mobiliza-
tion; all questions affecting civilian employees in collaboration with
the D.O.S.(Eng.) in the case of artisans; selection and training of
R.A.O.C. administrative officers and clerks and storemen, in con-
junction with D.O.S.(W); and of the administration of C.O.Ds. for
clothing and general stores, and of all Command Ordnance Depots.
(c) Director of Ordnance Services (Weapons) (Major-General L. H.
Williams) was responsible for all matters connected with the pro-
vision, distribution, receipt, storage, and issue of warlike stores,
including ammunition and M.T.; inspection of ammunition after
receipt into the service; scales of warlike stores in conjunction with
Director of Staff Duties (Weapons) (D.S.D.(W)) ; and for administra-
tion of the C.O.Ds. for warlike stores, including ammunition and
M.T.
(d) Inspector of Army Ordnance Services (I.A.O.S.) was responsible for
inspection of R.A.O.C. depots and field units.
(e) Director of Ordnance Services (Engineering) (Major-General Valon)
was responsible for all ordnance engineering services, e.g., repair
and modification of ordnance technical stores, excluding ammuni-
tion, after receipt into the Service; co-ordination as necessary with
the General Staff, M. of S. and War Office branches on technical
matters affecting the repair and modification of warlike stores, ex-
ammunition;
recommendations
D.R.O.
regarding
ordnance workshop establishments at home and abroad; accommo-
dation, equipment
and organization as affecting ordnance work-
shops and kindred services; training of Ordnance Mechanical
Engineers (O.M.Es.) and artisan personnel; formation and training
of all R.A.O.C. workshop units and the supervision of all arrange-
ments for the formation of training centres for them.
(f) Inspector of Army Ordnance Workshops Services (I.A.O.W.S.) under-
took inspection of R.A.O.C. workshops and workshop services.
Increasing commitments brought still further expansion of the R.A.O.C.,
and in March, 1941, D.O.S.(W) was re-designated " Director of Warlike
WO 277/21
