SERVICES
ROUS
Although the arrangements for ordnance supply were simple, considerahl
• difficulties were experienced.
In August, 1939, the R.A.O.C. consisted of 6 officers and 60 other ranks,
garrison of approximately 8,000.
apart from workshops personnel, the minimum necessary to serve the existing
At the end of August, 1939, 4,500 Indian
reinforcements (known as Force Emu) arrived, served by an Indian Aray
Ordnance Corps (I.A.O.C.) Ordnance Field Depot (O.F.D.). This force was
ill-equipped for the climate of Malaya, e.g. it had single fly tentage, and
insufficient accommodation stores.
The arrival of this first reinforcement
opened up two questions which were to cause considerable trouble in the
future, viz.: —
(a) Force Emu and all subsequent formations arriving were on a war
accounting basis.
The peace-time garrison remained on a peace
accounting basis till the middle of 1941.
(b) A generous scale of accommodation stores was supplied for this
formation and served as a basis for all future arrivals up to the
opening of active operations in Malaya. Issues to this scale imposed
a very heavy strain on R.A.O.C. resources, and when it was applied
to hutted camps in Northern Malaya at a later date, the fact that it
was ludicrously lavish became apparent.
By March, 1940, it was evident that the small I.A.O.C. detachment was
not adequate to serve this force which was under semi-peace-time conditions
and it was decided that the I.A.O.C. should be absorbed into R.A.O.C. instal-
lations.
Just at this time 50 per cent. of officers and men were ordered back
to the United Kingdom.
From then onward, an increasing stream of reinforce.
ments arrived in Malaya and took up positions on the mainland as previously
stated.
There followed, in September, the 11th Indian Division (12,000), who
should have brought with them stores for seven months. However, it was
soon found that most of the stores were to follow and that the units them.
selves were not fully equipped.
This proved the
same with all Indian
reinforcements and caused a tremendous strain on the limited resources of
the R.A.O.C. in Malaya.
During 1941, owing to the opening of numerous airfields, Malaya increased
in strategic importance and it therefore became necessary to undertake the
defence of the whole peninsula against invasion.
The force required for
this task was estimated at six divisions:
invasioer, by the summer of 1941,
it was necessars to em at six divisions the towevalent of four divisions only.
i.e. 3rd Indian Corps consisting of two indian divisions and one Australian
division in addition to the garrison of Singapore.
Third Indian Corps was
allocated the defence of North Malaya.
The Australian division took over
the defence of Mersing and the brigade thus relieved from Mersing beane
the Army reserve.
The L. of C. from the forward units of 3rd Indian Corps
to the base at Singapore was a distance of approximately 450 miles.
With the arrival of two extra divicions in adation to many base area and
L. of C.
units, the work of the ordnance services rapidly
increased. Il
it would be necessary
was decided that, owing to the lenoth and vulnerability of the I of C
ammunition.
The ordnance depot a Singapore now became a combined
B.O.D. and B.A.D. A.O.Ds. and A.A.Ds. were set up at Kuala Lumpur.
288
To face Page 288
