adopted and as a compromise solution, the whole S.O. in C. reserve was
removed from the B.O.D. and stored in the A.O.D. Arras.
In December, 1939, an important development in the administration of
ammunition supply was the addition of an A.D.O.S. (Ammunition), with a
suitable staff, to relieve the D.O.S. of the rapidly increasing executive duties
entailed in the supply and distribution of ammunition and the technical
direction of ammunition storage and inspection.
The A.D.O.S. (Amn.) was located alongside H.Q. L. of C. at Le Mans,
a location chosen in order to give the A.D.O.S. (Amn.) the essential facility
of the widespread and reliable signals service which had been set up there
There was considerable organizational activity at this time as it had
been decided, in October, to increase the number of B.A.Ds. to four and
the capacity of each to 34,000 ton.
On 22nd December, 1939, the first
of the new full size B.A.Ds. (No. 3 B.A.D.) arrived and was sited near St.
Saens, 20 miles S.S.E. of Dieppe.
Most of the personnel of this unit were
untrained, a regrettable situation but an inevitable consequence of the fact
that the whole R.A.O.C. organization in the United Kingdom was rapidly
expanding from its very inadequate peace-time nucleus, shouldering an
immense increase in the work load and simultaneously trying to train the
As well as being untrained, this unit arrived in
the field without unit war equipment and had to contend initially with short-
age of rations, inadequate water supply, lack of blankets, sparse billeting
facilities and exceptionally severe wintry weather.
It was during December, 1939, that a small ammunition depot was formed
in the A.A.S.F. area, in the Foret la Tracoue, to store a forward reserve
of army and R.A.F. ammunition.
During the period December, 1939 to January, 1940, various changes
were effected in the ordnance workshops organization.
A.F.Ws. which had earlier been found unwieldy, a considerable reduction
in unit equipment was effected by withdrawing seven machinery lorries from
each workshop. Most A.F.Ws. were found to be accumulating stocks of
spare parts instead of relying on systematic supply from ordnance field parks.
M.T. spare parts at this time were in short supply and by the end of 1939,
an excessive number of vehicles were off the road awaiting spares.
led to the uneconomic practice of evacuating repairable vehicles from A.F.Ws.
to the base in the hope of getting new vehicles in replacement.
and the hoarding of spares were stopped, with beneficial results.
It was during this period that the ports of St. Nazaire, Nantes and Brest
ceased to be used at M.T. landing ports and Le Havre became the principal
port for M.T.
The ordnance port workshop detachments were accordingly re-distributed.
No. 4 P.W.D. at Le Havre, disembarked in a period of two months no fewer
than 9,300 M.T. vehicles and 2,300 motor eyeles besides carrying out work-
shop repair services for local units. No. 2 P.W.D. was moved from Brest
o Bruz (near Rennes) to carrv out workshop renairs for the large number
of R.E. units employed there on the construction of new base installations.
150
Wes9717
WO 277/21
No. 1 P.W.D. remained at Nantes where it was fully
employed on local
recovery work and on the movement of heavy lifts from rail to the B.O.W.
and of heavy machinery from the docks to Bruz.
During January, 1940, No. 2 B.O.D. at Le Havre began the issue of
general stores and clothing, thus affording much needed relief to the hard
pressed B.O.D. at Nantes, and opened its sub-depot for returned stores.
By the end of January, 1940, when the B.E.F. had increased to a force
corps, each of three divisions, with corps and army troops, the
R.A.O.C. field organization had developed to a stage when at least the
major initial difficulties had been overcome and essential installations such
as B.O.Ds., B.A.Ds., vehicle parks, base and formation workshops L. of C.
recovery services and laundry services were operating with reasonable
efficiency for a force not yet committed to active operations.
time it was fully realized that much expansion was still necessary, that serious
shortages still persisted in many important items and classes of army equip-
ment and that an adequate maintenance organization for armoured forces
Among the most vital shortages, were components and
tracked vehicles: especially sprockets and tracks.
On 1st January, 1940,
for example, there was a stock of only 16 pairs of tracks and no sprockets
for the 50 infantry tanks operated by units, and only 37 pairs of tracks
and 136 pairs of sprockets for the 123 light tanks then in the Force.
gravity of such shortages was urgently represented to the War Office.
Development-February to April, 1940
The three months February to April, 1940, saw considerable progress
in the build-up of the B.E.F. 3rd Corps arrived in France during February
and March ; there were increases in G.H.Q., corps and L. of C. troops; base
reinforcement depots, training schools and practice camps were formed ; and
a progressive development and expansion of the administrative services took
During April three partially equipped semi-trained divisions arrived
in France, to continue their training, but primarily to provide man-power
to make good the acute shortage of labour available for the numerous projects
of constructing airfields and L. of C. installations.
As regards ordnance services, the main events were the arrival of a
second base ordnance workshop and three additional base ammunition depots
(two on special W.Es. much smaller than the standard B.A.D.), the opening
up of new vehicle parks, the inception of a new scheme for the dry cleaning
and repair of winter clothing withdrawn from the troops, a detailed review
of the B.O.D. organization and W.E. (which experience had already shown
to be seriously inadequate) and the planning of new base installations for
the maintenance of A.F.Vs. of the armoured formations expected to join
Simultaneously constant endeavour was made to improve the organization
and standard of service of the existing base ordnance installations.
re-organization of the L. of C.
area into two districts with a Deputy Director
of Ordnance Services (D.D.O.S.) at each district headquarters, was designed
to facilitate control of the rapidly increasing L. of C.
change in organization left H.O. L. of C. area with inadequate and ineffective
R.A.O.C. representation.
