The M.L.B.Us. in C.M.F. developed an efficient repair system, by the
employment of Italian women who (normally using their
own sewing
machines) repaired greatcoats, battledress, and khaki drill garments, socks
and underclothing, towels, blankets, palliasses, hospital clothing and bedding,
mosquito nets and veils.
These repairs greatly reduced demands on the
base and resulted in great economy of both stores and transport.
Experience revealed the need for R.E.M.E. craftsmen specializing in the
repair of laundry equipment.
MOBILE AMMUNITION REPAIR UNITS (M.A.R.Us.)
M.A.R.Us.-
-small and highly mobile inspection and repair units-had
been successfully employed in the Middle East and North African campaigns
under the original name of mobile ammunition laboratories (M.A.Ls.), and
they were used extensively throughout the Italian campaign for the essential
work of collecting, inspecting, repairing, or otherwise disposing of ammunition
MOBILE STORES REPAIR UNITS (M.S.R.Us.)
allotted' on the scale of one to each army, carried out
" stitch-in-time" repairs, mostly to general stores of the following classes ;
viz. tentage of all kinds, waterproof covers, canopies, hoods and bonnets of
vehicles, web equipment, accommodation stores, especially tables, forms and
chairs, all kinds of boots (except rubber), engine chests, wooden packing
cases, packsaddlery, pressure lamps, hurricane lamps and oil stoves, portable
cookers, food containers and Soyer stoves.
During static periods between mobile operations M.S.R.Us. did valuable
work in manufacturing a considerable range of stores such as packing cases,
tables and forms, simple types of engine chests, tentbottoms and duckboards,
signboards and flags, sacks and various harness items.
Each unit had an establishment of 1 officer and 42 O.Rs. and required
no machinery apart from one "L" Type (woodwork) machine lorry and a
MOBILE INDUSTRIAL GAS UNITS (M.I.G.Us.)
These small units were provided in C.M.F. on the scale of one for each
army, a scale which was inadequate to produce anything more than a small
fraction of the great quantities of oxygen, acetylene and nitrogen required
for workshop and other uses.
The requirements of the forces were in fact
mostly met by getting the existing local static plants repaired and into
production.
MOBILE OFFICERS' SHOPS
These units were designed to help officers to obtain quick replacements of
items of clothing and necessaries, badges, etc., of officers' pattern, and they
were stocked with all normal items of an officers' kit so far as availability
permitted.
In practice the officers' shops in Italy were seldom well stocked
because of the severe restrictions imposed, at the source of supply, on the
quantity allocated to the Army generally.
In 1945 it became necessary to
introduce ration cards to control individual purchases.
214
The stocks in officers' shops were recognized to be attractive items, specially
liable to be pilfered and particular precautions were taken.
losses by theft were considerable.
Nevertheless,
Rearward (static) units
R.A.O.C. TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT
This unit was set up at Salerno on a war establishment of 13 officers and
109 other ranks, which included an Italian co-operator element of 5 officers
and 68 other ranks. The Italian officers were employed mostly as interpreters,
the other ranks as cooks and general duty men.
The unit had four main training objects, viz.:
(a) to give practical training in the duties of field units and base installa-
tions to British other ranks who arrived in the theatre as recruits
with only theoretical training,
(b) to provide refresher courses in particular subjects, such as training
storemen in ordnance field parks in driver I.C. duties,
(c) to train captured enemy personnel in R.A.O.C. duties for employ-
ment on ordnance duties to relieve the strain on British man-power.
(d) to train local civilians for employment on ordnance clerical and
storehouse duties.
These objects were attained and the results achieved were highly satis-
factory, well selected instructional staff and efficient methods enabling this
small unit to produce an output out of all proportion to its numbers.
AMMUNITION REPAIR FACTORY
Early in 1944, it was noted that there were heavy accumulations at
B.A.Ds., of ammunition unfit for issue, presenting a repair task quite beyond
the capacity of these depots.
Proposals were made to the War Office for the establishment of a well
equipped repair factory in Italy.
For a variety of reasons, the chief of which
was the difficulty in getting building materials, progress was so slow that
the actual repair programme could not be started before the campaign was
over. The factory was then handed over to the Ministry of Supply to deal
with the work of breaking down surplus ammunition for disposal.
The lesson of this venture was that if, early in 1944, a similar factory
on a smaller scale had been established at each B.A.D., large quantities of
repairable ammunition could have been repaired and put into service, with
corresponding reduction in the shipment of new ammunition from Home.
CLOTHING REPAIR FACTORY
This unit, whose designation was a misnomer, did not repair clothing,
but manufactured garments of various kinds, which were in chronic short
upply from the normal source or temporarily not in stock owing to mistakes
in provision, and special requirements such as abnormal sizes of battle dress
or khaki drill.
The unit was made up of a nucleus of military supervisors (3 officers and
70 other ranks) and over 1,000 Italian civilians, mostly women machinists,
WO 277/21
