14. Corps are responsible for phasing in Corps Ordnance Field Parks
including Reserve Guns and Vehicles with No. 1 and No. 3 Sections and
Mobile Laundry and Bath Unit allotted to Corps.
15. Based on the Landing Reserves and spare Vehicles and Guns phased
in by Corps, Army have phased in Landing Reserves and Beach Maintenance
Packs as at Annexure I.
16. Between D+2 and D+8 Army have phased in Landing Reserves
adequate to maintain all Formations landed up to D + 12 with first line stores
assuming each landing Reserve lasts 15 days for a Brigade at intense rates.
17. Subsequent to D+8 all Landing Reserves will go to 17 Advanced
Ordnance Depot.
18. On D+3 Ordnance Beach Detachments will be augmented by
Ordnance Maintenance Coy. and a detachment of Canadian Ordnance Main-
tenance Coy.
19. From D+5 the Beach Maintenance Areas will be merged into an
L. of C. Terminal which will be under technical control of A.D.O.S. Army
Troops who will allocate Ordnance personnel to meet the load of Ordnance
stores as necessity arises with the L. of C. Terminal.
20. From D+7 a second L. of C. Terminal will be formed and will
include the Beach Maintenance Area of 104 Beach Sub-Area.
Thus from
D+ 7 No. 1 L. of C. Terminal will be 101 and 102 Beach Sub-Area holdings
of Ordnance Stores.
No. 2 L. of C. Terminal will be 104 Beach Sub-Area holding of Ordnance
Stores plus 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot.
21. From D+9 all Landing Reserves will go into 17 Advanced Ordnance
Depot unless it is necessary to divert any Landing Reserve to No. 1 L. of C.
Terminal or No. 2 L. of C. Terminal (104 Beach Sub-Area portion).
22. From D +9 Beach Maintenance Packs will commence landing and will
go into 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot who will lay out an Advanced
Ordnance Depot to issue Ist and 2nd line stores from Beach Maintenance
Packs. It is not anticipated that 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot will be able
to make any issues before D +14 and it is hoped not to make any demands
on 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot until D + 17 except for a complete Landing
Reserve or substantial portion of a Landing Reserve.
23. 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot will, however, be prepared to accept
emergency demands for easily located stores, such as complete engine assembly
24. A.D.O.S., Army Troops, will be controlling both L. of C. Terminals
and will see that formations do not unduly press 17 Advanced
Ordnance
Depot in the early stages, otherwise its efficient functioning will be jeopardized.
He will allot unit and formations to the Ordnance dumps in accordance
with their geographical position and the stocks in the dumps.
25. Unaccompanied G.1098 arriving before D+ 8 will have to be placed
in nearest Ordnance Beach Detachment to which it is landed.
At present
to indication is available of the tonnages involved but they are liable overall
to be large.
338
26. Unaccompanied G.1098 arriving after D + 8 will be put in 17 Advanced
Ordnance Depot and handled by the Stores Transit Sub-Depot.
As soon
as unaccompanied G.1098 arrives units and formations will be informed giving
details of weight through A.D.O.S., Army Troops, to D.D.O.S., Army.
27. Reserve Vehicles arriving before D+8 will be stored in nearest
Ordnance Beach Detachment and arrival reported through A.D.O.S., Army
Troops, and D.D.O.S., Army.
28. Reserve Vehicles and Tanks arriving after D + 8 will be sent to Vehicle
Park of 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot who will report daily arrivals to
D.D.O.S., Army.
Reserve Vehicles, up to and including D + 12, will be driven ashore by
personnel of 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot Vehicle Coy.
From D+13
to and including D + 16 reserve vehicles and tanks will be driven ashore by
personnel of 16 Advanced Ordnance Depot Vehicle Coy.
onward all reserve vehicles and tanks will be ferried over by drivers pro-
vided by D.O.S., 21 Army Group, and taken over on landing by personnel
of either 16 or 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot Vehicle Coys.
29. C.S.O. Reserve of Signal stores will not be issued by Ordnance Beach
Detachments without authority from C.S.O. Corps up to D+2, and after
that C.S.O. Army. This does not include Signal Stores in Landing Reserves.
30. Stores for Civil Affairs stored in Ordnance Beach Detachments will
not be issued without authority from the Senior Officer Civil Affairs. Ton-
nages of these stores will be very small (two tons at the most).
31. 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot will receive and store repairable engine
assemblies till they can be shipped home for repair.
32. Ammunition Dumps in 101 and 102 Beach Sub-Area will be merged
and form one ammunition dump in No. 1 L. of C. Terminal.
Ammunition Dump in 104 Beach Sub-Area will expand and with the
arrival of 15 Base Ammunition Depot will form 15 Base Ammunition Depot
in No. 2 L. of C. Terminal.
33. Mobile Laundry and Bath Units for Army are being phased in by
Army to arrive on or after D + 18.
34. Army will provide common issue items for Navy and R.A.F., including
Mobile Laundry and Bath Units as far as they are available.
Annexure I.-Ordnance Stores build-up programme together with
explanatory notes.
Annexure II.-Ammunition build-up programme (tonnage only).
Annexure III.-Ordnance personnel and connected labour build-up
programme.
NoTE. —The foregoing Annexures have been omitted from this narrative.)
10299717
WO 277/21
339
