campaign, the scales of the various stores were revised and new types of
packages were devised to facilitate handling and for use as store bins under
operational conditions.
To minimize the risk of loss by enemy air attack these reserves, as soon
as packed and marked for shipment, were dispersed to various depots for
storage till called forward to the ports. The estimated requirements of the
invasion force to meet the first 90 days maintenance in general stores were
packed and held ready for automatic shipment.
Early in 1944 preparations were being made for fighting in snow and
mountainous country and against Japan in jungle territory. This involved the
provision of highly specialized equipment not previously held by R.A.O.C.
Camouflage and other special devices for the deception of the enemy had
already proved their value and large quantities of these devices in various
forms were provided for the assault on Europe.
Special security precautions
were taken during the manufacture, storage and repair of these devices in
order to ensure their utmost effect. For this purpose a new depot was opened
at Elstree with sub-depots at Perivale, Olympia and Harlesden, in which the
specialized airborne, arctic and jungle equipment and the camouflage and
deceptive devices were handled.
Most of the equipment intended for operations in the Far East had to be
specially preserved and packed to prevent deterioration from tropical condi-
tions. Didcot became the centre for this work so far as general stores were
concerned. Special plant was installed for de-rusting, degreasing, preserving,
and packing stores to tropical standards.
In December, 1944, as part of the policy of relieving Didcot of its
increasing load, an additional C.O.D. was, established at Boughton in Notting-
hamshire, with the object of taking over progressively all functions in connec-
tion with oils and paints, transport and lifting gear, storehouse equipment and
industrial gas plants. Up to this time Boughton had been used by the
American forces, for whom it had been specially built, under reciprocal aid
arrangements.
A new sub-depot was established at Hainault in February, 1945, for the
receipt, storage and issue of laundry plants.
By this time the C.O.D. organization for general stores had become so
arge and complex that it was necessaty to nominate an officer for the general
o-ordination, under War Office direction, of all matters of policy and pro-
dure for all the C.O.Ds. dealing with general stores.
as given this responsibility.
Commandant, Didcot
A storage control organization was introduced with the object of directing
licy relating to storage and the actual delivery of stores throughout the
anization.
From an analysis of contracts placed, storage requirements
e assessed and direction given for the delivery of stores from contractors.
In May, 1945, further details were received regarding the commitment for
Far East operations covering the period June to December, 1945.
lity was shared by C.O.D. Dideot and C.O.D. Solway.
This
When Japan
tulated, the work on this commitment was well under way.
Evolution of the C.O.D. Organization for Army Clothing
In 1939, the only central depot for army clothing and necessaries was
the C.O.D. Branston, near Burton. The original depot buildings were com-
mercial premises purchased by the War Department in 1937 when it was
decided that central stocks of clothing should be removed from the C.O.D.
Branston, with its provision branch, opened as the new C.O.D. for
clothing in February, 1938.
In 1939, in view of the formation of the Militia and the decision to
increase the Territorial Army, it was decided to extend very considerably the
storage accommodation at Branston, and new construction began. In June,
1939, two new sub-depots were opened at Dewsbury in the wool production
area of Yorkshire, and at Stalybridge in the cotton production area of Lan-
The function of these sub-depots was to receive bulk material from
piece goods manufacturers and to distribute it to appointed garment makers.
The system of clothing supply to the Army which was in force in 1939
placed on C.O.D. Branston the responsibility of detailed issues to all units
in the United Kingdom, except units in Aldershot and Scottish Commands.
In those two commands the command ordnance depots made the detailed
unit issues and replenished their stocks by bulk-demands on Branston. During
1939, when it was seen that the detailed issues system had placed an impos-
sible strain on the Branston Depot the system was promptly changed ;
Branston was relieved of detailed issues and all commands brought into
line with Aldershot and Scottish Commands.
In July, 1939, the responsibility for the inspection of army clothing was
transferred from the R.A.O.C. to the Ministry of Supply, the latter taking
over the R.A.O.C. inspection staff and organization at Branston as a " going
Towards the end of 1939 the work load of the Banston organization
was showing a swift and huge increase, receipts pouring in from the manu-
facturers and the issue commitment rapidly rising.
accommodation was put under construction at Branston, and three more
sub-depots were opened in Cheshire, Yorkshire and Scotland. Initially these
sub-depots were used merely to solve the immediate problem of
congestion: they took in and stored the new
production from the army
clothing contractors in their areas. But by May, 1940, they had been
equipped with electric baling presses and allotted the function of baling and
marking in accordance with Branston standards and of. making bulk issues,
under C.O.D. Branston control, to command ordnance depots. Later, Bran-
ston made fuller use of these sub-depots by keeping them stocked with a
complete, balanced range of all items of clothing and necessaries.
enabled each depot to maintain systematic and complete replenishment of
the command ordnance depots in their area of supply, and to hold decen-
tralized reserves to insure against the risk
of invasion or disruption of trans-
portation facilities. A fourth new sub-depot had meantime been opened at
Within C.O.D. Branston, internal reorganization was effected. Two of
the seven store groups had become unwieldy and were accordingly sub-
divided and a new group was formed to deal with A.T.S. clothing.
while, C.O.D. Branston became responsible for large issues of clothing to
WO 277/21
18
