SERVICES
Under this re-organization, R.A.O.C. installations as shown
on the map facing page 294 were allocated as follows :-
and an alternative D.A.D.O.S. Office, The Ridge,
Repulse Bay Road.
(b) Workshops, Shousan Hill.
(c) Depot for camp equipment and gas clothing, Brickhill.
(d) Armament and gun stores, Lyemun Barracks (Married Quarters).
The total strength of Hong Kong garrison rose to about 16,000, the
main increase being effected by the arrival of two battalions of Canadian
troops in October, 1941.
In the meanwhile, local unrest became distressingly evident. Dumps of
machine guns, binoculars and other war stores were discovered in Hong
Kong warehouses, having been laid up by enemy agents in anticipation
of the outbreak of war. These stores were, of course, confiscated and taken
into use by the British forces.
Ordnance Situation during the Attack by the Japanese
When war with Japan broke out on 8th December, 1941, ordnance
stores and installations were dispersed as follows:-
Queens Road-All bulk stores and workshops except essential items
which had been removed.
Ma-Tau-Kok (Kowloon)-The only
important items left here were
blankets and a little ammunition.
Little Hong Kong
Upper and Lower Kennedy Road
Shousan Hill-War-time workshops.
Lyemun Married Quarters-Dispersed essential stores.
Brickhill-Dispersed essential stores, chiefly camp equipment.
The Ridge-Dispersed essential stores, arms, clothing, armourers and
Kennedy Town Godown-Tentage.
In addition to the above, arrangements had been made for hospital and
barrack laundries, for which certain equipment, including boilers, had to
be made by the R.A.O.C. workshops.
Within a few days came the news that the Japanese were advancing
on Hong Kong, and the withdrawal of the mainland forces was ordered.
All remaining stores at the Ma-Tau-Kok depot were immediately evacuated
to the island, nothing of value being left.
Then followed the bombard-
ment, both by artillery and from the air, of all base installations on the
northern side of the island, including the main Ordnance Depot at Queens
Road. Evacuation of all stores of value from this depot was carried out
by day and night.
Lack of transport, and panic among Chinese labour,
hindered the work. A number of casualties occurred and finally, after two
storehouses had been blown up and a third gutted by fire, the site was
R.A.O.C. personnel working there were transferred to the
depot at "The Ridge" and to the workshops at Shousan Hill.
had by this time been organized as the war workshops.
Bulk stocks of heavy explosive were removed from the magazines at
Kennedy Road, owing to the danger to surrounding districts, but although
these magazines were under shell-fire, they continued to make issues until
the end.
On 15th December, 1941 when the order came for all troops to withdraw
to the island from the mainland the island defence scheme was put into
operation.
The R.A.O.C. had the task of re-arming and re-equipping all
units, and this was done at the Ordnance Depot in Queens Road.
Meanwhile the Lyemun magazine and quarters had come under heavy
shell-fire, and evacuation was ordered.
Stores were evacuated to "The
Ridge " depot, but it was impossible to evacuate all the
ammunition.
Arrangements were, therefore, made for the R.A. to draw on it by night
for over-stocking their forts and batteries.
On the night of 18th December the Japanese effected a landing on the
Ordnance installations were now reduced to: —
The Ridge—Main depot and D.A.D.O.S. H.Q. Armourers and instrument
Brickhill-Camp depot.
Shousan Hill-Workshops.
Little Hong Kong-Magazines.
A small amount of stores and ammunition was still being obtained from
Queens Road and Kennedy Road storehouses and magazines.
The Japanese continued to advance and a period of intense combatant
action ensued for the R.A.O.C.
They were ordered to defend to the last
their installations at "The Ridge"
and Little Hong Kong. In addition,
R.A.O.C. personnel joined other arms and services in expeditions sent out
to retrieve the situation, but the position became hopeless. Orders were
then given to retire from " The Ridge" to Shousan Hill and Stanley, and to
join up with the forces in those areas.
were, rightly, the last to leave " The Ridge", it being
were between 60 and 70 strong, and after
5 days' hard fighting, upwards of 50 failed to get away and were captured.
A few were either killed or wounded while escaping.
1941 the island was surrendered to the enemy.
The fate of those captured
at "The Ridge" could not be ascertained until some days after Christmas,
when the A.D.M.S. was permitted to explore the area in search of wounded.
He found the party had been bound hand and foot with telephone wire and
subsequently bayoneted or shot. Not many were found and they were mostly
The R.A.O.C. who surrendered at Little Hong Kong were well-treated.
A count of the R.A.O.C was taken on 28th January, 1942 in
the
prisoner of war camp, the result being as follows:—
Present on parade—10 officers 82 other ranks.
Dead—3 officers 13 other ranks.
Wounded in Hospital-7 other ranks.
Missing (presumed dead) —2 officers 30 other ranks.
It is assumed that all those reported missing shared the fate of the party
at "The Ridge".
The percentage of dead and missing to the total strength - 33 per cent.
-was the highest of any unit in the Command.
297
was 9a7/17
WO 277/21
