OUS
However, by improvising equipment borrowed from the R.A.F. and by
obtaining additional plant from the United Kingdom, the unit was in operation
again in ten days.
Good use was made of the industrial capacity of Belgium for repairing
stores and clothing returned by units.
In March, 21,000 tons of general
stores and clothing were received,
sorted, repaired and re-issued by
Returned Stores Depot with the aid of civilian contractors.
17
Approximately
30,000 pairs of boots a month were also repaired and in some cases rebuilt
by this unit.
The increasing number of Allied liberated man-power units
being formed necessitated the expansion of returned stores facilities as
although initial equipment was being obtained from the United Kingdom.
for these units, subsequent maintenance had to be provided from theatre
resources.
This would not have been possible without using repaired clothing
and equipment, as stocks of new clothing were only sufficient to meet the
normal requirements of the force.
On 15th February, R.A.O.C. assumed responsibility for holding Civil
Affairs Ordnance stores in the Advanced Base.
However, this entailed little
change in procedure of method of supply, and the forward holdings with
armies were handled by Civil Affairs Military Government.
The arrival in the theatre of formations from Italy involved a large re-
equipment programme.
Security considerations made this task difficult but
it was successfully accomplished by liaison with the R.A.O.C. officers of
the formations concerned.
Arrangements were made to earmark and ship
the required stores,
ammunition and vehicles from the United Kingdom
before the arrival of the units. Staging camps on the route from Marseilles
to Belgium had to be equipped and accommodation stores provided.
To
meet this commitment,
additional quantities of stores were shipped from
the United Kingdom, while stocks of tentage from the R.M.A. were also
utilized.
Contracts were placed in Lille and throughout Belgium for the
repair of tentage to assist the military repair programme.
Shipments of "A" and "B" vehicles from Italy began arriving at
Marseilles on 20th February,
and as only 50 drivers accompanied the
first arrivals a detachment of 141 Vehicle Park was despatched there direct
from the R.M.A. to establish a receipt park.
This unit was eventually
relieved by a vehicle park from. Italy.
A Vehicle Company was formed
from reinforcements in the United Kingdom and British Liberation Army,
and quickly despatched to Marseilles by air and rail to ferry the vehicles
to the Advanced Base on a seven-day turnround, return trips of the drivers
being made by air.
Altogether,
approximately
3,271
"B" vehicles and
667 "A" vehicles were received.
Many of the
"A" vehicles were in need
of overhaul and modification before use, and as this additional task was
beyond the resources of R.E.M.E. in the theatre, arrangements were made
to evacuate the vehicles to the United Kingdom.
However, this problem
had been foreseen and stocks of "A" vehicles had already been increased
to balance such losses.
In January, No. 3 Field Ammunition Repair Factory moved from the
R.M.A. to the Advanced Base, leaving behind some 2,500 tons of ammunition
requiring inspection of repair which was later cleared to the Advanced
After the final clearance of ammunition
15 B.A.D. moved un to the Advanced Base to relieve the pressure of work
stocks from the R.M.A.,
242
placed on 2, 3 and 17 B.A.Ds, by the armies' requirements for operation
The ammunition build-up for operation
" Plunder"
largest ever undertaken by Second Army.
The stocks required from No. 8
Army Roadhead for the operation were cleared by rail to the
railheads in No. 10 Army
Roadhead by
all unition
seven trains a day from
the
18th March
and a maximum of
Advanced
Base were also received.
During
the build-up the average tonnage of ammunition receipts and issues handled
in the roadhead was 4,470 tons, the highest tonnage in any one day being
9,150 tons on 25th March.
To conceal the preparations for the operation
a smoke screen was provided on the West bank of the Rhine and a very
large number of smoke generators were used for this purpose, completely
exhausting all stocks in the Advanced Base so that it was found necessary
to comb the A.A. gun positions in the neighbourhood of Antwerp to provide
the amount required.
Following the break-out from the Rhine bridgehead,
the reserves of ammunition remaining in No. 10 Army Roadhead proved
sufficient to maintain the remainder of Second Army's operations in Germany
and stock the two roadheads, Nos. 12 and 14, subsequently formed.
Early
in April, 1 and 12 B.A.Ds. and certain port ammunition detachments and
ordnance ammunition companies were disbanded to form enemy ammunition
depot "Control Units"
ready to take over dumps of enemy ammunition
uncovered by the advance and during the occupation of Germany after
fighting had finished.
For Operation " Plunder"
the units coming under command of Second
Army from First Canadian Army had to be re-equipped in a very short
Consequently a special train was arranged to
convey con-
trolled stores to Second Army ordnance railhead where they were received
within forty-eight hours after the receipts of demands in the Advanced
Base
All formations were fully equipped several days before the beginning
of the operation, except for the Comet tanks of 29 Armoured Brigade
which were reported operationally unfit owing to defects in the tensioner
wheels.
Arrangements were made with the War Office to provide new
type wheels which were flown to the theatre in first priority air freight
direct from the factory.
Each day's consignments were collected under
brigade R.E.M.E. arrangements and fitted to the tanks within seven days-
in time for the operation.
The main body of 6 Airborne Division which
had been withdrawn from the theatre was re-equipped for the operation in
However, that part of the Division that was not in fact
airborne-mostly administrative units had to be re-equipped in the theatre.
This presented a problem, as the necessary special equipment was not
normally held in 21 Army Group.
An Ordnance sub-park, for which certain
personnel were supplied from the theatre,
was specially formed in the
United Kingdom to support the divisional ordnance field park, and arrived
by sea a few days before the operation.
Special packs of airborne equip-
ment were shipped from the United Kingdom and held in the divisional
ordnance field park, the sub-park- and in 15 A.O.D. These arrangements for
the maintenance of the division proved satisfactory.
A detachment of an Air Packing Platoon was flown in from the United
Kingdom to supplemen i PaRking Ca toon wasport platoons located at
Nivelles airfeld, holding pre-packed supplies for emergency maintenance by
This was not in fact required during Operation " Plunder".
67612
243
wes7e714
WO 277/21
18
