In Burma, despite strong protests, 4,000 tons were ordered into a com-
pletely unsafe area,
When a fire and explosion occurred, not a single ton
of ammunition remained.
As all this had been airborne, it was a rather
serious blunder.
In Normandy, in view of the impending mud in winter,
representations for a new site for one of the B.A.Ds. were made but refused.
When it became a matter of some urgency to transport the ammuntion to
Belgium, the only possible way was to use tanks to tow the lorries to and
from the stacks until the tanks themselves were bogged.
In view of these happenings, it has been arranged that greater emphasis
on the principles of ammunition storage shall now be given during Staff
College courses.
MALTREATMENT OF AMMUNITION BY UNITS
In addition to the various handbooks of weapons, all units were pro-
vided with sufficient copies of "Notes on the Care and Preservation of
Ammunition in the Field", which stressed the importance of the care of
ammunition, for issue down to the rank of serjeant.
Courses were run
at Bramley C.A.D. for officers of all arms, the subject being the care of
ammunition on unit charge
A training film was prepared called "Be
Ammunition Minded ".
It must be recorded that, despite the issue
adequate training pamphlets and films, most units treated their ammunition
badly.
The worst faults were :—
(a) Opening sealed boxes unnecessarily.
(b) Not providing protection for ready-for-use rounds.
(c) Holding too many prepared rounds for breech loading equipments.
(d) Transportation of ammunition loose
or in sandbags, the proper
packages having been misappropriated for other purposes.
Such treatment was bound to affect completely serviceable ammunition
in the course of time, but its effect on ammunition which had already suffered
damage was immediate.
132
PART III
OPERATIONS IN NORTHERN EUROPE
4 1939-1942
CHAPTER IX
FRANCE 1939-1940
The organization and build-up of Ordnance Services, September, 1939,
to January, 1940
Plan and Initial Build-up in France
The initial plan for a British Expeditionary Force in France in the event of
war against Germany provided, so far as concerned ordnance services, for
the immediate despatch of base and L. of C. installations, comprising: —
A Base Ordnance Depot (B.O.D.)
An Advanced Ordnance Depot (A.O.D.)
Two Base Ammunition Depots (B.A.D.)
A Base Ordnance Workshop (B.O.W.)
An Advanced Ordnance Workshop (A.O.W.)
for the provision of the following units within formations, viz.: —
Four Army Field Workshops (A.F.W)
Two A.A. Brigade Workshops
G.H.Q. Troops Workshop
Light Aid Detachments (L.A.D.) with practically every unit
Four Port Workshop Detachments (P.W.D)
Two Corps Ordnance Field Parks
and for the appointment of R.A.O.C. representatives to each army (when
formed), corps and divisional headquarters.
At G.H.Q. the plan provided an ordnance directorate with a D.O.S. as
the head of ordnance services in the force and a P.O.M.E. to control workshop
activities.
With the exception of T.A. field workshops and T.A. ordnance field
parks in nucleus form, no R.A.O.C. field units for the B.E.F. existed in peace.
Mobilization schemes provided for personnel, regulars, T.A. and sup-
plementary reservists, to be earmarked for specific units and appointments,
for unit and technical equipment to be assembled at ordnance depots through-
out the United Kingdom and for machinery for workshop units to be taken
from that in use in static workshops.
Depot mobilization schemes also included arrangements for the formation
of field units, and for the despatch of the units and their war equipment
to the ports of embarkation.
As a general rule, unit personnel and unit
war equipment were to be despatched separately to conform to the shipping
programme of the B.E.F.
~02717
WO 277/21
