Hitherto initial maintenance of overseas theatres BO. aken the form of a
scales issue of an initial -12 months' stock for the B.O.D., and scaled issues
for the vehicles in formations and increments.
Subsequent maintenance was
by theatre demands, the liability period for each theatre being periodically
re-assessed by War Office as the interim period varied.
There was great
difficulty in meeting theatre demands and to correct this automatic main-
tenance was introduced about May, 1941.
By June, both Canadian and
U.S. vehicles were being received, and availability of their spares was at
this period reasonably good, one year's maintenance being supplied with
the vehicles, with the promise of a second year's cover to follow.
By June, 1942, delay in delivery of spares had increased to as much as
nine months after the placing of the order.
Moreover, the North African
campaign was envisaged which would cause an increase in consumption
of spares.
It was, therefore, decided to raise the liability period for "A"
vehicles to 18 months and for "B'" vehicles to two years, both for initial
provision for new vehicles and maintenance of existing types. This entailed,
a complete review and heavy demands on the trade.
addin the provision of apocaly 110,00m vehicles, dues in .. tons
tracts, and the R.A.S.C. M.T. Depot at Feltham was taken over by R.A.O.C.
and became an additional C.O.D. for M.T.
At this stage a central stock
control system was evolved covering C.O.D?'s Chilwell, Derby, Bicester and
Feltham and simultaneously reviews taken by each depot in respect of items
on a pre-arranged quarterly cycle.
The number of items to be reviewed
was from 212,000 to 355,000, but the system worked well and adequate pro-
vision and uniform availability at all four depots resulted.
In 1943, the number of types of North American vehicles increased but
availability of spares deteriorated as the promised second year's cover had not
materialized; in July, it was decided that the first year's cover only would
be supplied automatically, subsequent maintenance being by demand placed
through British Army Staff (B.A.S.) Washington.
On British makes, the provision basis was proving more satisfactory,
though there was difficulty in maintaining trade deliveries and also a shortage
in fast-moving items.
In 1944, there was a marked improvement in availability of British spares,
but supplies were only just adequate to meet the requirements of units and
depots of 21 Army Group for the landings in Normandy.
There was great
anxiety, however, concerning U.S. spares, but after special representations
had been made to U.S.
War Department, who were themselves sufferin®
very serious shortages, the quantities required for landing reserves and beach
maintenance packs were provided in time for packing.
In September, requirements were re-stated and in October the liability
period was reduced to 18 months for vehicles in current use and to 12 months
or less for obsolescent types.
In March, 1945, it was decided to rationalize the global provision of all
M.T. spares of both United Kingdom and North American origin and in
order to ascertain the location of theatre surpluses, a phased system of
86
W97997/14
WO 277/21:
returns from overseas theatres was inaugurated.
Under this system home
requirements or overseas demands were met as far as possible by transfer
of surpluses from other theatres.
By April, 1945, it became clear that outstanding orders and the placing
of new orders should be reduced to the greatest extent.
The liability period
for the maintenance of current types was therefore reduced to 12 months, the
total initial provision in respect of new contracts remaining at 18 months for
"A " vehicles and two years for "B" vehicles.
Following the end of war with Germany in May, it was decided to alter
the basic usage figures from existing war-time rates to estimated peace usage
rates of one-third the peak war rates.
So that there should not be too
drastic a reduction in stocks at this stage, it was decided in June to add to
the liability period of 12 months at peace rates, a store margin of three
months at war rates except on very slow moving items.
The abrupt end of war with Japan caused the cancellation of those
contracts which had been placed on the assumption that the war would
continue for a longer period.
It was obvious that the reduction in vehicle
activity would be considerable but that figures would not be available for
some time; and to give immediate relief to industry, all outstanding contracts
were cancelled except for the most obvious requirements such as spares for
the latest types coming off production or items in chronic short supply.
PROVISION OF GENERAL STORES
The provision of general stores throughout the war was directly governed
by the principles set down at the beginning of this chapter and apart from
capital liabilities maintenance requirements were assessed on a 12 months'
maintenance period, a five months' store margin and a six months' interim
To cater for the increased consumption, maintenance figures were on the
outbreak of war, generally arbitrarily raised in the light of the known factors
as regards the probable expansion of the Army and the types of articles
concerned.
This action provided for an increased flow of stores from industry
which was subsequently adjusted by alterations in the maintenance figure as
occasion demanded.
At the outbreak of war a great volume of stores were coming in from
These were mainly capital requirements for which provision
had been made before the outbreak of war, under five main headings.
Firstly there were accommodation and training stores for the Militia; these
were found to be of somewhat doubtful value in the real emergency, in that
the comparatively luxurious scales had raised production difficulties incom-
mensurate with the results achieved.
There was also the war equipment for the Territorial Army which had been
doubled; this proved a godsend in that not only were the stores of great
value at the time of Dunkirk but it reduced the initial production lag on a
large range of vital stores.
In the third place there were the stores provided under the Master General
of Ordnance (M.G.O.) War Reserve Schedules for the maintenance of the
Expeditionary Force; to a great degree these proved inadequate, particularly
87
