RVICES
At first, individual formations were served by the same R.A.M.O. for as
long as possible; later, however, all formations were made dependent upon
a base depot. It was immaterial which R.A.M.O. actually flew in the stores,
so long as they were supplied at the right place and at the right time.
The role of the R.A.M.O., from the Ordnance point of view, became
that of a transit centre, with the exception of the authorized stocks of
ammunition, the principle now observed being that formations were based
on B.O.Ds., and that the R.A.M.O. was the forwarding agency only.
STORE HANDLING EQUIPMENT
Of the eight airfields which were operated by A.A.T.O., two had all-
weather service roads to both storage accommodation and loading bays,
and four had earth or metal-stripped roads to storage and metal-stripped
roads to loading bays.
Conditions were not ideal and it was only possible
to operate mobile trucks and mechanical handling equipment (" forklift"
trucks) at three of the airfields.
Holmes Wreckers were employed at all
R.A.M.Os. and were reasonably successful, except that they could not lift
loads sufficiently high to place them in certain types of aircraft without
the help of ramps and level platforms.
Gravity rollers were used whenever available, especially for ammunition.
It was found that a ramp placed on a three-ton lorry, and set to the height
of four feet made a useful base for loading items into C.46 aircraft.
ramps, up which heavy items were manhandled by means of wooden rollers
and ropes, were used when forklift trucks could not be employed because
Perhaps the most noteworthy effort in air supply in this theatre was the
fly-in of 105 Sherman tank engines, each weighing 2 tons 17 cwt., plus 105
Stuart tank engines weighing 14 cwt. and 83 Lee Grant engines weighing
The aircraft used had to be C.46, owing to the heavy load, and
the difficulties of loading and lashing were considerable.
gaining necessary height by the use of a ramp and level platform, were
used to load the engines into aircraft at R.A.M.Os.
a forklift truck into assemblies, and this was flown together with a ramp,
platform and craftsmen, to the forward strip (Meiktila) where the truck
was re-assembled; this handling equipment was flown in some five hours
before the first tank engine, and on arrival of the first sortie, all was ready.
The tank formations concerned were fully re-equipped and the advance
continued without delay.
VOLUME OF STORES HANDLED
During the period March to August, 1945, over 16,000 tons of ammunition
and 10,000 tons of ordnance stores were carried by air.
This represented
just 10 per cent. of the total tonnage carried by air during the period.
Ammunition Supply
In January, 1944, there were four lines of supply for ammunition:-
(a) Arakan L. of C. serving XV Indian Corps.
An advanced ammuni-
tion depot (443 (I) A.A.D.), was situated at Chittagong.
depot served 60 O.F.D. situated at Ulta Kali and 62 Ö.F.D. at
280
Ukia, 40 miles north of Maungdaw.
Ammunition was sent to the
O.F.Ds. by lighter and then forward to the ammunition points by
lorry.
(b) Dimapur-Imphal L. of C. serving IV Corps.
The advanced base
comprised 445 (I) A.A.D. at Manipur Road and 441 (I) A.A.D.
at Palel, approximately 150 miles forward of Dimapur. 445 A.A.D.
received from India and issued to 441 A.A.D., which in turn fed
51 and 52 O.F.D. each serving a division.
53 O.F.D. was situated
at Imphal and catered for the troops in that area.
(c) Gauhati-Ledo L. of C. serving troops in North Burma and Fort
Hertz. This line served troops in North Burma and also held most
of the A.A. ammunition for the defence of the base installations.
It also dealt with the training areas near Shillong.
Ammunition
was received from India at 54 O.F.D. at Gauhati, through 58
Ordnance Depot at Ledo.
(d) Eastern Bengal L. of C. serving all units in Eastern Bengal.
A.A.D. was located at Mymensingh and served 59 O.F.D. at Comilla
and 61 O.F.D. at Silchar.
The stock position at this time was not at all satisfactory ; the movement
of ammunition from India to forward bases
demands placed by Fourteenth Army on India five months earlier had not
G.H.Q. India did not watch the progress of consignments but
merely passed issue instruction to depots; issuing depots when asked were
unable to state the quantities in transit and quantities awaiting despatch.
To complicate matters further, shell, cartridges, fuzes and tubes were often
issued from different depots thousands of miles apart, and eight weeks some-
times elapsed before all the components arrived at forward base: Replenish-
ment stores were demanded weekly by H.Q. Fourteenth Army on G.H.Q.
To put the supply position on a firm basis it was decided to hold a
General Stores reserve and working stock in forward areas and the quantities
were agreed. A parent depot was established on each line and regular replenish-
ment up to the agreed holdings for that line was effected, on a planned
basis, at fortnightly intervals.. The period between demands by A.L.F.S.E.A.
and actual receipt by depots was eventally reduced to 14 days.
In January, 1944, 5th and 7th Indian Divisions were deployed in Arakan
and were preparing
to mount an attack in the direction of Maungdaw-
Buthidaung (Tunnel Area.
81st West African Division was moving down
the Kalidan Valley 60 miles to the east, with a view to pushing on to
Akyab should 5th and 7th Divisions attack be successful.
was wholly maintained from the air, it being impossible to supply them by
The 5th and 7th Divisions were supplied by 60 and 62
O.F.Ds. which were based on 443 A.A.D. Chittagong.
The British intention was, however, frustrated by a Japanese attack which
fully developed in the first few days of February.
were cut of and normal supply became impossible.
was not available in sufficient quantities so ammunition was repacked in
sacks, in blankets and in basket containers, with as much packing material
w027
WO 277/21
