(Ordnance) who interpreted them and issued " Marking Instructions" and/or
" Issue Orders" to D.M. & S. or to Longue Pointe Ordnance Depot in the
case of shipments from that depot.
Movement of stores to seaboard in Canada was in the hands of the Trans-
port Controller, a Canadian Government official responsible for the co-
ordination of inland freight. B.A.S. (Ordnance) initiated movement of War
Supplies Ltd. (W.S.L.) stores in a similar manner to that adopted in the case
of Lend-Lease stores of U.S. origin, i.e., by issue of ocean shipping orders.
Initiation of movement of direct British contract or mutual aid stores had,
however, to be undertaken in a different manner in order to fit in with
established Canadian custom.
The Transport Controller would only arrange movement of Canadian
controlled stores on receipt of application for ocean freight from the actual
shippers, i.e., manufacturers or Longue Pointe Ordnance Depot.
For this
reason B.A.S. (Ordnance) had great difficulty in controlling exports.
However, after the introduction of the theatre shipping priority programme
referred to above, the Transport Controller agreed not to accept further
applications for space without notification from B.A.S. that the stores had
in fact been accepted by the consignee for shipment in the ensuing month.
The Transport Controller, on receipt of applications for space and the
covering authority, arranged for ocean freight, either in vessels sailing from
Canadian ports or, in the absence of such opportunity, by application to
British Ministry of War Transport in New York, for space in vessels sailing
from ports in U.S.A.
The original staff of B.A.S. Ottawa was too small to permit proper pro-
gressing of Canadian exports and most of this work was done in Washington.
This was found unsatisfactory and was corrected by the introduction of a
basic progress record which was completed in part by both branches and
formed the basis of B.A.S. Sailing Cables in respect of Canadian stores.
Provision of Maintenance Spare Parts
Numerous difficulties were met in the development of a system of main-
tenance provision in North America.
It was found almost impossible to
obtain D.M. & S. or U.S. War Department agreement to definite scales.
first the policy was to produce main equipments to the exclusion of spare
parts.
This policy was dictated by the pressing urgency for main equipments
and by the influence of manufacturers who had little appreciation of wartime
requirements and who suffered no penalty for failure to comply with contract
requirements in respect of maintenance spart parts.
Another difficulty was that the Automatic Shipment Programme on which
the maintenance of North American equipments was based was frequently
altered. Consignments were constantly late and were sometimes over 50 per
cent deficient.
The U.S. War Department would not at first agree to any stable system
for supplying maintenance spare parts for the 2nd and subsequent years of
equipment life. The position improved, however, following the introduction
of Theatre Replenishment Demands.
Subsequent maintenance for vehicles
of U.S. and Canadian origin, and of artillery, small arms, signal and engineer
we 79714
WO 277/28
equipments of U,S. origin was made available against Replenishment Demands
submitted by theatres at yearly, half-yearly, or quarterly intervals.
Emer-
gency requirements arising during these intervals were met by special " Urgent
Interim " Demands.
The introduction of the Replenishment Demand system
reduced wasteful provision of slow-moving items and ensured that future pro-
vision was based on actual issue experience in operation theatres.
The problem of deficiencies was also serious. U.S. War Department and
D.M. & S. records of deficiencies were incomplete and it was therefore diffi-
cult to ensure that these were followed up and eventually supplied.
B.A.S.
(Ordnance) therefore provided their own records using " International Busi-
ness" mechanical accounting machines.
From these records " settlement"
lists were prepared and submitted to the U.S. War Department but issues
continued to be unsatistactory until late in 1943.
There was a general improvement in the supply of maintenance spare
parts in 1943-44 when the production of main equipments decreased.
Cycle
Unit Packing was introduced, forcing manufacturers to deliver 12 months'
maintenance
spares
concurrently
witn
equipments.
Further.
improve-
ment was also gained by the export of a number of "All Time Buys,"
i.e. the immediate export of all available spare parts for a particular equip-
ment.
These "All Time Buys"
applied principally to "A" vehicles, for
which the supply of maintenance spares had been most difficult.
To effect the maximum economy in the provision of maintenance spares,
arrangements were finally made for all theatres to submit to B.A.S. a return
showing the stock and declared surplus of every item of North American
production held.
Cataloguing and Publications
The cataloguing of Canadian equipments followed generally the British
Vocabulary of Army Ordnance Stores (V.A.O.S.) system.
In cases where
spare parts of British and Canadian manufacture were identical and had a
common use, the British Part Number and Nomenclature were adopted.
Where the items were similar but not interchangeable, the British Part Num-
ber was adopted, with the addition of the identifying letters "CAN".
the case of vehicle spare parts, manufacturer's number were used throughout.
In U.S.A., the problem was more difficult owing to a complete lack of •
uniformity, not only between the various U.S. Army Supply Corps but even
within a given corps.
A number of different systems were superimposed one
on another. New systems were introduced without any attempt to supersede
or even complete the previous system.
The U.S. War Department in the face
of strong and continued representation from B.A.S. admitted the weakness
of the position but could not promise a complete improvement until after the
To meet the difficulty B.A.S. (Ordnance) prepared and distributed a Master
Parts Index (M.P.I.) similar to the M.P.I. used in the United Kingdom, cover-
ing all equipments of U.S. origin.
This M.P.I. listed and cross-referenced all
part numbers in use for a given item.
B.A.S. Ordnance Technical Branches were set up in Washington, Phila-
delphia and Detroit for the preparation of the North American M.P.Is, and
subsequent amendment circulars for distribution to all overseas theatres. They
