Operations in the Far East
a overall strategic plan laid down by the Chiefs of Staff was that
should be given to operations against Germany when considering
stribution of administrative man-power and equipment.
Only after
leeds had been met were the requirements for the war against Japan
is being the case, ordnance services in India and in South East Asia
and suffered considerably.
They had to rely on improvisation and
ation to a very large extent.
e in 1944, however, after the 21 Army Group operation in France
en launched, plans had to be made to give India and the Far East
elp. although this help would still be only of moderate proportions
oops and equipment could be spared from the North-West Europe
ch information obtained from the experience gained in Burma during
id later in New Guinea and the Soloman Islands was available, and,
r to collate this the "Lethbridge Mission" visited the Pacific and
ia theatres.
e War Office, the R.A.O.C. standing committee (field force organiza-
as reconstituted to include senior officers who had experience in
East.
The terms of reference of this committee were to examine
force organization in relation to the operations in the Far East
commend necessary changes.
committee sat frequently from August, 1944 until October, 1944, and
members who had had
experience of operations in the Far East.
ges in organization which were recommended and later implemented
in the following paragraphs.
tandard war establishment for the divisional ordnance field park
1 proved efficient in North-West Europe, and no change in the
on of the personnel was considered necessary for operations in
East.
It was, however, necessary to
put this unit on a jeep and
sis, in order that it could be included in a new type of air-portable
known as a light division.
ght division ordnance field park was scaled to cover 1st echelon
rect to units within the light division; and 2nd echelon replenish-
R.A.O.C. stores sections attached to brigade workshops R.E.M.E.
ange was necessary to the standard headquarters corps ordnance
, except that the war establishment had to be amended to make
ir-portable by the inclusion of jeeps and trailers.
dnance sub-parks on the scale of one for a division and the corps
troops sub-park in the standard corps ordnance field park were
to be too cumbersome for inclusion in Far East operations.
It was
erefore, to introduce a corps troops ordnance field park and to cut
Inance sub-parks and corps and army troops sub-park.
rps troops ordnance field park (equipped with jeeps and trailers
rt by air) had the following role: —
echelon supply direct to all corps troops and that portion of army
oops placed under command of corps.
(b) 2nd echelon replenishmeR BMRA.O.C. stores sections attached to
corps troops workshops R.E.M.E., 3rd echelon replenishment being
carried out direct from the A.O.D. or B.O.D.
(c) Replenishment of R.A.S.C. workshop platoons within the corps
troops area.
(d) Holding a reserve of warlike stores as a buffer between the A.O.D.
or B.O.D. and divisional holdings.
The decision to include a tank brigade in the order of battle for opera-
tions in the Far East, required the organization of a suitable ordnance field
On the assumption that in jungle country the formation would seldom
operate as a brigade, but that individual armoured regiments would operate
separately under command of divisions, it was decided to organize the tank
brigade ordnance field park into a headquarters, and an independent section
capable of accompanying detached armoured regiments as necessary.
From previous experience in Burma, it was apparent that a very con-
siderable reorganization of the ordnance maintenance company would be
necessary, and it was reconstituted on the following lines: —
(a) The existing headquarters stores railhead section and tank railhead
section of the ordnance maintenance company were taken to form
an L. of C. maintenance stores company on the scale of one for
an army with the following functions: the staffing of stores L. of C.
terminals and the handling of all stores passing through these ter-
minals in transit: the holding of army reserves of controlled stores,
medical stores, general stores and clothing.
(b) The existing ammunition railhead sections of the ordnance mainten-
ance company, were reorganized to form an L.
ammunition company, on the scale of one for an army, with the
role of staffing ammunition L. of C. terminals in the army area, and
holding army reserves of ammunition required for the refilling of
corps forward maintenance areas.
(c) Forward maintenance stores sections of the ordnance maintenance
company, on the existing war establishment but in increased num-
ber, were utilized to form a forward maintenance stores company
on the scale of one for each corps providing sections on the scale
one a division and one for corps troops, with the role of staffing
corps roadheads or railheads and ordnance store dumps created
in the forward maintenance areas, and holding special reserves as
maintenance ammunition sections were similarly utilized
to form a forward maintenance ammunition company on the scale
was 797/14
WO 277/23
and holding ammunition stocks in the corps area (when not held
on wheels) for refilling 2nd line holdings.
Regarding laundry services, the weight and size of the single trailer type
equipment with which the existing mobile laundry and bath unit type
was equipped, ruled out that unit as a practical proposition for jungle war-
fare in forward areas.
Accordingly, a new type of divisional laundry and
