OUS
Kingdom together with a detachment of personnel of 15 A.O.D. to set up
a special re-organization park to receive back the old equipment and issue
one brigade of 49 Infantry
The equinment rendered surplus by the disbandment of 59 Division and
Division was received into 14 A.O.D., which
opened up special returned stores parks to handle the vast amount of equip-
ment involved.
Here the equipment was sorted, repaired and re-issued
to other units.
for servicing and re-issue.
Surplus vehicles were received into returned vehicle parks
It was considered certain that the enemy, even though he might be pushed
back from the line of the Seine, would impose a delay on our advance at
this point and would turn and fight again on the line of the River Somme
and other obstacles throughout North France and Belgium. It had been
planned, therefore, that the area in a rough triangle Dieppe-Rouen-Le Havre
should be laid out as an advanced Base, although even at that time it was
appreciated that operations might progress with such speed as to render
unnecessary the full development of this Advanced Base.
far as
R.A.O.C. was concerned, it was planned to establish there only a stores
transit sub-depot.
When the break-through occurred H.Q. 21 Army, who controlled the
allocation of all road transport, allotted every available lorry to the armies
with the exception of a bare minimum of general transport companies that
had to be retained for port and beach clearance.
In order to help the
transport situation, practically all the transport of L. of C. units was diverted
to support the advance.
This necessary step had a bad effect on ordnance services not only
because it caused a shortage of transport in depots but because it affected
the clearance of ships, some of which had to return to the United Kingdom
without off-loading urgently needed weapons and clothing.
OVER THE SEINE AND ON TO ANTWERP
The rapidity with which the advance from the Seine to Antwerp was
carried out meant not only that the British L. of C. lengthened to an
alarming extent, but also that the plan for the establishment of an Advanced
Base in the area of Rouen could be abandoned.
The entries into Brussels
and Antwerp on 3rd and 4th September respectively increased the length
of the L. of C. by approximately 300 miles but gave the opportunity for
establishing an Advanced Base in central Belgium with a first-class port
in good condition through which the supplies could be landed as soon as
the approaches were cleared of all hostile elements.
Such an advance in
little more than a week produced tremendous administrative
problems.
It had always been expected that somewhere a delay
would be imposed
by the enemy which would have afforded an opportunity for the build-up
of essential stores.
This check, however, never occurred.
Our dumps were
in the R.M.A. and the problem of supplying two corps advancing at an
average rate of over 40 miles a day had to be faced.
It was obviously
vitally necessary to exploit to the full the disorganization and retreat of
the enemy.
8 Corps, therefore,
was halted and all its second line trans-
port, as well as 50 per cent. of its first line transport was
temporarily
232
removed from it in order to supply the two corps who were racing forward
in the advance.
account but,
The opposition that they were meeting was not of great
even so, contact had to be
continuously maintained and the
momentum of the pursuit kept up so that the enemy would have no oppor-
tunity of again taking up a defensive position.
On 30th August a decision was taken to rely on the early capture of a
channel port such as Dieppe or Boulogne and to stop routing large quan-
tities of stores and vehicles through the R.M.A.
Stores for which early
despatch had formerly been considered essential were now held up in the
United Kingdom until a port or ports nearer the battle area became avail-
able for their reception.
Bearing in mind the satisfactory levels of supplies
of all natures in the R.M.A., it was decided to cut down imports from an
average of some 16,000 tons a day to only 7,000 tons a day.
This decision, which became effective in seven days, released, for the
direct support of the armies, transport which would otherwise have been
occupied on clearing receipts from the beaches and ports into the depots
of the R.M.A.
This freeing of transport enabled the advance to be sup-
ported continuously and contributed in no small measure to the early con-
solidation of our hold on the area which was eventually to become the
Advanced Base.
As distances between formations and the R.M.A. increased, army road-
heads moved forward to form dumps of selected fast-moving stores readily
accessible to the fighting formations,
and also to receive stores in transit
from the R.M.A.
the availability of transport.
The flow of stores, however, was entirely dependent upon
After the break-out from the Normandy bridgehead both Armies were
maintained by road convoys from depots in the R.M.A. to the ordnance
maintenance companies at army roadheads.
At the same time, a special
stores convoy unit to carry forward stores of extreme urgency was formed
from 15 Forward Trailer Section, a part of 15 A.O.D.
Subsequently, after
the armies had entered Belgium, stores were despatched by rail to railhead
south of the Seine and reloaded on to rail north of the Seine.
This opera-
tion was supervised by Ordnance railhead detachments.
The distances now separating the armies from the R.M.A. made it
necessary to increase the holdings of ordnance stores at army roadheads ;
15 Stores Transit Sub-Depot was, therefore, moved forward to Second Army
roadhead to augment No. 1 Ordnance Maintenance Company.
17 Forward
Trailer Section was also moved up to hold an operational reserve of stores
well forward in the Second Army area.
Similarly, dumps had to be opened
for the benefit of those L. of C. troops who by this time had also moved
forward to areas considerably distant from the R.M.A. It might have been
expected that in such a rapid advance the armies could have relied to
a certain extent on getting supplies from enemy dumps.
However, owing
to the accuracy of the air forces in bombing the railways, roads, bridges and
known enemy supply dumps, this expectation was largely unfulfilled.
Owing to the very limited space in the R.M.A., as many as three or four
vehicle parks were operating on the same site yet independently of each
233
2029157
17
wO 277/21
18
