One interesting problem which devolved on the R.A.O.C. in Middle
East Command was the supply of harness and saddlery.
The short campaign
in Syria during June and July, 1941 had resulted in the acquisition of a
considerable number of horses and mules and large quantities of horse-drawn
vehicles and harness.
To effect economies in the use of M.T. and in the
consumption of petrol, this animal transport was used extensively for the
carriage of stores.
Maintenance had to be effected mostly by local impro-
visation as only small supplies of repair material were available from the
United Kingdom.
Provision
The organization by which the whole work of provision for these three
B.O.D's. was
centrally carried out by the C.O.P.O. at Cairo is described in
Chapter V
This organization left the depots free to
concentrate upon
the executive work of making issues and had the inestimable advantage that
the stock holdings in the theatre as a whole were so balanced that the
greatest economy was gained.
Base Ammunition Depots
The first of the B.A.Ds. to be formed was No. 8 B.A.D., which was
established in the Tura Caves near Cairo.
Initially only one of these natural
caves was used but eventually seven of them were taken into use to store about
40,000 tons of ammunition.
In 1940, No. 9 B.A.D. was opened at Abu Sultan, about 22 miles south of
Ismalia.
This depot covered an area of about 10 square miles and by 1943
was able to accommodate 82,000 tons.
By December, 1941, a third depot (No. 2 B.A.D.) was in use near Kantara
on the eastern bank of the Suez Canal with a sub-depot at Wadi Sarar.
This
dépot did not operate as an issuing depot to the same extent as the other two
except for a short period during the Syrian campaign, but it was of great value
as storage space for the Middle East ammunition reserves and eventually held
over 40,000 tons.
Laundry and Clothing Repair Services
The influx of troops into the Middle East in 1940 raised, in an acute form,
the problem of providing laundry and clothing repair facilities.
A number of
mobile laundries arrived with the troops and performed some excellent work,
but their activities were restricted because of the shortage of water in many
places where the troops had to operate.
form base laundries in areas where water was plentiful.
It therefore became necessary to
The first base laundry was established in the dock area at Alexandria
in an existing laundry hired from a shipping company; work in connection
with clothing returned from the troops grew to such an extent that the need
for additional laundries quickly arose.
At Kafr el Dowar a site was found having power, water and drainage
facilities at which two base laundries were established.
some 17 field hospitals were centred around the canal area,
A little later,
No. 2 Base
Laundry was constructed at Quassassin and was operated by Italian prisoners
186
In the Middle East, as elsewhere, the conservation of clothing stocks was
of the greatest Importance.
To this end, all clothing withdrawn from the
troops because ic seasonal changes was sent to specially formed clothing
repair depots which worked in conjunction with the base laundries.
In addition to the repair and cleaning of out-of-season clothing, these
depots also undertook the servicing of clothing in current wear.
After
cleaning and repair the articles were absorbed into depot stocks, the require-
ments of the troops being met by issues of new or reconditioned articles from
stock.
A start was made by taking over a shed in the Alexandria area, and some
450 local women were employed to sort and repair garments as they were
received from the laundry.
The repaired garments were despatched to the
local ordnance depot (subsequently No. 6 A.O.D.) for sizing and baling.
At first work was limited by the skill of the workers to such repairs
as could be effected without rendering the garments unsightly with obvious
patches, but extremely good work was done in the early days, in cramped
surroundings and with an untrained staff, in servicing some 30,000 garments
weekly. A total of one million items were dealt with by October, 1941.
The growth of the Desert Army, however, and the obvious economies
effected by the repair service, were such that where summer clothing was
withdrawn at the beginning of the winter of 1941 expansion became an urgent
necessity.
In December, 1941, a cotton warehouse was taken over and
staffed with 1,000 employees.
A system of training, for both operatives and
supervisory staff, was inaugurated.
Canteen and social services were
instituted, and efforts made to increase produciton by improving conditions
and fostering the competitive spirit.
By December, 1942, the numbers employed had risen to 3,000 ; a further
warehouse had been acquired and over 200,000 items were being serviced
weekly.
The whole of the part-worn clothing organization was now centred
in the Clothing Repair Factory, Alexandria, the O.C. of which was also in
administrative control of the laundries which fed the factory.
On receipt from the laundries, the clothing was examined by trained
sorters, into " serviceable" " serviceable less buttons"
" repairable" and
" unserviceable".
Unserviceable garments were stripped of buttons, etc. and
serviceable sections removed before the residue passed to salvage.
Renairable
garments and those requiring buttons were repaired and passed to the
" serviceable" room.
Serviceable garments were measured on special sizing jigs, stamped with
the correct size, segregated by items and sizes,
and passed to folding tables.
After folding they were made up into standard bales and passed to the part-
worn clothing depot situated within the factory.
All indents from formations in Egypt and the Western Desert were passed
to the Part-Worn Clothing Depot, where they were met as far as possible by
the issue of part-worn clothing.
If part-worn articles were not available the
indents were passed to the base depot for issue of new items.
The amalgama-
tion of the nart-worn clothing depot with the repair factory saved double-
handling and transport.
67612
187
202947
WO 277/21.
