ROUS 'O' SERVICES
standard and the shortage of ordnance personnel rendered supervision sketchy.
Thus, by 1942, one depot alone had no fewer than 19,000 civilians on its staff,
yet the average time taken to effect an issue (not including time spent in
movement) was 28 days.
There was also a dearth of modern depot equipment.
Ordnance represen-
tatives at headquarters of armies and commands were under-staffed.
The
documents accompanying stores were insufficient, especially those concerning
receipts from the trade in India.
It is against this background that the Ordnance planning for the India
Base must be seen—
-lack of trained personnel, lack of equipment, lack of
storage accommodation, lack of transport, and large scale deterioration of
stocks through exposure and pilferage: these are a few of the major handicaps
which cast their shadow over the early expansion.
The decision to form the India Base brought about closer liaison between
the I.A.O.C. and the R.A.O.C., and a more widespread knowledge of up to
date War Office and R.A.O.C. depot administration procedure.
The supply
of essential personnel and depot equipment for the Base, however, remained
on an unfortunately low priority until the end of the European war, after
which the improvement was, in the event, too late to be of any great assistance.
However, the years 1943 to 1945 did see continuous improvement in, the
working of the Ordnance services in India, and they were finally provided
with facilities
which enabled them to undertake fully and efficiently the
maintenance of the Allied land forces.
Evolution of Ordnance Services for the India Base
The initial programme was to maintain a force of twenty British, Indian
and African divisions. It was also intended to provide certain ordnance
stores which were required to maintain a considerable number of R.A.F.
squadrons and shore-based Fleet Air Arm squadrons.
As previously stated, before the receipt in India of the directive from
the British Chiefs of Staff, a certain amount of expansion
was already
in progress in the East coast area.
This provided for the maintenance by
sea of some 16 divisions and 75 R.A.F. squadrons, and consisted of the
following main storage areas:
(a) No. 3 Reserve Base, near
Calcutta
- (subsequently
known as No.
205 Indian
B.O.D.).
560,000 sq. ft. of covered accommo-
dation for all types of ordnance
stores and ammunition, with addi-
tional open
storage
space for
vehicles.
(b) No. 4 Reserve Base, near
Madras
(subsequently
known as No. 206 Indian
B.O.D.).
450,000 sq. ft. of covered accommo-
dation for all types of ordnance
stores, excluding ammunition, with
additional open storage space for
vehicles.
(c) No. 5 Reserve Base, near
Vizagapatam.
250,000 sq. ft. of transit storage for
ammunition,
It was felt that as trafic to and from Calcutta and Madras, whether by
sea or land, might be interrupted (as in fact it had been in 1942), the safest
300
policy
No.
206 Indian B.O.Ds.
was to split stocks of the whole range of stores between No. 205 and
Major-General Williams,
This was the plan adopted and followed until
Office, paid a visit to India in 1943.
Controller of Ordnance Services (C.O.S.),
War
The C.O.S., having in mind the
lessons learnt earlier in the war, strongly advised against this course. He
recommended that clothing and certain types of general stores and ammuni-
tion should be stocked in more than one reserve base but that all warlike
stores, and M.T: stores in particular, should be concentrated in the Madras
Up to this time, the feeding of warlike and M.T. stores to No. 206 Indian
B.O.D. at Madras was planned to be mainly via the central ordnance depots
This course was to be followed because only the C.O.Ds. had
adequate facilities for the examination, modification and repair of stores.
This entailed a considerable amount of double handling, and the C.O.S.
recommended that, in future, the stores should be shipped direct to No. 206
All these recommendations were accepted. Their effect, together with
the now firmly announced requirements of the India Base, brought about
a large increase in the storage areas projected for the east coast depots.
It was decided to establish a B.A.D. in the Madras area, while the vehicle
sub-depots were eventually separated from the B.O.Ds. and set up as
independent and greatly expanded vehicle depots in both areas.
Expansion of the Ordnance Depots
As time went on, there came the inevitable increase in the maintenance
It was intended that No. 205 Indian B.O.D. at Calcutta and No. 206
Indian B.O.D. at Madras should hold two months' reserves of general stores
and clothing, with three months' reserves of warlike and M.T. stores, to
maintain a force of some 27 divisions.
Additionally, they were to cater
for the requirements of certain ordnance stores for some 270 British and
American air force squadrons and some 30 shore-based Fleet Air Arm
squadrons, plus a vast amount of military project stores. Moreover, ordnance
stores were to be provided for the civil administration set up in Burma,
Malaya and other liberated territories.
This project would have entailed the building of some 22 million square
feet of covered accommodation for No. 205 B.O.D., and about a million
square feet for No. 206 B.O.D.
The depot at Vizagapatam was also con-
siderably enlarged and used as an overflow for Calcutta.
The ultimate role of the two east coast India B.O.Ds. worked out as
No. 205 B.O.D. assumed the responsibility for the maintenance of
S.E.A.C. so far as its requirements of general stores and clothing were
In addition it had to handle very considerable quantities
of general stores either of ordnance supply or similar to ordnance supply
for the Civil Affairs services of Burma, Malaya, etc.
depot was dealing with 13,000 tons a month.
No. 206 B.O.D. assumed responsibility for the issue of warlike stores
early in 19a5tooethet tooth it me me called mon
301
