For a time the length of the L. of C. increased to such an extent that
the adequate supply of ordnance stores could not be maintained owing to
insufficient transport and the muddy conditions of the ground at 14 A.O.D.
Arrangements were therefore made by D.O.S. 21 Army Group to base the
First Canadian Army directly on United Kingdom Main Base depots.
was at this time decided to hold socks and battledress, etc., at the roadhead
and ration them according to the degree of urgency of requirements.
Salvage, in the Canadian Army, was a R.C.O.C. responsibility.
divisions the salvage organization consisted of a salvage collecting centre
which, though under an officer, was smaller than the standard salvage units
in corps and armies.
These salvage units were responsible for handling all
returned stores, whether serviceable, repairable or non-serviceable.
In
addition, they collected items of salvage such as metals, oil drums,
Even as far forward as divisional areas,
stores were
etc.
roughly
sorted.
Returned stores and salvage
were passed back by
Divisional ordnance
transport to corps where the stores were further sorted and then sent back
to roadhead by corps ordnance transport.
Vehicles going back to corps
ordnance area were almost invariably loaded with salvage and returned
stores.
At roadhead, two standard salvage units were combined under a
salvage headquarters to form a salvage company which handled all the
returned stores and salvage for the Canadian Army.
For handling heavy
stores such as repairable engines and other large assemblies the salvage
company was equipped with portable cranes.
264
PART VI
OPERATIONS IN THE FAR EAST AND INDIA
CHAPTER XV
BURMA 1941-1945
The Situation before the Outbreak of War with Japan on
7th December, 1941
The political separation of Burma from India in 1937 resulted in Burma
becoming an independent military command, the G.O.C. being responsible
to the War Office instead of to the C.-in-C. India.
In 1940 the command passed to the newly-formed Far East Command,
but on 15th December,
1941, one week after the outbreak of war with
Japan, it reverted to India.
It remained under the command of India, except
for a short while in 1942, until the formation of South East Asia Command
(S.E.A.C.) in 1943.
It was not until 1941 that an ordnance officer was placed at Army H.Q.,
although the H.Q. really covered the functions of a G.H.Q., a Corps H.Q.
and L. of C. H.Q.
Before that, ordnance representation consisted of three
British other ranks in the
"Q" branch,
all work
pertaining
to the
administration of ordnance services in the command being in fact carried
out at Rangoon Arsenal.
Later in 1941 a D.O.S.
Burma
was appointed
with additional officers for executive and staff work.
At the beginning of 1941 the only ordnance installation in Burma was
Rangoon Arsenal.
This was situated at Mingaladon about 12 miles outside
the city and was rail-served by a special branch line from the main railway
15 miles away.
The Arsenal was intended to serve about two brigades and
for this purpose was well sited.
It provided about 90,000 square feet of
tocommodation to warlike stores, general stores and clothing with about
20,000 square feet for the storage of ammunition.
There were some small
workshops.
The whole was enclosed by a high brick wall.
There was no
provision for expansion.
The expansion of the Army in Burma since 1939 and the arrival of an
Indian brigade group on 23rd March, 1941, with its maintenance stores,
necessitated additional storage space which was achieved by utilizing part
of the Rangoon Jail.
Simultaneously, five ordnance field depots (O.F.Ds.)
and
were
Moulmein,
Taunggyi,
opened—at
Nammwagon
Kengtung.
Mandalay,
These O.F.Ds. had been planned in anticipation of a possible
invasion from the East.
Each establishment held a range of all ordnance
stores, as well as ammunition.
The peace-time systems of demanding and
accountancy were in use.
At this time, the total staff of Rangoon Arsenal numbered about 1,300
persons, of whom 27 only were British.
The five O.F.Ds. mustered sixty-one
responsible persons
including
three British officers,
two British
warrant
officers and six British other ranks as the British military representatives.
265
I 7
WO 277/21.
18
