SERVICES
OUS
ISSUES TO THE U.S. FORCES
On 26th December a personal emérgency operations signal was received by
the Major-General i/c Administration from the American Commanding
General, Communications Zone asking for the immediate loan of as many
medium tanks up to 500 as could be made available.
given for the issue of 351 Sherman tanks.
Normal supply of our troops by rail was interrupted in order to allow
the assembly of the trains carrying these tanks.
The preparations included
a re-adjustment of the wireless layout of each tank to conform to U.S.
By Ist January all of the 351 tanks had been issued, 217 being moved
by transporters and 134 by rail, but the exceptionally severe weather con-
ditions delayed the arrival of some of the tanks on transporters.
other material loaned to the Americans about this time were one hundred
and six 25-pounder guns, seventy-eight artillery trailers, thirty 6-pounder guns
LOCAL RESOURCES AND ORDNANCE PROCUREMENT
A mutual agreement made between the Governments of Great Britain and
Belgium enabling the military to obtain stores and
resources in Belgium relieved the problem of supplying stores which were
already in short supply in the United Kingdom and in addition saved
valuable shipping space.
To implement this agreement, the Belgian Govern-
ment formed a department called the Office of Mutual Aid (O.M.A.).
organization delegated powers to burgomasters which enabled the military
to obtain their requirements, with the exception of the major transactions
which were conducted through the O.M.A.
production and payment for goods and services, including notably those for
civilian labour, were arranged through the O.M.A.
Similar mutual aid
agreements were concluded with France and the Netherlands.
agreements were made on a lease-lend basis.
importance was the local manufacture of 350,000 extended end connectors
(steel shoes, weighing approximately five pounds which when fitted to the
outside of tank tracks enable them to travel better over soft ground and
in snow); these connectors proved of considerable operational importance
early in the New Year and in the battles between the Maas and the Rhine.
Speed of manufacture was in many cases greater in Belgium than in England
where any new project had to be placed on a priority list.
For instance, at the
end of September, it was decided that, in view of our air superiority, an
increased amount of light could be used by vehicles at night in the rear
A method was required by which vehicles could use more light in
the rear areas and yet conform to operational requirements when in the
200,000 head-lamp modification
sets consisting of sixteen
different items, were designed and supplied within four weeks,
minimum of three months for the task had been estimated by the Ministry of
Supply in the United Kingdom.
CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT SHORTAGES
The provision of additional clothing for the winter assumed importance
during this phase and increases in the scales of protective clothing were
238
agreed to by the War Office in November.
hold two sets of battle dress, one new and one part-worn.
Each man was authorized to
A kit bag and a
fourth blanket were issued to every man in the force. Local production of
clothing was undertaken and 10,500 rabbit skin fur coats were made and
issued to armies in December.
At the end of December, the War Office
released snow camoullage and winter wartare equipment which was shipped
to the theatre in January and issued to formations in accordance with scales
laid down by G.(S.D.).
This equipment proved invaluable during the heavy
falls which occurred during January.
Certain units formed from Allied liberated man-power were equipped to
equivalent British scales so that they could replace British units in the
Order of Battle, thereby releasing British man-power.
Large issues of
clothing, personal equipment, A.F. G1098 stores and vehicles were made,
particularly to the Belgians, while issues to complete authorized programmes
continued concurrently both to French and Netherlands units.
The clothing
and equipping of Allied liberated man-power units was dealt with by
bringing over the initial equipment for these units from the United Kingdom
by setting up a special section in 15 A.O.D. to make maintenance issues
The Fourth Stage (15th January-8th May, 1945)
This stage began on 15th January, 1945 and ended on 8th May, 1945. It
covered the operations to cross the River Maas and capture the territory up
to the River Rhine (Operations
Operation "Plunder" which was the assault across the Rhine.
with the advance to the Baltic by Second Army, the operations of First
Canadian Army in Northern Germany and Holland, and the final surrender
of the German forces opposing 21 Army Group on 8th May, 1945.
L. OF C. ORDNANCE DEPOTS
One of the first steps taken by H.Q. 21 Army Group to provide more
administrative formations and units for the support of the advance into
Germany was the implementation of the decision mentioned earlier-to
shorten the L. of C. and to close down the R.M.A.
The first programme
for this task had allowed until 20th March for the transfer of stores from
the R.M.A. to the Advanced Base.
Early in February this plan was can-
celled and a decision was taken to close the R.M.A. from 20th February.
After that date the R.M.A. would be placed on a care and maintenance basis
and no further stocks would be transferred to the Advanced Base, with the
exception of ten train-loads of vital ordnance stores.
The depots in the
R.M.A. and the stores remaining in them would be handed over to War
Office control, and shipments to and from Caen would then be restricted
to the maintenance requirements for the personnel remaining in the area, the
export to the United Kingdom of certain repairable assemblies and unwanted
stores, and the import of coal. As from 15th February, the British controlled
area South of the River Seine would be condensed to a smaller area contain-
ing the actual depots and the ports of Caen and Ouistreham.
PREPARATIONS FOR THE OPERATIONS WEST OF THE RHINE
The concentration of troops for Operation "Veritable" was completed,
as planned, by first light on 8th February.
239
west 17
WO 277/21
