a wider range of distinctive and special clothing and more improvements
in design than in any previous war.
There were the distinctive berets for
different arms of the Service, e.., airborne troops, Royal Armoured Corps ;
there was special clothing for parachutists and tank crews: garments such
as shirts and battledress were specially treated to minimize dangers of lice
and typhus; to resist gas contamination; specially designed clothing outfits
for troops fighting in the jungle, for snow and mountain warfare, for arctic
climate and for service in the tropics.
All these patterns and changes in
design demanded from the Branston organization a flexible and efficient store-
keeping system, including highly intelligent provision, under constantly alert
Development of Central Ordnance Depot Layout and Procedure
The layout, the internal organization and the storekeeping procedure of
the five pre-war C.O.Ds. in existence in 1939 varied considerably. For some
years it had been realized that modernization was necessary and each depot
had been making experiments in an effort to improve the layout and organiza-
tion of offices and storehouses and to achieve an efficient, expeditious store-
keeping system covering receipts, issues and store accounting.
At Woolwich, the intention to transfer the depot to a new site ruled out
any major changes in the organization and layout of storehouses.
At Didcot, three accounting systems were in operation. Most of the depot
worked to the normal pre-war system of loose leaf ledgers with storehouse
tallies as operated in command depots. Experiments in the remainder of the
depot were carried out in machine accounting involving the use of the National
Cash Register (N.C.R.) system and the Hollerith punched card system.
Chilwell being a new depot started with a modern system entirely differ-
A control office had been established in which all documentation and
control of transactions was effected. Briefly the system was as follows: -
Indents were received at a central point and given a control num-
ber which was entered on every document connected with the transac-
tion, thus linking them together and enabling each transaction to be
watched to finality.
This watching process, termed progressing, was
effected by means of visible index panels on which were placed strips
The various stages of receipt
or issue were recorded on the strips as they occurred, any delays being
brought to the notice of those concerned.
Issue vouchers were prepared in the control office before issue
Storehouse personnel entered in the vouchers the actual quantities
of stores issued, after which the vouchers were returned to the control
office and posted in the account using N.C.R. machines.
houses there were bin cards indicating the stocks held. Fresh vouchers
were prepared in the control office for items which were not available
and sent to the storehouse to be held until the stores became available.
A duplicate of the account card maintained under the N.C.R. system
was used for notifying the provision branch when stock needed
replenishment and for other provision purposes.
The system of posting transactions in the
saction had been made was termed " post posting".
account after a tran-
In 1937-38 consideration was given to the standardization of procedure
and accounts in C.O.Ds. with the object of devising a system which could be
used in all depots both in peace and war, at home and in the field, thus
facilitating the change from a peace to a war footing.
It was considered that as machine accounting involves the use of power
driven machines and as ordnance depots in war theatres depend largely on
local civilian labour for routine clerical and storehouse duties (as well as
for unskilled manual labour) a manual method of maintaining accounts was
Experiments were carried out at Weedon and Chilwell, the one
involving the use of loose cards as in the N.C.R. system and the other using
a system in which account cards were filed in cabinets in such a manner that
the designations and catalogue numbers of items were visible in index form.
Entries on the cards were made through carbon backed slips which were used
firstly for checking entries, and secondly for notifying the stock position to
This system, which became known as the
" Visible
card index accounting (or 'Visidex') system " was the one decided upon as
suitable for use in base and advanced ordnance depots and therefore to be
It was in the process of being intro-
Branston being a new depot also operated a modified system of Visidex
accounting but maintained a duplicate account by using storehouse tallies in
each of its store groups.
The sequence of operations for the issue of stores under the control and
Visidex systems was: —
Indent registration.
Indent checking.
Voucher preparation.
Selection and despatch of stores.
Posting of account.
Provision action.
Preparation of vouchers for stores not available.
Progressing was effected at each stage.
The storehouse personnel were divided into: —
Selectors-For selecting stores for issue and marking up bin cards.
Binners-For receiving stores and placing them to stock.
"Dues out"-Clerks for watching the receipt of stores and then releasing
to selectors any vouchers held for stores hitherto not available.
Standard steel racking had been introduced for the storage of small items,
each division of a rack being given an identification number.
location in a storehouse of any item was ascertained by reference to a loca-
progressing,
This consisted of a series of panels similar to those used for
on which strips were placed for every item giving the reference
to the identification number of the rack in which the items were stored.
During the war the control system, with Visidex accounting, was gradually
adopted by all depots.
Many changes in the detailed
procedure were effected as experience
denoted desirable modifications and improvements. In 1941 it was clear that
45
22907
WO 217/23
