As much as possible of this work was done at the A.O.W. in order to avoid
the 400 mile haul by rail to the Base and back. At the start, the A.O.W.
was able to deal with 90 per cent. of the base repairs, but as the size of
the force increased this percentage gradually fell. In addition the A.O.W.
manufactured small quantities of experimental and urgently needed stores
on G.H.Q. instructions, and carried out instrument and wireless repairs for
all units in the forward area, as far as possible.
In order to give infantry units experience of active operational conditions,
arrangements were made in November, 1939 for British infantry brigades to
carry out short tours of duty under French command on the Saar front in
the Maginot line, near Metz.
Troops of the administrative services were
sent to the area for permanent duty, the R.A.O.C. detachment comprising
a Deputy Assistant Director of Ordnance Services (D.A.D.O.S.) and six O.Rs.
at Woippy three miles North of Metz.
The two B.A.Ds. were now holding 75 days' stock and were so congested
that further shipments of ammunition from England had to be stopped
temporarily.
At this time it became apparent that the general arrangements to provide
ordnance services for the A.A.S.F. were inadequate, the maintenance project
having envisaged direct supply from base installations to R.A.F. and army
Early in October, an R.A.O.C. detachment including a D.A.D.O.S. and
Engineer (O.M.E.), had been
A.A.S.F., but there was no pool of transport and labour in the A.A.S.F. area
on which R.A.O.C. could call for the handling and movement of stores and
In practice these requirements were met,
under arrangements made by H.Q. A.A.S.F., by assistance from various
R.A.F. units, but it was an improvisation
entailing considerable delays.
Ordnance store and workshop services in the area were developed by
small depot and a small static workshop, but the lack
of organized transport and labour for ordnance services in the A.A.S.F.
The activities of the port workshop detachments R.A.O.C. had increased
They now undertook repairs to M.T., pedal cycles, typewriters,
etc., for local units, and were made responsible for recovery work in their
In November, No. 3 P.W.D. successfully recovered an aeroplane
which had crashed and turned over in a field some 15 miles from Cherbourg-
the first of many handled by the R.A.O.C.
In November, 1939 the D.O.S. was informed that the first armoured
division would arrive in France by Ist May, 1940 and the opportunity was
taken to review with the War Office both the existing workshop organization
in the force and the additional requirements essential to maintain the
Emphasis was laid on the need for adequate numbers
artificers and craftsmen, fully
trained as Armoured Fighting
Vehicle (A.F.V.) specialists, for the timely provision of special tools and
appliances, assemblies and spare parts and for the compilation of technical
instructions on
stripping, repair and assembling of each type of A.F.V.
A visit by the D.O.S. to the War Office confirmed that action was in progress
to meet all these requirements.
By December, 1939 No. 2 B.O.D., Le Havre was organized and stocking
up in readiness to begin the supply of general stores and clothing.
Each
B.O.D. was therefore allotted a specific area of supply, No. 2 B.O.D. being®
made responsible for supplying general stores and clothing to all units in the
forward areas, except those in A.A.S.F., the Saar Force and in Alsace, and
to L. of C. troops in the Le Havre, Dieppe and Boulogne sub-areas.
No. 1
B.O.D. was responsible for the issue of general stores and clothing to all
units not in the area of supply of No. 2 B.O.D. and for the supply of warlike
of warlike
stores to the whole Force remained concentrated on No. 1 B.O.D. because
the total available stocks were too small to divide between the two base
It was, however, arranged that both B.O.Ds. should demand warlike
stores from the United Kingdom but that No. 1 B.O.D. should have priority
In order to expedite implementation of the above policy, it was arranged
that all shipments from England in December, 1939, of general stores and
clothing should be sent to No. 2 B.O.D. and all warlike stores to No. 1
It was also arranged that initial supplies for new
contingents, i.e.,
three months' estimated requirements, should go to No. 2 B.O.D.
It was necessary at this stage in the development of the two B.O.Ds.
to decide whether the function of provision should be centralized or organized
The establishment of one central office to co-
ordinate provision for both B.O.Ds. would entail duplication of stock records
and additional man-power and would deprive provision officers of the advan-
tage of close contact with and knowledge of the stores, an essential advan-
tage especially as regards the many new items of equipment coming into
supply. Each B.O.D. therefore carried out its own provision under
Assistant Director of Ordnance Services (A.D.O.S.) Provision.
The provision of signal stores for the B.E.F. presented difficulties through-
out the campaign, owing to initial serious shortages in the war reserves and
to unco-ordinated demands on the War Office by R. Signals and R.A.O.C.
The initial shortages were owing to under-estimation of the
extensive communications needed for the lengthy L. of C. and to delays
in production. In November, 1939, the Q.M.G. War Office, during a visit
to the B.E.F., ordered that all demands on the War Office for signal stores,
whether telephoned or telegraphed, should invariably be through ordnance
It was arranged also that S.O. in C. would compile each quarter
an estimate of the next quarter's requirements and notify revisions monthly,
provision of signal stores for the Force.
The method of storage and control of the S.O. in C.'s reserve was re-
viewed at this time.
The reserve was stored on ordnance charge at the
base, merged physically with maintenance stocks but separately accounted
for.
This arrangement deprived the S.O. in C. of the facility he needed
for intimate R. Signals' control and necessitated orders for issues from the
reserve to be routed through the Ordnance Directorate.
It was therefore proposed that R. Signals should form a signals base
depot and a signals park in order that the S.O. in C.'s reserve could be
stored and separately controlled by R. Signals.
This proposal was not
67612
F 2
wester it
WO 277/21
