- 2 -
bridgos fron the NOMIl while our own
SOUTH.
and infrntry got neross the bridge
or is roported to be helping
This does not woan that tho
gunning on the SOUTH sido of the rivor.
They have boon attacking t
against the inoricins nt GRONS WOK 7555 but without succoss.
Eur thor Si, the onouy holds leck whore 1052 end 1091 Reginants ha.
boon idontifiod.
This hovovor cavos no cluo as to the sizo of the con
force thoro, sinco roginental nurbors havo no noro sicifice tim to
in an obsoloto
tolo phone diractory.
alnost as much
boys and modically unfit.
"SuRLAND" and RIBINLAND"
which will crop up sonowhore or othor in the none futuro.
shov in of aron i into intox st to this corps is a capturol nap which
Corps "PIDT" whose HQ is shown at HÜLS 1.1509.
IJS rivor botwoon DEVIVER Z.90 and ZOLLE 15 milos NORIH of thore.
It is a striking corincilonce therefore that the nap should show Regt
This man, incidontally, is wantol for the murdor of Canndio Pil.
His guilt,
suspected by us, is confirnod by WUNSCHE,
Co, 12 ss
Tank Rogiment, who was
of courso it my not 3o the suno BRAPUR, but
tho scont is worth following.
Io sun up therefore the chony forn is as follows:
Iwo Hone Guard Divisions plus tonk na flnk oddments thought to
DO NORIH of the NDIJN, and possibly engrod right now at ARNIM.
SE of NICa cout helf a division end the proniso of more to cono.
On our I of C aru parachute ind GI ramants, and likoly to push
reninst the loft
Monk tro drovos of ill organised infantry
fran the BUST-DSCUT conal (for vithuraval is inoviteblo after our
vithdrawing
success today) i coning over fro the SCIDI forries.
Instly, fink, both hoovy ind light, il over the place.
1 h
(brigadior,
donoral Staff.
ably in the noor future.
prising if tho prosent forco of four battalions or so incronses concior-
Fron AnNiE, thore is little coheront nows.
and it is not known whothor we still hold the bridge.
in the area 6978 urg boing atinckod fron tho LiST ond vaSt.
barges md
chased out the onory and stunblod upon in FiC of no noa
ono, precious to the onony, for it was not long bofore they were back in
again trying to replonish.
ma 12 Para Rocco In, both nowly forned units and not
Idontifications aro fron 3 In 1 Parn logt
presont in strongthey
If this depot is corily important howover the onony will obviously make
sone offort to hold it.
on our loft our neighbours have gained the ling of the road botwoo
3015 cni 3010, but roport stifi
opposition fron the inSI at 3002.
are however no frosh idontifications on this front.
on the right our frionds havo socurod Lout ena lamoNt both just
short of tho Dutch frontior.
There are no
HUMOND is roportod by civilions to bo hold by out one battalion và th
sono tanks and sappors who an our to be nining thu IuST bank of tho cranc.
Iur thor SE,
tho inorions have taken SITUD K.66 md hold a rough
line fron there
nd throu
i thing to chi thing they sin
nre round tho town on thrue sidos
12 Division, newly
illios roport that it shot has rohioved good
linin HQ 30 Corps
I.0S. 0300..
/Tho pi bés. .....
WO 171/341
14625591
Return by (20/11/2025 14:25:16
9991969 (Alb
Docun
Document orde
