NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
nd to
organisation and administration.
data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
AR. Call be ted i daily, each entry ratione ay tie it appeal to, rep it, on.
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
VOTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
r other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
(* and deant osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(1) at oates in overent in thor at trenty, our hours and presen
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations. Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
f mobilisation or
ODeratione
important phases.
s, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
dinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
36), and personal
is representatives.
ar diaries will be
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viji) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
VOTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time the
iccun, or cone to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vil) might be added.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A time of each field return (A.F. W. 3008 and AF, W 3009) and of each operation or
the war dier or instruction issued during the period covered by the curent volume of
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
See F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
ni come No. The the tom entered second b the tin the ion in oh ot
concerned.
e given in the text, er mo
- WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Unith Port Armunition Detachment R.A.
Commanding Officer CAPT D. G. BRAY.
References to Appendic
Month and Year AUGUST 1944.
angrune-sur-mer.
Assisted by P.O.D's on beaches.
Commenced full P.S. Ration Scale. tyb
Weekly Strength Returns. Туb
First washing and exchange of blankets and denins carried oute teß
10
A11 ships started moving from OBOE to NAN beach...
Ship No. 2056 holed by
onemy action, amunition damaged (see Appendix "A") зв.
OBOE: beach olosed down completely ogl
12
BARIES
WAR
Weekly Strength R turns. asl
O.C. 44 Port Ammunition Detachment R.A. O.C. assumed command of 40 Port
5 - SEP 1944*
Immunition Detachment owing to the latter being away on duty. (Authority
* G.H.Q. 217 ECHELON:
3 Port Operating Group Routine Order No 342 dated 13th August 1944) Dsb
ommenced working on NAN beach. arb
Received 15 cut. Ford 4 x 2 G.S. Truok W.D. No 25502245. Pl
15
Unit assumed maximm state of preparedness in case of enemy attack. One
section detailed to aleep fully dressed nightly until furhher notice. Dub
Vely Strength Returase TB
Appendix "B"
Appendix "C"
Appendix "D"
Bulk
