INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
PArA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command
or appointment by :-
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
nd area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
ii) Unit commanders.
vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks o
licers and the number of other ranks or fol
vos dna or animal.
ii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
n addition in the case of units on the L.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
occur, or come to notice.
NorE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
t the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be addec
NoTe A.-In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
(i) Acting of each it retion issued dising the perio covered by to cach operation o
outine order or instruction i
the war diary.
Vy the current voi
VoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
The war will orden,, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3).
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide
pa provide data dion ve See to se object is to furnish a hi trial record opipation,
data upon
organisation and administration.
operations furnished in the
to appendices will be made in the last column of A. I Canaming the author. References
See PARA., on diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
VoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer
or other person shout he made dear, that the officer who initiato the entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
1) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued.
no decisions taken.
1) Dally locations. Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
111) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
2nd Echelon to be t
SPECIAL NOTE. —The time entered should be the time the information or order
The time of the
event recorded should also be given in the text, if k
Covering Letter.
Referenee No.PAP/wy/5/3...
To. Under Secretary of State (CT), War Office.
I enclose Ver Diary (A.T.C.2118) as indicated on this page.
Please return receipt below to address given.
Signature...
D.C. 44 PORT AMMU
In Lieu of ARMY FOR C. 212
SECREE
Strike out where netrage
) not applicable.
1. 0)..
12
1.3
7.6
18
19
27.
S/Sat A.E. nroceaded
course.
W,O. IT rejoined Inite
Two Cornoral Storeman!
Three Pte Storemen/ Amn
S/Sot AF. posted to 2
Col Clerk neioined TInil
(Wandsworth.) Technical
S/Sgt A.1, rejoined un
Orders received from R
Wt. 84859.1676 800,000 11/13 W. H. & S
Wt.34859 1676 800,000 11/13
444.
PrOn...
Appendices,
WAR
DIARI
of
AMMUNITION
st FEB.
DETACHMENT
R. A.O.C.
!944.......
cuments in your Bulk Or
e you have requested,
more of your doc
nents - Enquire a
documents are in
Desk for full details
