The Battle of the Falaise Gap
(9) When Hitler conceived this plan on the gth, it was too
late: the 35th Infantry Division was to occupy the cor-
ridor between the First and Third U.S. Armies.
(IO) Reconstructed dialogue from General Bradley's Memoirs.
(II) Quoted by Eisenhower in Crusade in Europe. (Double-
day, New York, 1948).
(12) Patton: op.cit.
(13) G.O.C. XXth Corps: 7th Armoured Division, 5th Infantry
Division and
35th Infantry Division, expressly "bor-
rowed" to close the gap at Saint-Hilaire-du-Harcouet. The
XXth Corps would cross France from west to east via
Angers, Chartres, Fontainebleau, Pont de Valvins, Troyes,
Rheims, Verdun, Metz.
"On August roth, as the result of a conference at General
Bradley's HQ, it was decided to profit by the enemy's
tactics, to carry out his encirclement." Eisenhower in
his Report on the Operations of the Allied Expeditionary
Force. But on August roth, Ike was in England reviewing
the 82nd and 10Ist U.S. Airborne Battalions. He had
flown from "Shellburst" the previous evening. Neither
Bradley, Montgomery nor Patton mention an inter-Allied
conference on this date.
All the decisions were taken
over the phone at o8oo hours, dictated during the after-
noon and personally checked by Eisenhower the same
evening on a visit to Montgomery at Creuilly (Chapter
7), studied in detail on the lIth during a conference be-
tween Generals Bradley, Montgomery and Dempsey.
(I5) The initial plan had a single sequel: Brest, whose dis-
rupted quays received neither troops or material, was
taken after a tough siege of 42 days—a quixotic gesture
in the American campaign according to Ralph Ingersoll.
Bradley, however, justifies this: "General Ramke,
manding the garrison of 70,000 German soldiers, was
determined to make things tough for the Allied lines of
communication."
(16) Ralph Ingersoll: op.cit.
(17) Dialogue reconstructed from General Bradley's memoirs.
CHAPTER 7
(I) Milton Shulman: op.cit.
(3) All the times in this chapter are German time-two
hours behind British Double Summer time.
(4) The ist Polish Armoured
Division (commanded by
General Maczek), incorporated on August 4th into the
Ind Canadian Corps, was a fusion of several units which
had fought both in France and Poland in 1940. The ist
Infantry Division had defended the Saar sector of the
Maginot Line before covering, at Lake Dieuze and on the
Xuves-Rechicourt canal, the retreat of the Fourth French
Army; the 4th Infantry Division had managed to trans-
port 2 complete regiments and a tank battalion to Eybad.
In 1944, the ist Armoured Division totalled 16,000 men,
two brigades (1oth Armoured and 3rd Infantry) four
artillery Regiments and usual services.
(5) Peter Simonds: Maple Leat Up (Island Press, New York,
(6) "The strategy of the Normandy campaign was British"
Montgomery maintains in his Memoirs. It is strange to
observe that on this vital point of the war the military
leaders showed great sobriety. Montgomery does not
touch on this problem of paternity, either in his Memoirs
or in Normandy to the Baltic, the official history of the
operations of the Twenty-First Army Group. Nor is this
problem elucidated by Bradley in his Memoirs. Patton on
the other hand does not claim the "idea". Eisenhower
alone mentions this inter-Allied conference.
General Brenton Wallace: op.cit.
(8) Lieut-Col. Repiton-Préneuf:La 2e D.B. en France (Arts
et Métiers Graphiques, 1945).
(9) Bradley: op.cit.
(I) A roadside Calvary between Estrées and Maisières, recalls
the tragedy.
(2) Quoted by
permission of Dr.
Gilles
Buisson,
deputy
mayor of Mortain and our friend Canon Léon Blouet,
authors of these lines (La Montjoie
héroique-Impri-
merie du Mortainais).
