58
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
But the truth was that the schoolmistresses of the Mortain
Sacré Coeur School and the curé of Saint-Jean-du-Corail, caught
on a terrain which had been swiftly recaptured during the
night, had just witnessed the launching on Avranches of 185
Nazi armoured vehicles
collected together in the face of in-
conceivable difficulties.' Energy
renewed by the inspiring
order of the day, they had crossed the Mortain crests during
the night and made contact with VII Corps along a 27 kilo-
metre front facing west, from Gathemo to Barenton. Operation
Luttwitz had begun.
So von Kluge had obeyed and at the same time disobeyed.
Obeyed by launching the offensive, and disobeyed by
choosing D-Day himself.
Hitler had fixed the attack for the 8th August but Hausser
had wanted it to take place on the 3rd.
That day the commander of the Seventh Army had tele-
phoned von Kluge who was still on a tour of the front:
must attack." Von Kluge had then called Jodl in Berlin:
must attack." Jodl had passed on the message to Hitler:
must attack." But the Führer was in no hurry. The miraculous
catch, he had replied, would be even greater, the larger the
number of fish allowed to swim into the net. The Americans
must be allowed to spread out into Brittany ... As many
Americans as possible.
The discussion dragged on. "You must attack as soon as
possible," said Warlimont on August 3rd. Next day it was no
longer "as soon as possible", but on the roth, "When each tank,
each gun, each plane is in position." decreed Hitler. "The roth?
But the concentration of XIVIl Korps cannot remain un-
noticed," Hausser remarked. "The Americans are reinforcing
to attack in the east. We must launch the offensive on the
evening of the 6th."" "Agreed for the 6th, then," replied von
"Not in agreement," cabled Berlin. "You will attack
on the 8th." Ridiculous, thought von Kluge. Four days ago the
Wehrmacht were only three kilometres from the sea, today
Mont Saint-Michel is 33 kilometres away. Tomorrow ... And
then calm and resigned, resolute after having been hesitant:
"They can yell if they like, I'm going to attack tomorrow at
The XLVII Korps therefore attacked.
Besides, was not its Commander, General von Funck, the
armour specialist, ready at last? Two hours before zero hour,
the ist S.S. Panzer, scheduled to be the spearhead of the attack,
was still crossing Tinchebray, 17 kilometres from its starting
base. General von Luttwitz's 2nd Panzer had still received no
tanks, no assault guns and no motorized artillery. As for
General von Schwerin, the commander of the 16th Panzer
ridiculously below strength: "he's messed up the situation,"
protested von Funck, "the attack on my right wing will there-
fore be delayed by several hours." 8
Despite these handicaps, Hausser refused to be disturbed.
"Attack confirmed, off to a bad start, admittedly. We must
hope that a good fog tomorrow morning will make up for the
time we have lost this evening."
At o10o hours all the original objectives had been reached:
Bellefontaine and Saint-Barthélemy in the north; Bion and
Saint-Jean-du-Corail, as we already know, in the south. In the
centre, Mortain was covered and Hill 314 encircled. The lines
were immediately organized behind the roads and cuttings, and
strong points established stuffed with tanks, guns and machine-
Surprised, hustled and disorganized, isolated from their
command, disorganized because they
were in the throes
of a relief, the troops of the zoth U.S. Infantry Division who
had hardly taken over the positions vacated by the ist Infantry
Division, gave in.
From the valley of the Sée to the valley of the Sélune, the
terrain formed an isthmus, an ideal jumping-off point under
cover of the hill. The whole length of the isthmus several
parallel roads ran in straight lines leading direct to the sea—
so many channels for an attack in columns.
The right wing of the 2nd Panzer crossed the main Sourdeval-
Mortain road at La Tournerie crossroads just above the crest
which separates the two secondary roads leading towards
Avranches, spread out at the hinge of two infantry divisions
of VII Korps, overran the anti-tank company which held the
village of Mesnil-Tove, capturing its weapons and vehicles, and
