3r0
54
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
La Varinière, vital because it kept the road round the massif
free.
"Have crossed river," was the next message timed 1645
hours. Orders were given to halt and to hold the crossroads.
But the Wiltshires discovered
an
unguarded path which
apparently led to the summit. It was an overhang with the
precipice on one side and the cliff on the other. The tanks took
the risk: one skidded and turned over, a second received a direct
hit and caught fire. The remainder climbed up as best they
could, reached the crest and sowed panic.
From the valley the success was reported. The C.O. of the
4th Wiltshires, whom John D'Arcy-Dawson, correspondent of
the Sunday Times described as "a tall, lean, sunburned man, his
features haggard and lined with tiredness,"
gave the signal. The
exhausted Wiltshires clambered out of their foxholes and
started to climb in Indian file; they met several groups of the
enemy whom they fought with tommy guns and then with the
bayonet. The slope covered with scrub rose steeply. The soldiers
slipped beneath the weight of arms, ammunition, spades and
picks. Night fell. Sleep won the day, wrestling with the fear of
encirclement, made easy by the thickets, the foliage, the forest
and the valleys. Progress slowed down.
"Come on, boys," cried a sergeant. "We're Okay. This isn't
an attack, it's a relief. The sth is already up there."
It was a lie, but Major A. D. Parsons said later: "This lie
helped speed up the advance. As we reached the top a thick
fog came down. We could see no landmark but we found the
tanks. They were relieved to see us, for Germans could be heard
shouting and digging in close by."
Completely exhausted the Wiltshires slumped to the ground,
their faces blackened, their uniforms in shreds, boots torn,
without even the strength to dig a foxhole.
To quote Major Parsons once more: "We had fought the real
battle not against the Germans so much as against the burning
sun, the choking dust, our parched throats and empty bellies,
the craggy slopes and tangled thickets, the rocky earth, and
above all against our utterly weary bodies."
The moon lit up the tortured, flayed, uprooted trees, and
watched over the sleeping and the dead. An officer of the 5th
Wiltshires, the battalion which had taken the brunt of the
The Decision
55
initial attack, began to count the survivors, using his hands as
a megaphone and launching the rallying cry.
"Hullo Wessex! Hullo ...o...o."
He advanced a few steps, according to Alexander Baron to
whom we are indebted for his description, between the mines
buried among the ferns, and cried once more:
"Ahoy Wessex!"
"Wessex ahoy!"
But no one had the strength to reply. Then, 200 yards away a
man rose slowly and silently from the foliage like a body rising
from the tomb. A second man stood up and then another and
as the men stood up the officer seemed to see a legion of ghosts
emerging from the bowels of the earth.
None of them spoke.
They began to advance towards him. Silently, like sleep-
walkers along the desolate, moonlit slopes they climbed mutely
to the summit.®
The plain, that plain so eagerly coveted for two months,
opened out in front of General Horrocks, who later said: "The
key to France was Mont Pinçon. The Wiltshires turned the key
which opened the door of victory."
A hundred kilometres south of Mont Pinçon where von Kluge
was already encircled, General MacLean's American regiments,
which had just crossed the Mayenne, advanced towards Le
Mans. Meanwhile Patton, that spoiled child, reported his 83rd
Infantry Division round St. Malo, his 79th Infantry Division in
Laval on the 5th August, his 6th Armoured Division
the suburbs of Brest on the 6th and his 5th Armoured Division
in Château-Gontier on the same day, his 8th Infantry Division
in Dinan and also in Chateaubriant on the 7th August.
August 7th. On that day, rich in conquests, Patton hesitated
for the first time. There was a rumour that the Germans were
re-forming behind the ridges which ran on a line from Vire to
Mortain before bending away to Barenton.
"I hear say,"
admitted Patton,
"that several Panzers are getting ready to
attack in a westerly direction."? And suddenly the Luftwaffe,
long absent from the front, appeared again. That day, the 7th
August, it had even dropped 200 bombs on Patton's own Third
