146
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
The whole of the plain of Dives was now in a turmoil, its
fate sealed.
"We had to retreat again," a corporal of the Wehrmacht
noted in his diary. "All roads are choked with vehicles. It looks
as if they are trying to pull the motorized columns out of the
pocket first." 1
Von Kluge, via patches of cover, pressed on to Nécy, stalked
by the fighter bombers which seemed to have eyes only for the
two cars. The heat, fatigue and tension exhausted the Feld-
marschall. The rendezvous with the two generals was now
only 8 kilometres away. But the Allied aircraft continued to
circle overhead. Von Kluge was at the end of his tether. His
aide Tangermann left the car and got on a bicycle, while the
C.-in-C. waited under a clump of trees. The lone cyclist arrived
at Nécy too late.
Eberbach having waited two to three hours on the tiny
church square had returned to his headquarters at the Rouvre.
Von Kluge decided to push on "to see Eberbach whatever
happens."
"The situation on the main front before and west of Argen-
tan is deteriorating from hour to hour," Blumentritt, Chief of
Staff of the Army Groups, telephoned to Jodl. "The enemy is
attacking everywhere west of Argentan."
It was 1830 hours. The cornerstones of the battlefield were
Flers, Vassy, and Condé, hemmed in from north and south. But
the attack which
preoccupied Blumentritt was the one on
Rânes.
Rânes, occupied by the 3rd U.S. Armoured Division, was the
scene of Eberbach's counter-attack in the direction of Sées,
which Berlin refused to abandon. "The Eberbach attack is a
vital necessity," was Jodl's reply to Blumentritt's telephone
call. And Berlin insisted: "The Argentan-Dreux sector must be
held at all costs." But that evening the Canadians at a point 4
kilometres north of Falaise and the Americans at the crossroads
south of Gacé gave von Kluge a corridor of only 27 kilometres
along N 158.
The Encirclement
"Where is von Kluge?"
Only he and his aide Tangermann could tell. He was on the
way to Briance now that night was falling and the fighter
bombers had gone home.
But Saint-Germain-en-Laye did not know this. "Perhaps he
is wounded, or has had a breakdown and cannot get in touch,"
stuttered Blumentritt.
"I received the last message at 0930
hours from his portable transmitter. Since then nothing." ?
Eberbach was constantly questioned at his HQ.
"Where is Feldmarschall von Kluge?" insisted B Army
"I waited three hours for the C.-in-C. West on Nécy square.
He did not turn up."
"Where is Feldmarschall von Kluge?" asked the Führer an
hour later, taking advantage of the call to order General
Hausser "to penetrate in the Sées sector where the enemy is
threatening to encircle three armies."
"I don't know," replied Eberbach.
"Find out the approximate whereabouts of von Kluge,"
stormed Hitler. "Report to me hour by hour."
"This situation made me very nervous," admitted Eberbach
whose Chief of Staff was the Feldmarschall's son—Lieutenant-
Colonel von Kluge. Anxiety increased when cries of joy dis-
turbed the night: C.-in-C. West was there, he had managed to
extricate himself from the "chaotic night traffic."
"So he must have had some personal experience of the
desperate road conditions to the rear," Eberbach could not help
admitting disrespectfully.
The C.-in-C. West had taken six hours to cover 80 kilo-
metres. Eberbach immediately sent a radio message to La
"The Herr Feldmarschall has reached Seventh
Army Tactical HQ." It was in vain, the message never reached
Blumentritt. The consequences of this faulty liaison were to be
At Saint-Germain-en-Laye Blumentritt was struggling on the
phone: Jodl had been ordered by the Führer to ask the terrible
question: "Has von Kluge returned or has he gone over to the
enemy?"
The word was uttered and the die cast.
Unaware of this conversation between his Chief of Staff and
