302
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
the battle in a resounding declaration to the world Press on
January 3rd, 1965: "Montgomery was so scared that he came
in from the west. He crushed the tube of toothpaste and
squeezed out the paste instead of closing the hole. I have often
wondered whether we should not have done the work our-
selves instead of Monty and closed the breach ourselves."
The Canadian argument: "The situation south of Falaise
on August ith presented one of the best opportunities of
the war." This is the opinion of Colonel C. P. Stacey, head of
the Historical section of the Canadian Army, charged by the
Ministry of Defence to write the official history of the Can-
adian Army in the Second World War. "First Canadian Army
made the mistake of not taking advantage of the front it held
on the fringes of the pocket. For their part Bradley and Patton
refused to consider their trump cards.
True Patton
did not
succeed in closing the pocket; but the stakes were such that he
should have tried. It is also true that an advance beyond the
demarcation line would inevitably have led to incidents be-
tween the two Allied Army Groups but this would have been
more than compensated by the damage that would have been
inflicted on the enemy by the closing of the pocket. Moreover
this demarcation line was subsequently altered twice. It would
have been common sense to have altered it on August I3th."
Seven years after the war Bradley still could not admit that
"we should have postponed our marsh on the hote in favour
of the advance on Chambois... Normally the destruction of
an enemy army is the first objective of any force... Was the
bridgehead over the Seine so important that we should lose
sight of this military dogma?"
Let us try and answer the questions posed by Bradley. First,
the destruction of the enemy army.
What do the Americans say? And above all, what does the
Supreme Commander say?
'Although the Battle of the Falaise-Argentan pocket did not
result in the total extermination of the German armies in Nor-
mandy, their fighting power was broken and our route across
France was open." This was Eisenhower's official opinion in
the official report of the C. in-C. to the Allied Chiefs of Staff.
The Surrender
Ike himself compiled a balance sheet: "A vast part of the
Ist S.S., 2nd S.S., 9th S.S. Panzer, 12th S.S. Panzer, Panzer Lehr,
2nd, 9th and 116th Panzer Divisions managed to escape. But
the 326th, 353rd, 363rd, 27ist, 276th and 89th Infantry Divi-
which escaped were only able to do so at the cost of losing
most of their material."
62 tanks and 26 field guns.
Let us hear Bradley:
chewed up within the pocket. The enemy west of the Seine
had been destroyed and as it fell the liberation of France lay
only days away."
Montgomery, who does not hesitate to assert that the main
characteristic of the Battle of Normandy was that it would
exactly as had been foreseen before
considered that "on August i9th, the end of the Normandy
Battle, we finally cleared up the remnants of the enemy trapped
in the 'pocket' east of Mortain. The final victory was definite,
complete and decisive." 5
Calculating the German losses from June 6th, Montgomery
reported on 19th August, 20 Army Commanders
taken prisoner, 2 Army Commanders wounded, 2 Supreme
Commanders relieved of their commands (von Rundstedt and
von Kluge), 40 divisions eliminated or severely manhandled,
200,000 men, at least, put out of action plus 3000 guns and
more than 1000 enemy tanks destroyed.
As for the Allied
losses-ascribed to the Falaise pocket
alone-Bradley estimated them at 19,000 killed or wounded
for First U.S. Army and 9,000 for Third Army.
Let us consult Martin Blumenson, official historian of the
Army: "Between 20,000 and 40,000 Germans
