162
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"In Rio de Janeiro?" asked Gunther." A new burst sprayed
the road. It seemed almost a relief to dwell reminiscently on
the fate of the family furniture,
rescued during the Greek
débâcle three years earlier by his father (at that time Polish
Ambassador in Athens) who had secured its safe passage to
Brazil and the embassy in Rio.
*
"Moving order for Provisional Corps," Bradley telephoned
to Patton at 1830 hours. "Start line: Ecouché-Exmes. Direction
north-east. The Canadians are descending on Trun. You will
join them passing by Chambois. Units engaged are the three
divisions of Provisional Corps commanded by
"I know—by Gaffey," replied Patton, delighted at last to
have finished with this front.
"No, not by Gaffey," Bradley interrupted. "For this attack
the Provisional Corps will be under the orders of Gerow."
"Gerow? What's he got to do with all this?" asked Patton,
completely taken aback. General Gerow was not attached to
Third Army. General Gerow, commander of V Corps, was 100
kilometres north of N 24 bis. One of the first American generals
to land on the morning of June 6th, 1914, at Omaha Beach,
Gerow had led his divisions across the Bocage from which he
had finally emerged south-east of Vire. "What's Gerow got to
meddle in XV Corps' business for?" asked Patton who had seen
Gaffey's preparations for the attack the following morning.
Gerow was not interfering in the affairs of XV Corps. Brad-
ley in his feverish excitement got everything mixed. At the
time of this conversation Gerow knew nothing of this: it was
not until three hours later-at 2130 hours- that he received
the order to report to his chief, General Hodges.
"Gee! Report forthwith at First Army Battle HQ." What
does that mean, he wondered. Gerow later recalled: "I took a
part of my staff along, I should say about ten officers, travelling
in three Jeeps. We proceeded to Army HQ as rapidly as We
could go?
At 2230 hours, General Gerow found Hodges' tent.
"You are to close the gap between Falaise and Argentan,"
the First Army commander began.
"But V Corps is south-east of Vire."
The Encirclement
forced to withdraw two of its divisions, and 2nd and 29th U.S.
integrated with XV Corps."
"Where are these three divisions?"
"We don't know," replied General Kean, Hodges' Chief of
Staff. "You will have to locate them."
"Tell me at least what is the enemy situation?"
"We have no idea here at First Army of the situation on
Third Army's front."
From o2zo hours until dawn there was an incredible mix-up.
On the one hand General Gaffey continued to give orders for
an attack which was to begin the following day at 1000 hours.
On the other, General Gerow was informed that as from that
night he was to take command of three divisions still under
Gaffey's orders. But the official transfer of command had not
been made: the resultant night of disorder was to have in-
calculable repercussions on the scene of the final "hunt".
During the night both generals were on the road; Patton,
notified of this change of command, asked Gaffey to leave Sées
with four officers and proceed to Alençon to hand over officially
the direction of Provisional Corps to the Third Army Chief of
Staff, Major-General Hobart R. Gay who, in turn, would hand
over to General Gerow.
But where was General Gerow?
On the road, with his deputy Chief, his G3 and G4, his Corps
Artillery Commander, his Signals Commander and some junior
officers. Let him tell of the extraordinary journey in his own
"It was raining like hell. We had in the beginning one
car with a radio but we soon found that the radio was out of
order and we were out of communication with all other HQs;
for all practical purposes V Corps that night was composed of
ten rain-soaked
officers in three Jeeps out searching the
countryside for three divisions with only a general knowledge
about the area of search."
After a host of enquiries General Gerow discovered the Battle
HQ of 9oth Division. There he was able to contact XV Corps
HQ which he located at the Hôtel de France, Alençon.
At dawn the two commanders, the new and the old, were
