246
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
divisions continued to occupy the Gouffern Forest, squeezing
the last German columns against the Canadian forces.
In columns running parallel to N 24 bis, the 9oth U.S. In-
fantry Division reached Chapelle-Saint-Benôit at 1400 hours;
a few Germans surrendered without fuss. At Miguillaume in
the plain, a road junction now a few hundred yards from the
British trying to reach the west, the Americans took 400
prisoners. They set up two guns and shelled Tournai and Saint-
Lambert until dusk.
To the right the American batteries strafed Aubry. At 1500
hours two Germans surrendered to the Americans on the Fougy
road; they sported a white flag made from the cover of the
Aubry church banner; while they parleyed their brothers in
arms wrapped the wounded in the copes and albs, and then set
fire to the church. At 1700 hours the Americans arrived: they
took 60 prisoners.
An American ambulance arrived to collect military and
civilian wounded lying near the church. But the Germans still
in the heart of the pocket opened fire. The ambulance driver
hesitated and retired: the wounded would lie there in the open
all night, the next morning and part of the afternoon.
In the centre of the pocket two villages still remained
"German". One at the far end of the cauldron, the other at
At Bailleul a Bren-gun carrier patrol of the 53rd British
Division arrived at the end of the day. "Most of the Germans
allowed themselves to be taken," says Maurice Dormois. Some
of them tried to flee, but others put up a weak resistance, but
the Tommies' sub-machine-guns proved persuasive. Picking up
the weapons lying around, the villagers of Bailleul set out in
pursuit of the Boches. Some S.S. with guilty consciences showed
the medallions which they wore around their necks and begged
for mercy: "Moi Katholik".
Two hundred Germans were picked
up in this way in Saint-Martin alone. Six others took refuge in
the church which the curé had bolted and barred and were
handed over to the British next morning. There was, in fact,
merely a patrol in Bailleul, leaving the town to its own devices.
Its liberation would not take place until the following day.
The Surrender
The west fringe of the pocket was now practically continuous
from the American to the British front, the latter joining the
Canadian front to the north-east.
At Tournai, it was hell.
The German artillery was firing from there and the allied
guns concentrated on them, particularly after midday, in
reply to the opposition from Saint-Lambert: the town hall, the
school and farms collapsed one by one in a village whose exits
were guarded by S.S. as though it were a fortress. "The S.S.
Germans at the dressing station installed in M. de Mesnil's
house had only one desire—to be taken prisoner and get out
of this hell."
Abbé Doffagne was among the Tournai refugees. He decided
to go to Saint-Lambert. He wanted to meet the Canadians to
plead the cause of the civilians and (why not?) at the same
way. It was 1100 hours. It was useless his pleading that he was
the pastor of Tournai and that he was going to find food for
medical orderly thought differently. He persuaded him to
supplies. Too late. Night had fallen!
obsessed everybody."
