The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"If the SS Divisions are withdrawn from the sector south of
Caen, the enemy will attack here and will break through here."
"I need your Panzers to consolidate the Cotentin, to retake
Avranches and to halt the Americans," interrupted Warlimont.
"If you take my Panzers for the west it will no longer be
possible to hold Falaise."
"I know. But the 89th Infantry Division on its way from
Norway is at this moment crossing the Seine. It will hold your
front on the Falaise road … instead of the armour."
"It's impossible to concentrate such a large number of tanks
without courting disaster from air attack."
"I know. The movements will take place at night."
"There is not enough room to deploy such armour."
"The Americans are already too strong in the south..."
Sepp Dietrich was right. Rennes was surrounded and Saint-
Hilaire-du-Harcouet lost.
"New units are on the way. I have asked for two Infantry
Divisions from the Fifteenth Army; the 84th and 85th Infantry
Divisions will protect the northern flank from counter-attack.
The First Army is sending me the 708th Infantry Division; it has
left Angers and is at this moment crossing the Loire. It will
protect the south flank from counter-attack. But for a break-
through I need armour, your armour."
Eberbach made an attempt to come to the aid of Dietrich.
Pointing beyond the golden plain to the depression of Caen
where the divisions of the First Canadian Army were massing
for Operation Totalize: "The main question is to know how the
front can be held in this long race against an enemy so superior
in equipment."
Warlimont promised two SS Brigades from Denmark.
"But," remarked Eberbach, "that movement will take eight
to ten days. It's too long!"
Warlimont promised all the necessary material. But the
withdrawal of the armoured divisions from the Caen Front
could not be discussed.
"To withdraw the SS Divisions and launch them in the
direction of Avranches will take three or four days. And we
don tiknow he the situation will develop here," retorted the
G.O.C. Panzer Group West wearily.
The Decision
43
Sepp Dietrich knew the situation here.
The spearhead of the German forces in Normandy, his I SS
Panzer Korps, had been successful against Montgomery from
June 7th onwards. The I SS Panzer Korps had kept the British
from Caen for thirty-three days. Its two armoured divisions
had been in the toughest actions. On the right the 12th SS
Panzer-the fanatical Hitlerjugend which had halted the British
8th Army on the Odon and had lost Carpiquet after bitter
fighting, had just broken up the advance on Falaise from the
south-east along the N13; on the left the ist S.S. Panzer had
prevented the Canadians breaking out from Caen to climb the
plateau leading to Falaise, and now Sepp Dietrich was being
asked to dismantle the formidable barrage set against General
Crerar. Why? "For an offensive, hypothetical in the extreme,"
roared Sepp Dietrich. "It's madness. We shall run into a trap."
A decision had to be made: the parties separated on a com-
promise. Sepp Dietrich would keep the 12th S.S. Panzer in front
of Falaise, but would hand over the ist S.S. Panzer which had
been guarding the right bank of the Orne.
Von Kluge immediately phoned the German High Command
with full details. It was 1210 hours.
"Plan approved," replied Jodl.
TABLE III
The German Forces in Normandy on August 3rd, 1944
(including the armoured units in these forces)
LXXXVI Korps: near Cabourg
Ist S.S. Panzer
Panzer Group
I S.S. Panzer Korps: Falaise / 12th S.S. Panzer
West
road. Sepp Dietrich
Eberbach
II S.S. Panzer Korps: S.W. of
9th S.S. Panzer
Caen. Bittrich
roth S.S. Panzer
LXXIV Korps: Mont Pinçon
LIst Panzer
Il Parachute Korps: West of l
2nd Panzer
Vire. Meindl
Seventh Army XLVII Panzer Korps: West
2ndS.S. Panzer
Hausser
of Mortain. Von Funck
LXXXIV
Korps:
East
of
II6th Panzer
Avranches. Elfeldt
