ChOUeT
38
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
fire from planes
described
"pretty chromium-plated
machines gleaming in the sun", "noisily acclaimed despite the
shadow cast on the victory by so much wanton destruction,"?
so intense was the desire for liberation.
Gautier's round took him westwards from Mortain to Saint-
Hilaire-du-Harcouet: 75 kilometres by bicycle along the NI77,
cluttered up with wagons, tip-carts and women's bicycles
"borrowed" by German soldiers on their way to or returning
from the front line.
The night before, August ist, the postman had come across
an American post at the Petit-Jesus Martigny crossroads: the
Ist Infantry Division was heading for Mortain.
"On your way but don't carry any money. It's too
dangerous!"
In return Gautier reported the position of the German guns,
turned round and went back to occupied Mortain where he
suffered the bombardment he himself had "ordered".
Today, on another round at the approaches of Saint-Hilaire-
du-Harcouet, postman Gautier passed a group of Germans in
their gun positions and muttered as he passed: "Poste! Poste!"
continuing on his way possibly to deliver his mail, possibly to
renew his contacts of the night before or perhaps to bring
news of the neighbouring villages.
On his return to Mortain he had an incredible piece of news
to impart. At the entrance to the town the gendarmes awaited
him, not to arrest him but to receive his "report". Postman
Gautier merely took some packets of American cigarettes from
his bag' "the first that had been smelt in the land since 1940."
At Parigny, in fact, while delivering his mail the postman
had crossed the German and then the American lines, and
repeated this on the way back: in this way Mortain learned
that on August 2nd, General MacLean's division was leaving
Saint-Hilaire-du-Harcouet twelve kilometres away.
Warlimont next went to Livarot, where he arrived on the
morning of the 3rd, to plead his cause with Eberbach, G.O.C.
Fifth Panzer Group, who was in command of the armoured
divisions which were to be redistributed on Avranches.
The Decision
TABLE II
The German Forces in the West on the eve of Mortain
German High Command (O.K.W.)
East Prussia
Feldmarschall Keitel
Chief of the General Staff Jodl
39
Commander-in-Chief West
Saint-Germain-en-Laye
Feldmarschall von Kluge
Chief of Staff General
Blumentritt
Army Group
Chief of Staff
Hans Speidel
Flanders Normandy Brittany
Army Group G
Atlantic and Mediterranean
9th Panzer Ith Panzers
Fifteenth
Army
Seventh Army
Facing the Americans
Hausser
Panzer Group West
Facing the British
Eberbach
"Warlimont oozed optimism," General Eberbach told the
Americans in the course of his interrogation at a prisoner of
war camp, but that morning he was extremely annoyed at
having already given up his
In6th Panzers to the Seventh
Army, and was not going to appear very co-operative.
"What would you think of a counter-attack by our forces
launched against Avranches?"
"A counter-attack with no hope of success," replied Eber-
