200
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
TABLE VII
fronts.
Montgomery on the western, eastern and north-eastern
First Canadian Army (Crerar)
Second British Army
XII British Corps
(Dempsey)
Il Canadian Corps
-
-
2nd ID
3rd ID 4th AD
Ist Polish AD
Falaise
Trun
in the
on the
valleys
hills
15th ID south of Falaise
3rd ID
9th ID
• along N 158
XXX British Corps
lith
AD
(Horrocks)
approaching
the
Argentan-Chambois road
The Germans still occupied twelve kilometres of this road,
from the hamlet of La Bergerie to Argentan, which was
Originally intended as the meeting point of Montgomery and
Bradley. That evening it was of vital importance to the Ger-
mans; like a huge sewer all the roads coming from the Orne
bridges, in particular the bridge at Putanges, abandoned at I 100
hours to the British XXX Corps, ran into it. The longer the
German LXXXIV Korps could hold this road, the greater the
number of troops would escape from Dempsey's clutches.
The struggling Germans were further hindered by the locals
who had removed the signposts: in this hilly region the roads
continuously fold back on themselves to maze round the
slopes, and never run straight across the plain.
which might seem ridiculous, had its effect.
This detail
"A shambles
developed which was repeated at Vauvert, and a fantastic
traffic-jam built up. The convoys turned in circles. Tanks could
be seen jostling each other and crushing everything in order
to get through "
*
To the south-west, Argentan remained quiet.
The now famous Ith British Armoured Division slowly
The Pocket
201
approached the ruins, fresh from its battles east of Vire against
the II S.S. Panzer Korps. General Dempsey's tanks followed the
N 24 bis to Ecouché. On their right a second armoured division,
American this time—the grd Armoured which had so far held
the hinge between U.S. First Army and Patton's army—
marched on Rânes and, via Fromontel and Batilly, was also
hurrying to the meeting place at Chambois.
In Argentan, however,
"that summer night was terrifying,"
writes an eye-witness.
"From 2200 to o6o0 hours, at regular
intervals, the guns hurled their shells, at first on the centre of
the town, then lifting the barrage onto the Falaise and Sévigny
roads."
At the extreme north of the pocket, the village of Merri was
caught like a nut in a pair of crackers between the British lines
and the lines of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division.
"Our
village was being heavily bombarded," reported one of the
inhabitants.
with its marker flares."
"The Air Force was illuminating the whole sector
To the north-east, from where the Canadians, now reinforced
by a new division-the 3rd Infantry from Morteaux, were
advancing, the hamlet of Magny, the south suburb of Trun, had
been turned into a fortress by the S.S. Cut off from the world it
would remain impregnable for three days. Magny prevented
the Canadians and Americans from joining up. The Canadians
threatened Magny but could not capture it.
German Staff consisting of a general, a colonel and a major,
arrived there at about 2 o'clock in the morning and selected
Gallet farm. Two of them slept in beds, the third rested his
head on the table. But two of the villagers had different ideas.
Pierre Dufour and Emile Loison ran through the night to the
nearest Canadian post along the river at Drieu Mill. They were
taken to see the Canadian colonel' and asked him for a squad
of 8 men. But the suspicious Canadians kept them at tommy
gun point and led them cautiously back to the farm. Convinced
at last, they leaped on the German officers who were asleep.
They awakened them roughly, and captured them without
resistance, increasing their catch with about twenty soldiers
sleeping in the straw in a nearby barn. They formed their
