250
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
reinforcements who were holding the road. "The civilians fled
from the mill beneath a hail of bullets and shells through
blazing vehicles and corpses. The children screamed in panic,
the women, their hair streaming in the wind and clothing torn,
were white with terror and blindly followed the men who led
them."
"On the morning of the 2oth," relates Johann Borner, "an
S.S. officer ordered us to capture a small hill in an outflanking
movement. The hill was held by the Canadians. The Wehr-
macht gave us rather older soldiers, but nothing could be done
with them. They had already thrown their rifles into the Dives
and simply did not want to know'. Parachutists and S.S. in-
fantry separated, duly warned that neither the artillery nor
the tanks could give support to our few rifles, machine-guns
and grenades. We were aligned along the Dives. The signal was
to be given by a revolver shot from the S.S. officer. We waited
with beating hearts.
This was perhaps our last chance, but
many of our comrades fell in this last chance. The signal! We
rushed forward crying 'Sieg Heil!' On reaching the height, my
comrades fell in droves. We used their bodies for cover and also
as parapets over which to fire. We took the hill. The Canadians
fled. At my side lay a lieutenant wounded in the head."
From Hill 117, a slight eminence overlooking the valley in
which Saint-Lambert nestles, Major Currie had seen these
German waves preventing the Allies from linking up. Here,
Major Currie, who did not know that the link-up had taken
place (he did not learn it until 1600 hours), had installed the
headquarters of the South Alberta Regiment.
"About 8 o'clock waves of German infantry advanced to-
wards our positions," he records. "It would have been difficult
to define this movement as an attack since there was no artil-
lery support. Let us say rather that it was a mass movement
of infantry. Our Battalion headquarters tanks took up their
positions and began to mow down the advancing infantry."
"My mates died like flies,"
a German soldier on
August 20th, 1944. His letter, precise and moving, was found
The Surrender
251
in the mail bags abandoned on the battlefield. "For several days
now we have been inside the pocket. We are supposed to hack
our way out of it. Two divisions have tried, but three kilo-
metres before reaching our objective we were surrounded by
British tanks. There is no command. I don't want to go on
fighting. God grant that we get out of this alive."
The Seventh Army Chief of Staff, Colonel Baron von Gers-
dorff, who had lost contact with General Eberbach, arrived
before Saint-Lambert. Dawn was breaking over the Trun-
Chambois road. His hotch-potch column was subjected to
violent artillery fire. Gersdorff had two of the 2nd Panzer's
tanks. They opened fire with their 75s on the Canadian anti-
tanks enfilading the road, crushed them and gave the signal for
a general charge: cars, tanks and guns "emerging from every
imaginable piece of cover" forced a passage, and attacked the
first slopes, surprising a few enemy
breach; disarmed by the Germans, they were simply left there
gaping on the road.
This new opening was soon saturated. "An uninterrupted
flow of soldiers determined to save their skins," relates Major
Friederich Hayn, "swept through this slender corridor. Colonel
von Gersdorff directed the traffic until he managed to rescue
from the cauldron Colonel General Hausser who completed
the course as a mere rifleman."
A terrific explosion rocked the courtyard of Bourgogne
farm. A few refugees ventured out to discover a dismembered
Panzer in a meadow 200 yards away. Trying to cross Foulbec
stream, the crew had run the barrel of the gun into the side
of the embankment. They had destroyed the tank rather than
abandon it.
At midday, "twenty S.S. men, looking sour and aggressive,"
burst into the kitchen.
"They sat round a large table in front
of the window and cleaned their sub-machine-guns. They must
have crossed the brook for they were soaked to the waist and
their boots were full of water. They gave us to understand
that they would fight and since the Canadian tank which had
