The Battle of the Falaise Gap
rushed from one HQ to another, visiting isolated troops with
no heed for the bombers which chased him almost daily. He
made desperate efforts to re-form a front." 5 The Feldmarschall
was at the very point of reaping the benefit of his insistence
"Your suggestion to transfer the Atlantic and Provence
Army Groups to the Loire line has been accepted," telephoned
Jodl. "The First Army staff has been given orders to leave
A new front was envisaged; the whole of the south-west of
France was to be abandoned in favour of a Mayenne-Orléans
line. Even worse, two divisions from the Pas-de-Calais and two
S.S. training brigades had mutinied. The news caused quite a
stir. A further telephone call put everything in abeyance once
more. There were indications of an imminent landing in
Provence; no Army Group G for Army Group B.
Von Kluge could not let the day pass without giving Jodl a
final warning. It was 1800 hours.
"The enemy is trying with all his might to complete the
encirclement of the main forces of the Fifth Panzer and the
Seventh Army. In practice, the encirclement is imminent."
At 2300 hours the first Allied shells on Saint-Lambert, Ville-
dieu and Tournai told their unfortunate inhabitants that they
had been fated to lend their soil for the greatest disaster in
German military history since Stalingrad.
"A litre of calvados for forty litres of petrol. O.K.?".
The Germans let themselves be tempted. M. Bisson, Mayor of
Loges-Saulces rubbed his hands: the mill would turn and the
refugees would have bread. 4,000 citizens of Falaise were dis-
persed in the farms and hamlets. "In order to have bread,"
Leonce Macary relates, "the country had to be scoured for
corn, oats and barley. Then the grain had to be milled, trans-
port assured under cover of night-often under machine-gun
fire—the dough kneaded and cooked with or without yeast,
with or without salt. At the foot of Mont Mirat in a rocky
hollow, Marcel Vallée was in charge of a complete camp of
noisy refugees. On one side twenty-two people in an open cart
shed and a family in a ditch behind a screen of leaves, gave
the impression of an inviolate intimacy. Elsewhere beneath a
huge canvas tent wallowed 30 inhabitants of Val d'Ante.
Opposite, a group sheltered under a patchwork of canvas
blankets, planks and branches on ground covered with rocks
and boulders. Ten Spanish refugees had chosen to live beneath
sixty feet of rock: they had to climb into the cave. Two couples
in the Grotte aux Fées ignored the water that trickled down
the rock face and dripped upon their matresses at night. The
ground shook beneath the bombardments."
Near Eraines, a tunnel 3 feet high and 3 feet broad sheltered
32 refugees. The shells made holes in the embankment. Cling-
ing to the walls, a crowd of college professors, artisans and
tradesmen sat there night and day. Each one in turn went for
supplies, bent double to leave the shelter, stumbling over an
old woman who, unable to slip into the tunnel, was forced to
remain sitting on a chair and endure artillery bombardment
But Hitler had not given up.
On the morning of the 14th, the Führer telephoned to the
Feldmarschall. "The present situation in your sector is the
result of the setback to the first attack on Avranches."
Von Kluge bore the brunt; he had become used to it.
If only it had been a "rocket". It was worse. It was an order
to resume the offensive. He had grown used to this, too.
"Eberbach will attack in the
Alençon-Carrouges sector,
destroy XV Corps, and advance sufficiently south to strike the
Americans on the left so as to avoid being encircled again."
"With what forces?" asked von Kluge, to whom General
Friedel had just announced coldly: "The gth Panzer has been
practically wiped out in the Forest of Ecouves;" to
General von Luttwitz had just cabled: "The 2nd Panzer has lost
more than half its total strength."
"With new troops, the oth S.S. and loth S.S. and the 2ist
The eternal shuttle service, north-front south-front, began
"Madness," roared SS Gruppenführer Bittrich. "The 1oth S.S.
Panzer is guarding Tinchebray. If it leaves the Vire-Condé
road it will open the way to Falaise from the south-west."
"Crazy," exclaimed Stücker, G.O.C. 9th S.S. Panzer. "My
