150
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
yellow and white standard of the loth Mounted Rifles Regi-
ment—led by Major Maciejowski had won a ten-hour battle
against Kurt Meyer's Panzers on the rippling slopes of the
valley before reaching the railway line which ran parallel
to the river. It had received a warm welcome from the anti-
tank guns on the opposite hills, crowned by Courcy Wood, a
marvellous cover for the 85th Infantry division of the
Wehrmacht.
Major Maciejowski's tanks were unsupported by infantry.
What did it matter? The men descended and formed a patrol
led by Lieut. Z. Maksymowicz. They advanced to the river,
took prisoners-Russians
information on the state of the bridges and the infantry
battalion guarding them—and with their Bes automatic pistols
searched the abandoned houses where military caps on suit-
cases and half-eaten meals testified to the panic of the enemy.
Meanwhile, still at the foot of the hill, Lieut. Polozynski's
Cromwell tank had received orders from Squadron Commander
Wasilewski. "Hullo. Stefan Four. Turn right. Drive along the
railway line. After the railway line turn left and make for the
"We passed under the railway bridge with beating hearts,"
relates Lieut. Polozynski? "I expected at any moment to see
its concrete walls collapse upon our tanks. Luckily tank after
tank crossed this unpleasant spot, only to be greeted once out
of the tunnel by vicious mortar fire. The first houses ... And
the bridge. We could see it through our field glasses.
was partially destroyed. We should have to look for another
Previously the 1oth P.S.K.—the heroes of Saint-Sylvain,
Soignolles and Estrées-la-Campagne-had crossed, according to
the account of a Polish officer "a desert covered with the
corpses of men and horses and with no sign of civilian life." 3
But this time the Poles entered a village which had apparently
preserved its peacetime image.
Lieut. Polozynski observed the river. To the right of the
bridge in the clear limpid water of a summer afternoon, mines
could be seen resting on the bottom: to the left no mines
but marshes. The Cromwell at which the Germans were now
firing, advanced to the river bank, while its crew hurled
The Encirclement
waiting its turn, emerged from the bushes, spotted the bogged
down Cromwell, threw it a line, reversed and dragged it back
onto the bank out of danger. There goes our last hope of cross-
ing the river, thought Lieut. Polozynski, momentarily dis-
couraged.
Fortunately, a few hundred yards away to the right, Sergeant
Laskowski of Ist Squadron spotted a ford which the Germans
had apparently overlooked. "Like a spaniel jumping out of the
bushes after a breathless hunt," says Lieut. Polozynski, "the
tank slipped into the water, crossing it as calmly as a cruiser at
sea; the Dives was kind to us." The Cromwell reached the
opposite bank from which, between two farms, a road led to
the hills, by-passing the village. Less fortunate, the next tank
got stuck in the middle of the ford and had to be towed out of
the water by its leader. They were followed by the Cromwell
of Major Wasilewski which, due to some miracle, crossed the
river unaided. In a short space of time the whole of No. 1
Squadron approached the hill which the Polish artillery massed
at Sassy had now reduced to silence.
this discovery of the Poles by the French and vice versa was a
mutual surprise.
On the other side, the fighting continued, a house to house
battle of infantry for the possession of the destroyed bridge, a
battle waged by the roth Polish Dragoons protected, not with-
out losses, by the tanks of No. 3 Squadron of the roth P.S.K.
One tank received a direct hit from the 88s and exploded at the
end of the bridge. Its driver was burnt to death and the crew
seriously wounded.
At sunset the ist and 2nd Armoured regiments, the pride of
the Polish Division, appeared. The ist Armoured had crossed
the river a little farther north at Vendeuvres, in a crossed
manner, thanks to a Sherman bulldozer which by scooping
out a side channel, had drained one tributary of the Dives.
The 2nd Armoured regiment used the ford discovered by the
Ioth P.S.K. Regiment, and spent the night at the foot of the
hills.
