254
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"The whole afternoon," says von Luttwitz,
"the enemy
tanks coming from Trun were still trying to break through
into Saint-Lambert, whereas our armour now held the road
leading north-west of that village."
This is not quite accurate.
In actual fact, Currie, who had spotted an 88 and a Mark IV
400 yards from his HQ, opened fire with eight tanks at a time,
destroying the 88 and its ammunition dump which he saw go
up in a magnificent explosion. He received a hot burst from a
5.9 as reply, and ordered about 100 salvoes on the cottages
which he knew were teeming with the enemy. He heard cries
and screams and broke off this half-hearted attack. A fantastic
amount of traffic crossed over the bridge which had become
an exhaust valve through which the whole pocket deflated now
that N 158 was in the hands of the British and, since 1100
hours, Argentan in the hands of General MacBride.
For his part, Lieutenant-General Badinski who, with his
276th Infantry Division held the Trun-Occagnes road, tried at
dawn to break out south of Trun. But the Allied air forces and
the Canadian artillery prevented this. The General, who had
intended to wait for nightfall to chance his arm, was taken
prisoner together with his staff by a movement of the tanks
of the 8oth Infantry Division. A very few units of the 276th
managed to cross the Dives under cover of a storm and join
Meindl in Coudehard.
This is what happened to General Erich Straube together
with his staff outside Saint-Lambert. LXXIV Korps commander
had decided that morning to give each of his five divisional
commanders a free rein. Cut off from all liaison with his
generals, he himself had no idea of the arrangement made
for the breakout. Without news of Il Parachute Korps which
he should have followed, without news of Seventh Army HQ
staff, Erich Straube set out that afternoon and met von Lutt-
witz by Saint-Lambert church. He helped him to regulate the
traffic on the small bridge, organized combat groups to keep
an eye out for Canadian patrols, then, during the evening,
made for the hill, reaching Coudehard at midnight, where he
met Meindl and helped him keep the door open.
When night fell von Luttwitz decided to abandon the bridge.
"I formed my men into small groups, placing them under the
The Surrender
orders of resolute officers and ordered them to march north-
east. At 2100 hours on August 20th I myself left. The enemy
infantry entered Saint-Lambert. The door of the Falaise pocket
was closed."
Not quite. At about 2300 hours, 900 men in small groups
were on their way to Saint-Lambert. They were the remains
of 277th Division which had come from the Falaise-Argentan
road, after sheltering all day in Villedieu-les-Bailleul. Short of
on Monday reached the Vimoutiers sector.
ing the 116th Panzer, crossed the village. His division aligned
along the Gouffern Forest had evacuated its positions that after-
noon under pressure from two American Regiments advancing
from the N 24 bis. All day Colonel Muller had been looking
for Panzer Korps HQ. The HQ staff was fighting to cross the
Dives between Saint-Lambert and Chambois. At 1800 hours,
Muller, furious to learn that his superiors were across the river,
A reconnaissance informed him that
Saint-Lambert was still under Allied artillery fire. The bridge
therefore was still passable. Muller reached the village, cleared
a narrow path through the ruins and despatched the divisional
staff, the remains of an infantry regiment, five field guns and
fifty vehicles. The group reached Coudehard and Orville with-
Less lucky, the group so far engaged in defending Argentan
- 8 tanks, 1o flak guns with engineers in support-lost its way
during the night, looked for a crossing avoiding Trun and was
Saint-Lambert was in flames. In a barn, wounded Germans
and Canadians groaned, tended by an English-speaking German
doctor and two German soldiers who had been
born in
America. Nine Shermans were smouldering. The blazing trucks
lit up the ruins where the enemy soldiers "fired, crawled,
