00
136
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
on the north slopes among copses, hedges and orchards.
of the 12th
organizers of Operation Tractable had assembled a formidable
concentration of armour, infantry and artillery, of a density
columns each composed of an
armoured brigade reinforced by
two brigades of motorized
infantry in Kangaroos, tracked
armoured infantry carriers,
specially adapted for the occasion on Sherman chassis.
"Yes," General Simonds had said, "there will be no excuse
for a setback." This was repeated by the leaders of the columns,
protected at that moment by medium bombers of the 2nd
Tactical Air Force: 45 Mitchells and 28 Bostons, which were to
plaster the gun and mortar emplacements held by the remains
of the i2th Panzer and the 85th Infantry Division, round the
villages of Montboint, Rouvres and Maizières, astride the
For fifteen minutes the bombers circled ahead of the moving
columns, while a wave of heavy bombers followed N 158 at
right angles to the front, to destroy or neutralize the enemy
guns, villages and strong points on the right of the advance and
to prevent-towards Potigny and Bois-le-Quesnay—any move-
ment between this sector and the sector of the offensive.
Their work of destruction completed, a weird screen of
luridly glowing smoke rose up like a cloud, through which the
leading columns rolled towards a sun transformed by the fog
into an orange disc. To the right the armoured personnel
carriers of the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division descended to
Montboint on the river bank so as to climb to Mont Joly, which
in happier days was the delight of tourists. The barrage sup-
ported the infantry, equipped with Wasp flame-throwers on
Churchill tanks. To the left, the tanks of the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division streamed down the slopes leading to the
Laison, preparatory to climbing the hills dominating the Dives
cauldron, now teeming with the remains of the Seventh Army,
so as to gain control of the Falaise-Lisieux strategic highway,
along which the enemy units flowed.
"Falaise must be neutralized so that none of the enemy can
escape along the roads which cross or approach it," the C.-in-
C. Twenty-First Army Group had insisted.
And Montgomery, aware of the slowness of his results com-
The Encirclement
pared with those of Bradley, put his thoughts into words:
But that morning it was still not quite the battle for the
Falaise road. Since Kurt Meyer resisted him foot by foot on
N 158, General Simonds preferred to transfer his effort to the
left, to overrun Falaise from the east, ready to head back once
the town was taken, and change course so as to join up with
Patton at Argentan as had been planned.
"Advance into the sun, always into the sun," was the order
given to the tank drivers.
But how to make out the sun? "The dust rising around the
area between Caen and Falaise during this fighting was terrific.
It was as fine as flour and seemed to penetrate everything.
First of all, the top soil had been broken up by heavy aerial
bombing. Finally the tanks and tracked vehicles finished the
can't get rid of it. It gets right through the mesh of your battle
dress and underwear and you get so dirty you begin to hate
to protect the Canadians was also to disrupt the offensive.
gunners had pin-pointed the spots where they knew
Brigadier General E. L. Booth, commanding the 4th Canadian
Armoured Brigade, was killed in the leading tank guiding the
column to the river.
A bad start and a bad omen; although the infantry could
jump from their vehicles to comb the spinneys along.
river bank, the tanks were halted at the river itself, which Kurt
Meyer had transformed into an effective anti-tank ditch.
What had happened?
Simply this: the previous night a senior officer of the 8th
Canadian Reconnaissance Regiment had ventured into Kurt
