Leno
11
Patton stops below N 24 bis
"Some of our units are at Argentan," Patton telephoned
Bradley on the evening of August 12th.
"Let me go on to
Falaise and we'll drive the British back into the sea for another
Dunkirk."
"Nothing doing! You're not to go beyond Argentan," roared
the C.-in-C. 12th Army Group.
"Stop where you are?"
"But
my tanks are already on the way to Falaise" 1
insisted "Blood and Guts". "We agreed to take Argentan our-
selves, but now Montgomery will.'
True Montgomery was to reach Argentan, but he had not
yet taken Falaise. Worse, he had not even begun his march on
Falaise, having been halted on the Laison.
"Haislip has been in Argentan since 1830 hours. We have
already outstripped the British sector by 20 kilometres. Maybe
more, maybe less."
"If Haislip is in Argentan," Bradley pointed out, "it's because
Montgomery sanctioned it on the 8th August. That's where
we're to converge on the N 158. Stop the movement: Sibert'
tells me the Germans have begun to pull out. Button up your
gaiters and get ready."
Patton hung up. The orders he had given his advance guard,
in the bantering turn of phrase characteristic of him, "to push
on slowly in the direction of Falaise", i.e. to take it, "and to
continue pushing on slowly until we make contact with our
allies", were countermanded. While Bradley, in Saint-Sauveur-
en-Lendelin, made the acid comment, "I'd far rather get a solid
foothold in Argentan than break my neck at Falaise," Patton
was venting his rage in the Tac HQ at Andonville, near Laval.
"What kind of an order is that? Given the go-ahead by Bradley,
my four divisions could have easily gotten to Falaise, and
completely closed the pocket." 3
"But we still have to cover another thirty-odd kilometres of
The Encirclement
claimed the anti-Patton faction.
take Falaise ... as far as I'm concerned it's a cinch." 4
town. Patton never in fact pushed on to Falaise, but halted
along the edge of the N 24 bis on the 13th August. Leclerc drew
up at Ecouché, with Combat Command A halted before Argen-
tan and Combat Command B on the Castelle crossroads.
attack.
For eight days these thirty kilometres were to keep the two
armies apart. A clear halt to the day's hectic pattern of events
had been called that evening.
"A costly day for some of the French units," writes Pierre
Bourdan,
"and a bloody day for the enemy. Hustled, over-
run by the French armour and by men whom no fire power
seemed to halt, seeing them appear from everywhere, from the
fields, the roads, the hedges, attacking, passing and returning to
the attack without respite, the Germans, after an efficient and
obstinate resistance, were finally no more than a disorderly,
disrupted, decimated rabble trying to find an outlet, an open-
ing, machine-gunned down in mid-flight, sometimes at point-
blank range."
At the time Patton was trying to convince Bradley, the
four companies of the 50ist Tank Regiment, which had also
crossed the
sacrosanct line of demarcation
between the
Americans and the British, advanced in an unpleasant atmos-
phere of insecurity. It was by the light of fires that the rest of
the column made its sinuous way round the carcasses left by
its predecessors and finally arrived at the slope which descends
to Ecouché and the Orne. There, faced with a resistance which
had grown stronger, they formed a square for the night.'
"At dawn it was a mirage. At the bottom of the slope was
N 24 bis, the goal of all our efforts. It emerged from the village
