The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"You will confine yourself to barring the exits of Argentan
with the Artillery Corps' 155mms."
"I'll catch up with the Germans a little farther on," replied
the GOC XV Corps, philosophically. "Dreux is their last escape
route south of Paris. We'll stop them getting through there."
The orders were given forthwith but the movement did not
take place until the following day at 1100 hours.
The 79th U.S. Infantry Division in reserve round Mesles-sur-
Sarthe, after leaving Mortagne, had at its disposal a network
of roads leading in a direct line to Nogent-le-Roi, where it
would cross the Eure between Dreux and Maintenon.
General Oliver's
armour, taking a more pliable itinerary
along roads parallel to the Paris road, would not reach Dreux
until 32 hours later, on the 16th at 1730 hours.
The two divisions would line the Seine from Nantes to
Louviers; the objective would be reached, in the face of con-
siderable difficulties of traffic regulation, by General Walker's
units before the last shots were fired in the battle of the pocket
on August 20th and 2ist.
To replace these divisions, Patton extended the lines of
Leclerc's division to Argentan, entrusting the holding of N 24
bis to General MacBride's division, still at Le Mans, and the
Bourg Saint-Leonard road junction to General Maclean's
division. The goth U.S. Infantry Division, which we shall meet
again throughout this account, having completed the capture
of Alençon by Leclerc, was that day mopping up the Ecouves
forest, leaving one of its regiments to keep an eye on the
suburbs west of Alençon and the still troublesome Perseigne
The Third Army Commander had no sooner allocated the
tasks-Walker to Chartres with XX Corps, Cook to Orléans
with XII Corps-than Leclerc was announced.
"Let the French have the honour of reaching the Seine first!"
"The political repercussions as to who reaches the Seine first
are of no interest to me," was Patton's curt reply.
"In spite of a little rough talk," Blood and Guts admitted,
"we parted friends."
So the rush continued to the east, and no longer towards
The Encirclement
Montgomery, too, had changed his mind.
He relinquished the south, he left Patton, gave up Falaise
He countermanded his directive dated August IIth,
ing to which the pocket was to be sealed off on the Falaise-
Argentan line.
"Your task, the most important task," he told General
Crerar, "is to carry out a broad sweep south-east, to capture
Trun and then join up with Patton."
Everything had been changed.
He had to inform Bradley and explain the whys and where-
fores of this change of plan: to increase the area of the trap, in
order to catch that part of the enemy forces which, already
east of N 158, believed themselves to be out of danger; in short,
to prevent them approaching the Seine.
"I've changed my mind, Bradley. Don't wait for us any
longer at Argentan. Operation Tractable has advanced 8 kilo-
metres this evening. We have taken Olendon and Sassy! We
are now approaching Perrières and Soulangy six kilometres
from Falaise. We are therefore in an excellent position to en-
circle von Kluge from the south-east."
"From the south-east?" exploded Bradley, thunderstruck.
"You mean that ....
"You will join up with us at Chambois; we'll close the trap
there. Incidentally I have sent our Polish Division there."
Bradley replied wryly: "I quite agree with you, Sir. We
should march north-east. Actually I have just despatched two
divisions to the north-east... to the Seine!"
Bradley recalls that Montgomery was flabbergasted.?
On either side of the German retreat, therefore, both of the
Army Group commanders had faced his opposite number with
a fait accompli; diminishing the force of the lever for the
Americans, modifying the meeting point for the British, en-
larging the area of the trap, prolonging the final reckoning by
multiplying the number of escaping troops, and upsetting the
plans so carefully worked out at the Allied conference of
The Americans would never forgive the British for this
"Monty's tactics upset me," admitted Bradley.
