SriOVO
CARREFOUR
DE LA VICTOIRE
9. The three negotiators of the sun
render at Tournai-sur-Dives: M
Damain, Abbé Launay and Abbe
Doffagues.
TO.
Victory Crossroads. This histori
notice still contains errors afte
20
years:
the figures of th
American
regiment
are tran
posed
and
the
reference
anti-tank "division" is the resul
of an unfortunate translation
ne Polish word DION.
I1. Polish and German men wounded by a tank
taken prisoner.
C Hill 262, helped by the M.O.
of the 2nd Polish Armoured Regiment and a German doctor who had been
6
Montgomery descends upon Falaise,
Bradley turns north to Argentan
The German troops of the 89th Infantry Division had not
yet seen action; they had been bathing in the Norwegian fjords.
Suddenly everything changed: ordered to drop everything
and pack up, the unfortunate soldiers were hustled into trains
for the Baltic, trans-shipped across Holland and Belgium in
convoys, and were now on the Seine in France, and therefore
at the front.
From the ruins of Rouen which they just had time to see
from the ferries, from the destroyed villages which became
more frequent as their trucks
approached the Caen-Falaise
road, the men of the 8gth—who reached the positions vacated
by the Ist S.S. Panzer, which had left for Mortain on the night
of the 4/5th August—realized that their hour had come.
It came on the 7th August at 2100 hours! Strange green
lights to the south and red to the north suddenly marked point
by point the Caen-Falaise plateau. The Germans
in their
trenches saw the glow, and the Canadians, too, in their Crom-
well tanks saw these green fires
burning, yet consuming
nothing. Thus Fontenay-le-Marmion emerged from the shadows
and May-sur-Orne was outlined in the darkness. The Scots also
saw Secqueville-la-Campagne loom up green. All these villages
sentenced to death by the target-indicator shells, to receive the
bombs of Operation Totalize.
"It was a magnificent and
grandiose sight despite its horror. The whole horizon seemed
to be on fire," noted an historian of the Polish Armoured
Division, which was still held in reserve.
For every soldier, allied or enemy,
the rumble growing
louder across the plain of Caen was like a threat of death:
1020 R.A.F. Halifaxes and Lancasters carrying 3,462 tons of
bombs flew over the lines of General Crerar, razing the villages
held by the 89th Infantry Division.
E
