ChOUeT
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
mont G.S.O.1 (operational) of the HQ Staff had arrived direct
from Rastenbourg.
In Strasbourg where he exchanged his plane for an armoured
car, Warlimont recalled as he observed the banks of the Ill that
as a I9-year-old artillery subaltern thirty years ago he had
been garrisoned here on the first day of the First World War,
August 2nd, 1914.
Warlimont's first step was to see Blumentritt, von Kluge's
Chief of Staff at Saint-Germain-en-Laye.
Infantry General Günther Blumentritt lived in the lodge
vacated by the C.-in-C. West at the bottom of a garden hidden
by the long wall of the Rue Alexandre Dumas.
All the adjacent villas, surrounded with barbed wire, seemed
to be prepared for an attack. In front of walls perforated with
loop-holes, armed sentries patrolled with automatic weapons.
In each garden a huge bunker loomed from the soil, bunkers
which were all connected by several kilometres of underground
Blumentritt, tall, jovial, renowned for his plumpness and
amiability, listened courteously.
"The order is to re-establish the Avranches-Saint-Lô front,"
explained Warlimont, pointing to a line of heights running
parallel to the coast: the Mortain hills which would serve as a
jumping-off point for the Panzers.
Blumentritt put on his glasses and bent his stocky Bavarian
frame over the maps.
Warlimont, jaws clenched, thin lipped and tense with steel
blue eyes, threatened: "I must tell you that any withdrawal is
forbidden. You have to keep your eyes riveted ahead and on
the enemy, never looking back."
Warlimont of course was well aware as he spoke that a line
of retreat had been organized on a line Somme-Marne-Saône,
but he was silent on this point. Von Kluge must not be informed
of this, for Hitler had said to him: "As soon as a line of defence
has been built in the rear, my generals only think of retiring
"T repeat: I have received orders to put you on your guard
against any retreat. The terrain must be held with fanatical
Blumentritt rarely raised his voice. This time, however, he
replied: "I tell you that the Panzers have been weakened by
the violent fighting round Caen. We had 1400 tanks on D-Day
and we have lost 750. The Seventh Army has lost 160,000
killed, wounded or taken prisoner out of the 450,000 men
engaged since the invasion. You don't know the true situation
of our infantry."
Warlimont repeated the lesson he had learned the night
before from the Führer's lips:
"If and when precautionary measures have to be taken to
the rear of the Western theatre of operations, the necessary
steps will be taken by the O.K.W. and the O.K.W. alone."
It was a dialogue of deaf mutes.
Warlimont then went to La-Roche-Guyon where, during the
evening, he conferred with von Kluge and the entire staff of
Army Group B, who affirmed that "no new development had
occurred to modify the situation." The Führer's order had not
yet arrived. It burst like a bombshell that night but Warlimont
would not hear its purport from the lips of the C.-in-C. until
the following day at 0700 hours.
"Before I left the Führer's HQ there was no question of
modifying the original intentions of O.K.W.—to continue the
battle where the front line actually is," stammered Warlimont
in his embarrassment.
By way of reply von Kluge brandished the telegram from
the Wolfschanze.
"The decision," explained Warlimont like a child making
"seems to have been taken abruptly by the Führer
alone, last night apparently, without consulting the General
"I maintain and assert that our chances of success are non-
existent," was the C.-in-C. West's reply. "Even if we intensify
the power of the Panzers they will never get to the sea. Even
admitting that we reach Avranches; the breach will be con-
solidated. And what then? These attacks can only decisively
worsen the situation of the Army Group."
At Mortain, the postman Gautier, as on every other day,
completed his rounds in spite of roads sprayed by machine-gun
