Leno
44
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"Plan useless," sighed von Kluge, hanging up. The Feld-
marschall had just admitted to General Küntzen, the LXXXIV
Korps Commander: "The counterattack will not change the
situation in the least. Unless it were to facilitate a withdrawal
to a new line of defence, but since Hitler won't entertain
this."
Should the bells of Mortain Collegiate Church be rung?
Everyone wanted to know that late morning of August 3rd,
although the 18th American Infantry regiment had not yet
passed the Point-du-Jour crossroads, two kilometres to the west.
"I the situation clears up, the evening Angelus will be
sounded with three bells,"
promised M. le Curé while the
windows were decked with the first premature flags, and the
women and girls donned tricolor ribands and cockades.®
"Let us ring the bells," begged two young men of Mortain,
early in the afternoon.
"This type of bellringing is not my province. It's up to the
mayor," replied Canon Blouet, now facing an emotional con-
gregation gathered outside the church on the war memorial
square, attracted by the noise of the Americans preparing to
enter the town.
"I beg of you, take care," interrupted a farmer who had
hurried into town from the Belle Etoile farm a few hundred
yards away. "There's a Tiger in my courtyard and its guns are
trained on the church."
But the crowd did not disperse Had not two Mortain youths
left, determined to return with the Americans whom they had
gone to meet in the hills? Were not Lieutenant-Colonel Josset
and his son Major Josset at this very moment using all their
powers of persuasion on the American Commander?
"Hill 314 is a first class observation post. Its strategic
importance is vital. From up there you can see all the exits
from Brittany and Normandy, all the outlets of the Orne. Enter
the town. You can cut the N 177 which the enemy must use
for his retreat to the south."
On the court of the Collegiate church the authorities awaited
the results of these negotiations. Two kilometres away Colonel
The Decision
45
Smith, who had listened to the two Frenchmen, conferred
with his subordinates.
"The situation had its snags," said Canon Blouet. "A certain
uneasiness was apparent among the inhabitants," admitted Dr.
Buisson. "Sound commonsense made the people aware of the
grave dangers that threatened. Firing broke out in the town;
some Germans were shot. Time pressed."
Finally, about 1530 hours, a few American trucks appeared,
rather casually, distributing cigarettes and candy generously
under a shower of flowers.
Suddenly the church bells rang out unexpectedly. The mayor
and the Canon exchanged anxious glances. The Germans on
the outskirst of the town heard the bells. "The deep beautiful
sounds filled the valley with a sacred, grave and solemn joy,"
in the words of Canon Blouet. He
himself was a prey to
anxiety and perhaps a sense of frustration; the order to ring the
bells had been given neither by himself nor by the mayor, but
by two American N.C.O.s.
Six Thunderbolts dived on Hill 314 above the church.
The Germans were there.
A shell exploded near the public gardens.
wasted," someone said to reassure himself,
although the comment comforted no one.
The crowd dispersed in silence and, it must be admitted, not
without a certain embarrassment. Had the danger been
"Although taken note of by the advance posts, the sound of
the bells was lost in the general uproar and completely for-
gotten," Canon Blouet observed. The German troops who were
to enter Mortain had no insults to avenge. They had come from
far away, withdrawn from the front facing Montgomery's
Then the infernal general post began
the bombed,
smashed and blocked roads. Infantry divisions were despatched
to Montgomery's front; the Panzers transferred to Bradley's
front. In short, a reversal of the strategy worked out since
D-Day, when the dangerous front was calculated to be that
which opened out on the Seine.
The I16th Panzer Division of General Count Schwerin was
