The Battle of the Falaise Gap
At La Roche-Guyon and Saint-Germain-en-Laye, the news
made high-ranking officers turn pale.
"This counter-offensive ordered by the Führer contravenes
not only the laws of
strategy but also those of reason,"
protested Speidel.
"It gives the enemy a decisive and un-
expected advantage."
"It's time to abandon the South of France," suggested von
Kluge. "Why leave the First Army on the Atlantic now that
we know the outcome of the war is at stake. Let us put Army
Group G on the line Seine-Loing-Loire-Gien-Nevers-Gex. Let's
abandon Provence!"
In Berlin the daily communiqué disturbed listeners who
had expected the capture of Avranches.
They heard instead
this unexpected report: "The six tank divisions of General
Bradley's mechanized forces are
fanning out in a south-
westerly, southerly and south-easterly direction, each of them
manoeuvring separately ..
After all, was the commentator so wrong?
"Listen, Koch,"
Patton had just said to his Intelligence
officer, "this is the first time in military history that an army
in the course of an offensive has attacked simultaneously in
the direction of the four cardinal points."
Despite the threats to the north and south, von Kluge kept
his eyes on the west. The C.-in-C. West promised the G.O.C.
Seventh Army a tremendous amount of reinforcements: the
9th and loth S.S. Panzer and the gth Panzer!
"The 9th Panzer!" interrupted Hausser. "You're joking, Herr
Feldmarschall. That division is fighting on the Mayenne. The
powerful American armoured units which turned eastward
after Pontaubault are attacking there on our flanks. The transfer
of the 9th Panzer to the Mortain front would mean the death
warrant not only of the Seventh Army but of the whole of the
Wehrmacht in the West."
Von Kluge knew it and would admit it that night to the
O.K.W. in a despairing report to which he appended this
comment: "Nothing would be more welcomed by the British
than if we were to continue our drive to Avranches. It will help
them to break through at Falaise."
The Decision
79
Kurt Meyer had attempted the impossible the whole morn-
To the rear of the 272nd and 89th Infantry Divisions which
had disintegrated, waited the Hitlerjugend 12 S.S. Division
commanded by 33-year-old General "Panzerfaust" Meyer, "a
tall handsome youth with hard, piercing blue eyes"?
The 12th S.S. Panzer was the fanatical division which had
plagued Montgomery since the 7th June. It was the only
German division which might have cut the landing beaches as
early as the 9th June. The Canadians had
already had
experience of these Hitlerjugend at Tilly-sur-Seulles, on the
Odon, round Carpiquet
before Caen.
escaping the big "mopping up" of August ist, the 12th S.S.
Panzer guarded the Falaise road, flanked by two infantry
divisions which had retired that morning in disorder. That
night the balance of arms had changed. The 12th S.S. Panzer
had only 48 tanks left out of its original 214; they had scraped
together everything for Mortain and now ... Now Kurt Meyer
on a visit to his advanced posts was gripped with fear. "I lit a
cigar and stood in the middle of the road. I realized that I had
to do something to send these men into battle. At the top of
my voice I asked them if they intended to leave me alone to
fight the enemy. On hearing a divisional commander address
them in this way they stopped, hesitated and finally returned
to their positions." ?
They were ill-advised. Overhead the sky grew deafening. It
was 1055 hours? The sun was so brilliant that its rays pierced
the haze of floury dust which smothered the plateau. Towards
Bretteville-sur-Laize, over Saint-Silvain and along N 158, over
the ridge overlooking Hautmesnil and Cauvicourt-the ridge
overlooking the valley of Caen and the valley of Laison which
positions, the last
annihilating with 1,488 tons of bombs the villages which dotted
As soon as the bombing was over, three new divisions went
The 4th Canadian Armoured, the 3rd Canadian
Infantry and the ist Polish Armoured Division."
