The Battle of the Falaise Gap
tanks are in action against those of the lith British Armoured
To withdraw
us means abandoning
Noireau and opening the road to Falaise from the west."
"Lunacy," protested Feuchtinger. "The 2ist Panzer is hold-
ing the Bocage. We lost Thury-Harcourt yesterday. General
Dempsey has just made a deep penetration in our lines. To
abandon our position is to open the road to Falaise from the
"Success doubtful," was the official comment of Eberbach.
Deeply offended by the cable received from Saint-Germain-en-
Laye he immediately dispatched his "last staff officer" to the
Feldmarschall to hand over a sarcastic report—he
wounded on the way—to von Kluge in person.
"If we wish to
avoid the catastrophe, a rapid withdrawal of the Seventh Army
should be ordered immediately with flank protection. I will
only carry out the order of the Supreme Command after the
arrival of the two S.S. Panzer
Korps and after receiving
sufficient supplies of fuel and ammunition. Attack impossible
before August 16th. Success very unlikely."
Faced with these reactions, the Führer momentarily gave
"I authorize the withdrawal from the Flers salient." Than he
went on: "But I repeat, the C.-in-C. West must consider the
of the enemy at Alençon as his first and most
Von Kluge did not wait to be told a second time, and seized
this opportunity to issue an order for a withdrawal in echelon
"in compliance with the wishes of the Führer." To turn south
was to give up looking westward. It was to reinforce the ram-
which the Feldmarschall hoped to
extricate the Seventh Army.
"Blumentritt, tell Sepp Dietrich to join up with Eberbach.
His three divisions will counter-attack the Americans." 6
It was I110 hours when the German troops facing Mont-
gomery received the order to turn about and face Bradley, in
Twenty-seven minutes later the curtain rose and the action
Where the German troops were still facing Montgomery.
13
Twenty-nine kilometres separate the two
arms of the pincers
The order broke the radio silence imposed while the tanks
moved into their forming up positions along the Bretteville-le-
Rabet-Saint-Sylvain road.
It was 1137 hours on August 14th, a bright sunny day.
Across the still unharvested corn fields sped the columns of
General Kitching's 4th Canadian Armoured Division. Direction:
the line of hills which still hid Falaise from view. Attack on a
five kilometre front from Estrées-la-Campagne to the Soignolles
road junction.
"It is vital that this be done quickly," ordered Montgomery:
him," ordered General Crerar, G.O.C. First Canadian Army.
"What you do today may hasten the Allied Victory to a
led the movement on the Caen-Falaise axis, a movement which
that day was at its third "launching"
Bradley. Argentan, approached by General Oliver's U.S. tanks
The first hurdle was the crossing of the Laison, a tiny river
barred by a screen of powerful long range 88-mms' which had
already halted Monty twice. The second was the scaling of the
heights which led on the other side into the Dives cauldron, and
the third, to cross the valley and climb onto the N 24 bis, the
limit of the line imposed upon General Haislip.
Now the Laison was held by Kurt Meyer, in front of the river
