The Battle of the Falaise Gap
after passing the town had taken up positions on the Mont-
Jarry from where there is a remarkable view of the approaches
to Maine and Brittany.
Here the Sherman tanks were superbly placed to negotiate
the hairpin bends on the way down to the straight road to
M. Brière, the contractor, asked his carpenter, M. Auguste
Macé, to accompany him. The two men made their way
through the ruins to the church of Notre-Dame-des-Champs of
which nothing remained except the charred walls-the walls
and towers having served as a Flak O.P. for the Germans who
had now fled. On the way they met a new column of Sher-
man tanks by-passing the town and heading for the Pontau-
bault road. With the help of his companion, Brière managed
to climb the north-west tower, and must have been watched
at this moment by many of the refugees on the shore and in
the hamlets below. M. Brière hoisted the flag he had brought;
dodging a hail of bullets coming from the Pontaubault road, he
crouched behind the granite balustrade, managed to secure it
firmly to a railing and, with a flick of the wrist, the tricolor
was unfurled: it was visible for 35 miles around—as far as the
ramparts of the Mont-Saint-Michel.
François Brière accompanied by three fellow villagers
pressed on to the town hall. The main door was closed. Auguste
Macé broke a fanlight window and, given a leg up, dropped
into the courtyard and ran to open the door. The four men
shot up the stairs leading to the attics, appropriated the French,
English, Belgian and American flags, rushed to the balcony and
quickly beflagged it. They stopped in amazement. A few yards
away was a Panzer with its guns trained on them.
Back on the Place Carnot, François Brière and his comrades
ran into a German detachment marching west in two ranks,
one on each pavement, weapons in hand, taking with them a
couple of villagers in shirtsleeves as hostages.
"Komm, komm! Where have you come from?"
"We've been tending the wounded ... German wounded!"
"Ach, so! Gut! Gut! Carry on."
"But we need help. Free these two civilians."
The Germans agreed. ®
At that moment the barrage erupted from all directions.
The Decision
21
From the south-west, the west, the east, and from the spurs of
the hill above the Granville road. Even from the ridges facing
towards Brittany. Some panzers still in the town plastered the
reinforcements of the 4th Armoured Division crossing the Sée:
four American tanks were on fire. On the other side the Sher-
mans which had crossed the town clashed on the bends as they
were leaving Mont-Jarry with a strong German column coming
from the Sélune.
Colonel Rudolf Bacherer had returned to Avranches.
"I have sent Bacherer to Pontaubault," telephoned Farm-
bacher, G.O.C. XXVth Infantry Korps of the Wehrmacht in
Brittany. "But I must inform you that the Kriegsmarine and
the Luftwaffe refuse to obey my orders to halt the Americans
on the peninsula."
Von Kluge sighed; this was an unmistakable sign of a débâcle.
A further whiff of catastrophe was the inopportune tele-
phone call from Speidel, Chief of Staff of Army Group B,
begging von Kluge-at 0923 hours—to transmit an out-of-date
order to LXXXIV Korps:
"The positions north of Avranches
must be held. The LXXXIVth must be ordered to hold these
lines, even if encircled, so as to be in the best position to restore
the situation "
Von Kluge called General Warlimont in Berlin.
"The Americans are at Avranches and possibly at Villedieu-
les-Poêles. These key positions must be recaptured at all costs
in view of further operations."
What further operations?
Von Kluge had, as yet, no idea; he would not make up his
mind until he had met Hausser at midday for a decisive con-
ference.
Von Kluge did not like Hausser, did not approve of him and
had no hold over him. Hausser was Hitler. A confirmed Nazi,
he was the new commander of the Seventh Army, a former
Reichswehr officer who had left that service with the rank of
lieutenant-general and had only arrived on the Normandy front
on June 25th at the head of the formidable II S.S. Panzer
Korps. His two divisions, the oth S.S. Panzer and the roth S.S.
Panzer, had halted the Red Army offensive before Tarnopol.
