OA
IOUS
76
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"Make a half turn to the left... Forget about the Seine and
turn 90° by Le Mans and Alençon on Argentan. All right, that's
what we'll do!"
"Just a minute. We'll go as far as Argentan and hold there.
We've got to be careful we don't run into Monty coming down
from Falaise."
With this remark, which as we shall see was to divide the
Allies until the end of the war and cost Argentan an 8-day
martyrdom, the C.-in-C. 12th Army Group hung up.
A serious decision had been taken; it is obvious that Bradley
profited by Eisenhower's presence to telephone to Mont-
The whole inter-allied strategy was reversed. The Americans
abandoned the Loire-Inférieure, the British abandoned the
Seine-Inférieure. 15
In short the Germans themselves gave the Allies the idea of
encircling them.
Bradley would willingly have foregone this
imperative manoeuvre; it crippled him, according to one of his
biographers!° What Bradley wanted was to encircle the entire
enemy forces between the landing beaches and the Seine by
means of a large-scale thrust from Avranches to Orléans, con-
tinuing via Chartres and from there joining
the Seine and
following it north to the sea, a manoeuvre which would have
put paid to the Wehrmacht once and for all in Normandy.
We shall see that he was right.
A realist above all, Bradley gave orders as dictated by
Turning to the slim, brilliant Lev Allen, his
Chief of Staff, the C.-in-C. 12th Army Group was jubilant: "We
have just taken the most vital decision of our whole campaign.
The enemy has just offered it to us himself."
Bradley went to the cupboard concealed under the leather
bench and took out two bottles of Coca Cola, opened them and
"This decision will cost him an Army and will bring us
7
Von Kluge and Eisenhower take the big
plunge
"We must now risk everything," said von Kluge. It was
1845 hours. The C.-in-C. West who had so far been hesitant,
now defied fate. "A breakthrough such as we have never seen
is taking place near Caen."
Risk everything to the West? The breakthrough to the
North? It was battle on two fronts: something which von Kluge
feared most and which was sought after by Montgomery.
On the evening of August 8th the Feldmarschall made his
play. An unsuccessful gambler, von Kluge squandered his last
units, and fell headlong into
the trap, risking everything
despite the calls for aid from his generals.
"A breach of 22 kilometres from Domfront to Romagny in
the lines of LXXXI Korps," General Kuntzen, harassed to the
south of Domfront, had repeated since the morning.
"Americans beyond Barenton," signalled the 275th German
Infantry Division.
'mouldering heath'
"We have lost the wooded crests of the
"The south flank of the II S.S. Panzer exposed. Tank positions
of the Das Reich Division turned. The 35th American Division
has pushed us back to Ger."
"I do not think I am in a position to pursue operations with
the troops at my disposal,"
telephoned Colonel Kleinschmidt,
Chief of Staff of LXVII Korps at 1430 hours.
"Thanks to their
air superiority, the enemy have considerably reinforced their
position. Our fighting power has diminished.".
The II S.S. Panzer, which had to its credit the capture of
Saint-Barthélemy the night before, had in fact, under a clear
blue sky, just been the chosen victim of the Typhoons, and
was immobilized in the sunken roads. To make matters worse
its hemmed-in tanks now presented ideal targets for the anti-
tank guns of the zoth U.S. Infantry Division.
