138
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Meyer's lines. Captured and searched he was found to be carry-
ing a plan of the offensive to be launched the following day:
Meyer only had to post his 88s at the points of crossing.
Falaise that day was impregnable.
Nine kilometres away Falaise would remain impregnable
for a further four days.
It was a setback. It also represented a reprieve for von Kluge.
During this time, below N 24 bis, the Americans and the
French waited for the British, the Canadians and the Poles;
General Haislip was waiting for General Simonds.
This was Bradley's decision. Montgomery had also decided
this in spite of Patton.
"If Patton continues to advance on Falaise I am risking a
confrontation of two converging armies,"
explained the
C.-in-C. 12th U.S. Army Group.
"To burst pell-mell into Mont-
gomery's line of advance would give rise to the most disastrous
"On August I4th the Third Army will have advanced faster
and farther than any other army in history," replied "Blood
"General Haislip's whole line remains vague, imprecise,
clipped and in places inoffensive; four divisions are there,
wasting their substance in artillery duels and patrol activities;
four divisions on a front of 40 kilometres."
"It's too much," Haislip complained to Patton who had just
paid him a visit. "Two divisions are enough to hold the pocket."
The GOC Third Army rubbed his hands and slapped General
Haislip-who was not unlike Churchill to look at—on the
back, picked up the telephone and called Bradley.
"I suggest sending two of my divisions onto the Seine; the
5th Armoured and the 79th Infantry."
Bradley reviewed the problem:
"We have the choice of three solutions, Georgie. Either we
hold our positions....
"Until the pocket has been emptied, I suppose," interrupted
"Or we ask our divisions to advance 15 kilometres north-
The Encirclement
east on Chambois, thus reducing a little the power of our
"Or else," continued Patton, anticipating the thoughts of his
superior and giving this third proposal all the weight of his
approval, "we leave only a part of our forces before Argentan
to wait and join up with Montgomery, and we push on west
with the remainder and form a bridgehead on the other side of
the Seine. All right, that's what we'll do!"
A tempting gamble. After all Bradley was covered by Mont-
gomery's directive dated August lith, giving priority to a
movement on the Seine, "in the event of the Germans escaping
from the pocket."
The problem was to know whether the Germans were
Patton at the telephone waited for his chief's reactions.
"To strike on the Seine," remarked Bradley, "means running
the risk of letting the enemy escape more easily out of the
Then with resignation: "If Monty wants us to help him
close the pocket let him say so."
Monty in fact said nothing. His Chief of Staff, the elegant
colourful Sir Francis de Guingand gave the explanation after
the war: "It should not be forgotten, however, that Mont-
gomery had to be very careful to ensure that the two Army
Groups did not become entangled."
Bradley reflected aloud:
"The Canadians have not yet
reached the demarcation limit between the two army groups,
whereas we have done so."
This tiresome demarcation limit was later to cause endless
friction. "Bradley was given several changes of his northern
boundary," de Guingand admitted. "First the line Domfront-
Alençon, then Argentan, and finally Chambois."
For the moment the Americans were at the meeting point.
But no meeting had taken place.
"So it's on to the Seine, then," deduced Bradley, with a clear
Patton went in person to give the news verbally to General
"O.K. for the change of direction, Wade? You'll go
right. Send Oliver and Wyche to the Seine!"
The C.-in-C. Third Army looked at the map a little sadly.
