The Battle of the Falaise Gap
been patrolling the neighbourhood for two days was due to
arrive, we were very nervous," says Madame Triquet.
A few minutes later the Cromwell duly appeared. It stopped
in front of the courtyard entrance and trained its gun on the
building. The Germans stood up, hesitated, climbed through
the window overlooking the meadows and fled. A farmhand
ran to warn the Canadians. "The latter, revolvers in each hand,
woollen caps on their heads, and in shirtsleeves, hugging the
walls as in a real cowboy film, surrounded the farm. We waited
anxiously. Twenty minutes later the S.S. re-entered the court-
yard with arms raised escorted by Canadians."
"At Io o'clock in the morning," reports General von Lutt-
"my infantry at Saint-Lambert reported that it had
cleared the road and was covering it south and north to Trun
and Chambois. At midday I managed to reach Saint-Lambert
myself and there from the top of the village church directed
the evacuation of my troops. The crossing of the bridge over
the Dives was a particularly terrifying business. Men, horses,
vehicles and other material hit by shells during the crossing
had been hurled into the deep ravine where they piled up in
hideous heaps."
The HQ of the South Alberta Regiment was well within
range of the enemy. Currie called for artillery support, but the
medium guns replied instead of the field artillery. Their shells,
however, risked hitting some of the Shermans still in action. In
fact a 6-pounder exploded less than 15 yards away from the
major. "Sorry but we have no other artillery available," replied
the regiment, in explanation.
The village must fall, thought Currie. The bridges must be
attacked. He had a plan ready: an attack launched from the
west, no longer from the north,
in order to cut into the
columns before they passed through the village. The plan was
subsequently rejected because shuffling refugees were concen-
trated en masse in the sector chosen as objective. Major Currie
discussed this plan once more with two officers of the Argyll
and Sutherlands, when a radio message compelled him to climb
aboard a tank. An 88-shell burst among the group, killing the
Major's two brother officers who were waiting below the tank
The Surrender
cribes the fighting in these terms: "In the early hours of the
morning of the
2oth, Seventh
Army led by Il Parachute
Korps and Eberbach's Panzer Group comprising LXXIV and
LXXXVIII Korps, made a movement to break out to the
were lost."
"The convoys took the Hennecourt road in such confusion,"
notes M. Boulais, Mayor of Chambois,
"that the Germans
posted all around fired on their own troops. A tank flattened
a cowshed burying the eight refugees inside. A woman man-
aged to escape but she was hit in the thigh by a bullet and
died later. In the afternoon the Germans installed in a trench,
fired on some
soldiers whom they did not know
were
Germans. A meadow separated them. An officer waved a white
rag and surrendered with his men, only to discover to his sur-
prise that he had surrendered to his brothers-in-arms."
Three thousand prisoners were captured that morning along
the banks of the Dives, particularly around the hamlet of La
Harangerie. There two squadrons of the South Alberta Regi-
ment were advancing towards the bridges.
The whole afternoon the Americans at the western exit of
Chambois and the Canadians at the western exit of Saint-
Lambert, remained separated by these 2 kilometres of a road
teeming with fugitives. Of this breach, the log book of B Army
Group records:
"it allowed us by hand-to-hand fighting to
evacuate fifty per cent of the encircled forces which man-
aged to rejoin II S.S. Panzer Korps, fighting against the Poles
on the heights."
