The Battle of the Falaise Gap
given to M. Xavier Rousseau, Director of Pays d' Argentan, who
conceived the idea of collecting testimonies from eye-witnesses
of the Normandy Battle and publishing them in a series in
Pays d'Argentan, which appeared in 1947.
We have used much material from these testimonies because
of its vividness and veracity. We must thank M. Rousseau for
accompanying us so often to the actual sites of the battle and
generosity in allowing
us to publish his personal
recollections which he regards in this book as a prolongation
of his own work.
Locally we must mention the precious testimonies of:
Abbé Launay: Dans la Tourmente de la Guerre (Vilaire,
1946), who gave us permission to quote from this volume.
Boulle and Macary: La Poche de Falaise (Lainé, Rouen).
Boudet and Cauquelin: Les Combats Decisifs (Laigle,
Galerie Juin, 1944).
Local facts referring to regions adjacent to the battle have
been subject to studies by:
Marc Lardry: A.O.K. 7 et le General Dollmann (Le Mans).
Docteur Gilbert Buisson: La Bataille de Mortain (Etudes
Normandes, 1955).
Docteurs Jules and Gilles Buisson, Mortain et sa Bataille
Canon Blouet: Mortain en Flammes (Le Chaplais, Saint-
Hilaire-du-Harcouet, to whom we owe special thanks for
his collaboration.
let me come on prom al same.
Guerin et Saintmont: Normandie, Champ de Bataille
(Bonhomme Libre, Caen).
Alfred Marie: Avranches (Editions de l'Avranchin).
et Percée
Avranches).
d'Avranches (Private,
Le Maresquier: La Manche liberée et Meurtrie (Entraide
Française).
We must also thank Marcel Vallée for having let us use his
cuttings from Les Nouvelles de Falaise.
VI. German sources
Failing to obtain the necessary collaboration of the
Bibliography
335
Historical Services at Freiburg despite the efforts of Major von
Klintzing's Military Attaché
to the Federal Embassy, the
Kriegstagebuch (The War Diary of Army Group B) was
interesting with regard to the hours and the content of tele-
phonic communications. Hans Speidel's Invasion 44 best reveals
the opinions of Army Group B's HQ Staff on the progress of
operations for which he was one of those responsible. The feel-
ings of von Kluge and of his Chief of Staff Blumentritt are
given in Wilhelm von Schramm's Der 20 Juli in Paris. General
Blumentritt has given us considerable help with regard to
Paul Carrel's book Sie Kommen is, in our opinion, the best
account so far given of the 2oth August rush to the Coudehard
heights, apart from the work of Friedrich Hayn: Die Invasion
(Vonsinckel), and that of Kurt Meyer who published his
account in Munich, under the title Grenadier (Schild Verlag).
By chance, immediately after the war, Liddell Hart and
Milton Shulman were able to obtain valuable declarations from
high ranking German officers in the Allied prisoner of war
camps: their works are the source of many subsequently
Generals Warlimont and Hausser have both published their
memoirs, but are not very communicative about the period
under review. (General Hausser devotes only two pages of his
book: Waffen SS im Einsatz (Schutz Göttingen) to it).
VII. British sources
Thanks to
General Montgomery's writings, the British
sources appear reliable:
Montgomery: Normandy to the Baltic, 1948.
Memoirs (Collins, 1958).
The Operations of the Allied Expeditionary
Forces in Europe, 1947.
But we must also quote the Memoirs of his Chief of Staff,
F. de Guingand: Operation Victory (Hodder and Stough-
ton, 1947).
And finally,
the fine
historical document by Chester
Wilmot: The Struggle for Europe (Collins, 1952) is a
major work.
Let us also mention Alan Wood's dispatches to the Daily
