The Battle of the Falaise Gap
The junction was now no more than a matter of a few
minutes, a few yards ahead.
At Headquarters the progress was followed by reading the
telegrams which poured in-messages sometimes confused,
sometimes contradictory in that each commander claimed to
have been the first to reach the road junction.
Messages from General MacLean to Colonel de Langlade:
"Our infantry on the slopes east of Mont Ormel is being
counter-attacked from east and west. Drive on Frenée to
Message from Colonel de Langlade to General MacLean: "The
Tactical Group of the 2nd Armoured French Division crossing
the Dives has just captured Omméel. Is sending a patrol to
Frenée." Minjonnet's sub-group still not wanting
feathers", advanced behind a barrage of 1800 shells and only
attacked after covering Mont Ormel with a smoke screen.
Message from General MacLean: "You are at this moment on
the right flank of the 358th Infantry, entering Chambois."
Reply from Colonel de Langlade:
"We are still not in a
position to occupy the terrain in force."
1720 hours: Message from the Ist Polish Armoured Division
to II Canadian Corps: "The 1oth Polish Dragoons have sent a
patrol in the direction of Chambois."
1730 hours: Message from the Americans to II Canadian
Corps this time: "Chambois being shelled from the north-west
to all appearances by you. In which case hold your fire. We are
about to enter the town."
Sergeant Clarence E. Atkins' squad, which had been marking
time since 1500 hours south of the first houses, passed a mass
of enemy vehicles on which a white flag fluttered. There were
12 trailers, 2 half-tracks, a horse-drawn waggon and the
horrible remains of dismembered Germans. A squadron of
Sherman tanks opened fire on the fortified houses. The infantry
followed with 360 men
supported by
sections. E Company split up, one section to the west, the other
to the east; in other words, towards the Poles.
Kintzi, advancing beyond the road junction sent a patrol
well to the south, to the crossing of the Bourg Saint-Léonard
The Pocket
approaching our lines."
"Take up position," ordered the 2nd Squadron Commander.
"Hold yourself in readiness for any eventuality."
masses of German corpses,"
he writes.
prisoners, destroyed tanks, trucks and piled up weapons."
The Poles entrenched along the ditches of the road which
enters the town from the south.
"Suddenly we heard loud cheering coming
from both
sides ... from ours and from opposite! The Americans entered
the town." There was a rush to shake hands. "I think," Captain
Giera remarked cautiously, "that my company was the first to
make contact with the Americans."
Karcz looked westwards.
"The sight was impressive: there
were fires everywhere, planes diving and machine-gunning,
and a formidable artillery barrage." Dragoon Chaplain A. P.
Stopa also looked around: "The approaches to the town were
chaotic. The
roads
were
jammed
with
smashed enemy
equipment which slowed down the advance far more than
the sporadic resistance." "For the first time in my life I had a
living proof of the old cliché 'rivers of blood'," notes Captain
Gaskins, the officer commanding F Company of 359th Infantry
Regiment.
"When I entered Chambois the blood was flowing
in streams in the gutters. The buildings blazed and the stench
of death and burning flesh was almost unbearable.
There was
an incredible pile of German dead, dead horses and destroyed
equipment. All around us ammunition exploded. It was like
the Fourteenth of July." "I had never seen such a mass of
harness in my life,"
relates Captain Waters.
"Nor had I ever
'seen so many horses, wounded horses. The enemy vehicles
burned,
wheel to wheel.
Boxes of ammunition
exploded,
obstructing the roads." "The town was on fire," Karcz wrote.
"The road leading to it and the side streets were ammed with
German armour already alight or smouldering, enemy corpses
and a host of wounded soldiers. No civilians were to be seen.
True,
the village had been shelled and bombed for several
days."
