178
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Simultaneously a few American planes dropped their bombs
on the neighbouring regiment—the South Saskatchewan at the
southern perimeter. The Luftwaffe counter-attacked.
Three hundred refugees were herded together in the Trinity
Church—in the nave, under the organ and near the portal,
some on the steps, some on chairs, some beneath blankets or
on a pile of straw.
That night, which was ultimately to end in a day of re-
joicing, anxious eyes were raised to the vaulting as the droning
grew ominously louder.
What still remained to be destroyed in Falaise? A dead city
bombed on June 6th, sacked on June 7th, pulverized on the
roth, set on fire on the 12th, pillaged and abandoned and since
the 15th of August bombarded, strafed and from that morn-
ing delivered over to street-fighting.
What was there still to bomb in this town, described by Alan
Wood of the Daily Express as "more devastated than Caen,
perhaps because of the incongruous contrast between the ruins
and the beauty of the valley with its steep green slopes, in the
place where the houses of Falaise once were"?
And yet—relate Jean Boullé and Léonce Macary-"the first
explosions roared", and the nave of the church amplified and
echoed them. Panic seized the women and children. People
rushed to the doors in an attempt to flee and some were
crushed. The Canadians had to intervene. "Don't go outside.
You'll go to your death."
"But here we shall be crushed, we shall be roasted."
Gigantic fires had now sprung up all round the square.
Enclosed in a curtain of flame the church seemed doomed to a
hideous auto-da-fé. Women screamed, others fell on their knees
and prayed. Flames licked round the pillars,
catching
timber-work, lighting up the deep burning reds of the stained
glass windows. Once more a crowd rushed for the doors and a
great cry went up entreating the others not to let them pass.
William the Conqueror Square was an inferno. Falaise was
aflame. In the nave the incendiary bombs were countered with
prie-dieus. The bells melted.
And then amid all the panic and uproar in the church, one
or two very dissimilar cries could be heard. A woman in
labour had given birth to a child.
Kilometres
St. Pierre-DIVES
Livarot
JORT
Falaise
NÉCY
TRUN
TOURNA!
St. LAMBER
CHAMBOIS -
80600
GO FOREST
2000
Le Boura-.
ECOUCHÉ
ARGENTAN
18th August. The Canadians in Trun, the Americans in Bourg Saint-
Léonard and the Poles on the heights reduced the width of the
pocket
