The Battle of the Falaise Gap
The two barrels swung towards each other, but the Mark IV
which had no electric mechanism, took as long to cover 60° as
Krebs's to cover 180°. The barrels were aligned. Krebs fired
three times. The German once. The shell ricocheted off the
armour plating of "Brive-la-Gaillarde". Baker Martin "blown
off by the blast" took cover by a wall. A huge column of black
smoke rose from the Panzer, which exploded between the
parapets, blocking the bridge to Noël's squadron which was
obliged to skirt the town. In the action Captain Noël "standing
on the engine" revolver in hand, plunged into the smoke" 1o
and lost two more tanks-put out of action by other Panzers
hidden in the hedges of this now flat country.
Martin now had the job of exploring the deserted streets
with "Brive-la-Gaillarde"
. Unwittingly hurrying to avenge the
burned tanks, he spotted a stationary Panzer on a hillock; it
manoeuvred under cover of the hedge, turned about and
then crashed through.
"Krebs and his adversary stared at
each other for a second at 100 yards. An expression of utter
terror appeared on the face of the German. Hardly had he tried
to manoeuvre his turret when two shells threw up a jet of
flame and smoke. The German, arms spreadeagled, was flung
out onto the grass." 11
"Hullo, Noël. Krebs here. Have destroyed two Panzers.
Looking for the third."
Krebs, who had not noticed that his machine-gun on the
turret had been ripped off by another shell, did not find the
third Panzer. The Germans were retreating: some towards
Perseigne Forest, others towards Alençon.
"Brive-la-Gaillarde"
sped across the fields to Pont-des-
Batailles to see it any German tanks were hiding in the thick
hedges or the sunken roads. Krebs looked for cover and dug
himself in. Hull-down he scanned the broken countryside. In
the distance two aerial flags emerged from the smoke: "Blois"
was burning, but Krebs did not
know this. When he learned it he wept for his dead and he
still mourns them twenty
years later, as he
plane circled above them. Krebs who had
destroyed in a flash".
Fortunately the pilot was on the same wavelength ae himself.
Krebs, who had never ceased moaning about the interference,
now made contact and was overjoyed:
"Hullo, Charlie One! I am French. This is my position.
"Twenty years after I still do not know whether he under-
stood. Anyhow he left me in peace." 12
"Hullo, Krebs? Noël here. Return to Champfleur from the
"Hullo Desforges? Noël here. Return to Champfleur from the
It was 1800 hours. The whole squadron assembled on the
village square, together with a Sherman which did not belong
to No. 3 squadron but to the squadron protecting the divisional
advance's HQ. It bore the name "Tailly", and its gun was of
sheet metal. This was General Leclerc's command tank. The
commander of the 2nd French Armoured Division descended
from it and removed his leather-peaked cap. Captain Alain de
Boissieu emerged from the radio jeep. The driver handed the
general his cane and his képi. The general walked across the
square, caught sight of the innkeeper, asked him to put a table
below the church steps, sat down, unfolded his maps and pre-
pared for his next leap—to Alençon.
Greatly moved the innkeeper asked the general's permission
to serve the HQ staff with cider; meanwhile the tank shells of
the 2nd Armoured Division smashed the saddle-back steeple,
beneath which their leader was holding his conference,
wounded a subaltern, and rather unjustly peppered Lieutenant
Krebs, who having given adequate proof of his courage took
a header this time inside his tank.
"Tell them to cease firing on Champfleur," calmly ordered
the general, while the cider was passed round. "No more than
a couple of glasses each ... we have work to do."
Seven kilometres from Alençon-the way to which had now
been opened by Lieutenant Krebs—in a "fight which marked
me for life" 1-General Leclerc, now surrounded by a crowd
which had expected Americans instead of Frenchmen, nodded
to the innkeeper, who continued to fill the glasses, and said
"What about me? Don't I deserve a glass of cider too?"
Louis Martin watched the French tanks set out for Alençon
and thought that it was high time to return home.
