The Battle of the Falaise Gap
would snap at the first shot. To reinforce it he had to recall
the 79th Division which had pushed on as far as Pontorson;
Bradley, in contempt of his subordinates, had just given this
order directly to Middleton, G.O.C. VII Corps, during the after-
noon of August 2nd. He did however wish to discuss it with
Bradley entered the precincts of Third Army's advanced
HQ at the same moment as his bustling subordinate appeared,
stiff with weariness and covered with dust.
"For God's sake, George, what are you going to do about this
open flank of Troy Middleton's?" 2
Patton threw up his arms in disgust.
"Oh, shut up about your flanks."
"Listen. If the Germans can break through the Avranches
corridor to the sea, they'll pin us down in the bocage and we
shan't look so hot."
"My dear Brad, I'm at Dinard, I'm at Fougères. To protect
my flanks I have the Breton Resistance."
The Breton maquis did in fact seem to have received special
attention from the Allies. During the whole of the Occupation
they alone had benefited from many more weapons and many
more technicians dropped by parachute than all the other
French maquis combined. The F.F.I. Bretons, who had
numbered no more than 10,000 at the beginning of June, had
increased to 20,000 by the end of July. By mid-August their
number had risen to 80,000. Had they not just fought like
tigers against a whole division of the Wehrmacht? 4,500
members of the Resistance led by Colonel Bourgoin were pre-
paring to protect an American landing at Suscinio
Quiberon, where the Allies intended to create a new "Arro-
manches to receive deliveries of equipment direct from the
Bradley was not convinced.
"Our columns will be cut off from their supplies of fuel and
ammunition. With a couple of divisions the enemy will squeeze
us in there before we can relieve Middleton."
At this, the G.O.C. XII Army Group revealed the object of
his visit and, pointing to Fougères on the map said: "It's not
order your 79th to go there."
perhaps exactly to rule, but I have taken it upon myself to
The Decision
51
Patton smiled sheepishly and put his arm round Bradley's
shoulders.
"Fine, fine, Brad, that's just what I would have
The 79th U.S. Infantry Division left the Bay of Mont-Saint-
Michel during the afternoon, crossed the positions of the 5th
Armoured Division in the suburbs of Fougères, reaching the
town during the night, and posted its three regiments facing
north-east, east and south-east. They would enter the city the
Bradley had abandoned his advance on the peninsula. It was
high time. That same evening the warning sounded: the first
German bombs which, under a full moon, were to rain down
for five nights on the il stone arches of Pontaubault Bridge.
Quite unperturbed, however, the Third Army crossed over,
but the tanks, which at times went over the bridge three
abreast, left the Pontorson road and wheeled to the left on
reaching the crow's foot.
Direction south-east.
To von Kluge's rear.
The idea of giving up Brittany began to form in Eisenhower's
mind that August 2nd. An idea not yet of the magnitude Brad-
ley, influenced by the course of events, was to accord to it six
days later. That day, the Supreme Commander of the Allied
Forces wrote to General Marshall to suggest sending only a
small part of the forces into Brittany, leaving the main Allied
Forces to destroy the enemy to the west of the Rhine and then
to push on eastwards as far as possible.
"If the Allies are granted a period of ten to fifteen days' fine
weather," concluded Ike, "we shall be assured of a success of
the greatest significance." 5
Next day Bradley, either by coincidence or interpretation,
revised his programme. Hodges was to head for point 314, the
high ground which dominates all the hills around Mortain and
gives control of the roads from Brittany to Normandy; and for
Patton, the minimum of forces in Brittany.
It was no longer the Loire, it was the Seine.
"Your orders are to take Mont Pinçon quickly and at once."
