186
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
and untracked roads there were no landmarks for the bombing.
That evening the Poles informed
the headquarters of il
Canadian Corps that they were constantly being bombed by
friendly planes. Half the fuel and ammunition sent to the 2nd
Polish Armoured Regiment was destroyed by bombing shortly
after 1700 hours. In three days the airmen of 84 Wing, support-
ing the Canadian and Polish advance, had killed 72 and
wounded 191 Poles. General Crerar in a message to the officers
of Il Canadian Corps commented rather cynically some hours
later: "If the Canadian formations compare their own losses
with those that our planes inflict on the enemy, they will have
some idea of the extraordinary balance in their favour."
"The retreats from the pocket continue," read the C.-in-C.'s
report to Saint-Germain-en-Laye at 1400 hours.
bulk of our forces is now on the east bank of the Orne."
Putanges was in fact in the hands of General Dempsey, and
the hotly contested N 158 was under fire from the British
advancing from the west.
Model, crestfallen, telephoned Jodl during the afternoon,
demanding reinforcements, while Hausser dictated an order of
the day which signified nothing:
"The Canadians have made a deep penetration south-east of
Morteaux-Couliboeuf in the sector west of Trun. To ensure the
success of our withdrawal to the Dives it is essential to re-
capture the Morteaux-Couliboeuf sector, the cornerstone of the
new front, and to establish a covering line south and east of
.. "East" ... Hausser had forgotten a
single cardinal point, the most important one, the North.
In the north, the rear of Seventh Army, the fate of Ger-
many would be sealed that afternoon.
"Well, Dave, up to now this has been a pretty good war, but
this is it." This was Major David Vivian Currie's remark to
himself when the O.C. South Alberta Regiment informed him
of his new mission-—to take the village of Saint-Lambert-sur-
Dives.
The Pocket
187
With what forces? With his 15 tanks and 175 men including
a slight reinforcement of other ranks from the Argyll and
Sutherland Highlanders of Canada?
"You can't count on any artillery support. Later perhaps,
but ...
Currie looked at the map. The village was on the line of the
German retreat. In other words he would be in the thick of the
fray.
"Your mission is directly bound up with the general strategy
of the Allied campaign," remarked the Colonel. "You are to
stop the retreat of the Seventh Army and you alone. Move off:
6.00 p.m."
The Canadians and Americans were only an hour's march
apart, but they would not join up until three days later.
Unable to use the valley road, the Canadian
continued on the heights, cutting the Trun-Vimoutiers road,
occupying Hill 259 above Louvières and Hordouseaux, closing
the door from behind.
Currie and his tanks formed up south-east of Trun, which had
now been mopped up by the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division:
four in front, three command tanks and finally two troops of
tanks carrying the infantry of the Argyll and Sutherlands.
Currie was about to give the "move now", when he was
approached by a sergeant.
"Have a drink, Major," said the NCO, handing him a pewter
"Sure, what is it?" asked Currie from the turret of his tank.
"I don't know, try it."
Currie took a gulp and, as he said, almost choked to death.
The sergeant, seeing his face, said: "Sure, it's hot, eh?"
This was Major Currie's first acquaintance with that fiery
apple-brew, calvados.
His tanks moved off.
The leading tank had hardly gone ten yards when a shell
coming from the left set it on fire.
From the left? wondered Currie, since his tanks were using
the cover of the last houses in
Trun. Couldn't the Poles
recognize their friends?
