2nd S.S. Panzer
AVENELLES
GREFFIN
FRENEE
COUDEHARD
Polish Aboured
ECORCHES
BOISJO
FRENCH
AMERICANS
CHAMBOIS
Corridor of
Death
towards MOISSY
towards St. LAMBER
137
CANADIANS
39. Aerial view showing positions of German and Allied troops on zoth August.
towards TRUN
The Encirclement
with which the retreat had so far been carried out suddenly
disappeared "* Confirming the observations of the Supreme
Commander. Montgomery notes for that day that "The dis.
order of the divisions constantly manifested itself: the leaders
xercised no control except over their own combat groups." "
In the theatre of operations orders and counter-orders
muddled the movements. "Retire immediately towards Lisieux
as a reserve ferce." Saint-Germain en Lave cabled to Ober
gruppenführer S.S. Bittrich, commanding the Il S.S. Panzer
Korps astride Argentan. The oth and roth S.S. Panzers
obediently took the N 1g8 from where they pivoted at Falaise
on Lisieux. Counter-order "Falaise is in the hands of the
Canadians. The Il Panzer Korps will take up positions round
Vimoutiers by forced marches whatever the losses suffered
from the fighter bombers." Bittrich ordered his troops to turn
half-right. But how to join them? Where to join them? All the
wireless posts of II S.S. Panzer Korps had been destroyed
Runners were sent to rally the divisional troops, "Direction
northeast: Vimoutiers." The re-formation had taken place
when a third order left everything in abeyance once more.
enemy has broken through south-east of Falaise
"The
and is
advancing on Trun. II SS. Panzer Korps must repel the enemy
and hold Trun." Bittrich asked for nothing better, provided
he could reach his divisional commanders. But the roads were
more than conjested. The Americans had passed Bourg Saint-
Leonard, and Trun was being threatened by the Canadians. The
corridor was now at their disposal; a length of ten kilometres.
This was the situation then, when Feldmarschall Model-
already noted in the Wehrmacht for his complete lack of
realism-arrived. Solid, stocky and square-shouldered,
distinguished but highly intelligent, the former commander of
the Central Armies on the Eastern Front,
whom General
Blumentritt has described as "tough, cold with a will of steel,
always ahead of his troops in battle," owed his swift rise-a
Feldmarschall at 54-partly to his pitiless energy, but also to
his fidelity to Hitler. On july soth he had been the first to send
a telegram expressing his loyalty to the Führer.
The new C-in-C. Army Group B en route for La Roche-
