188
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Currie, halting the movement, hurried to the Polish sector,
found the guilty tank, remonstrated with the commander, who
made his excuses and promised not to do it again.
It was 1820 hours. Currie set out for Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives,
without realizing the part this Norman village would play in
his life.
"Kameraden all kaput! Tommies all kaput!"
The thirty refugees crowded in Bourgogne farm above Saint-
Lambert stared at this German who "looked at them with such
distress that I have never forgotten it," said Madame Tricquet.
"He could not have been more than 17 or 18. He was deathly
pale. He leant against the door without saying a word. My
cousin offered him a glass of water which at first he refused."
The German gradually unfroze and described in bad French
the duel between his Panzer and a Cromwell. The two tanks
met on a corner and fired simultaneously destroying each
other.
Everyone was dead except himself.
He kept repeating in a desperate tone: "Kameraden all kaput!
Tommies all kaput!"
The whole plain was on fire.
"That evening,"
recalls Jean Bard,
"from the heights of
Malvoue which dominate the plateau we could see smoke
rising from one end of the little Juillemier road to the other.
Ammunition dumps flared on the Guerquesalles road, the
plateau of La Bruyères Frenay was thick with smoke and the
Argentan road ablaze, while the ammunition in the wrecked
tanks on the Camembert road blew up." 13
Night fell on Trun. "But now it was the turn of the Boches
to fire," relates Xavier Rousseau.
"Their 'Moaning Minnies'
filled the sky with the dreadful wailing noise of projectiles; the
electric guns joined in and the flames grew thicker. German
planes prowled over the town. It was hell on earth." 1
The Canadians were only 7 kilometres from the Americans,
who were approaching Chambois from the south, and the
Americans were only 3 kilometres from the Poles who were
also approaching Chambois from the north-east.
18
The Americans advance on Chambois
from the south
"At 0400 hours a long infantry column left Tercé and
travelled via Aunon to Urou. It made no noise for the men who
observed absolute silence were wearing boots with rubber
soles. At oб3o hours this column was massed behind
Vaugan ford. Behind the infantrymen came jeeps, mortars and
light artillery. A dressing station was erected beyond the ford.
Like huge wasps, reconnaissance aircraft circled above Urou
and Crennes. One by one in single file the men crossed the
Eure, and then fanned out from the marsh to the church, the
grassland and the small streets of the town."
This is how a dozen refugees' in trenches under the N 24
bis saw the start of the offensive by the 318th U.S. Infantry
Regiment on the morning of the 18th, at o8oo hours Allied
Colonel McHugh's regiment was one of the four which, on
the 27 kilometre front from Argentan to Gacé held the
southern jaw of the pincer.
Ahead of the American infantrymen were hills, and then
more hills. On the extreme left, Hill 213, the south-west out-
runner of Gouffern Forest, dominates the town and the Argen-
tan plateau. On the extreme right the heights of the Touques
dominate Gacé. Halfway between these crests, Hill 129, at the
north-east end of Gouffern Forest, controls the only corridor
cut through the slopes—the Chambois road.
Leclerc's armour protected the right and left flanks of the
American infantry. On the left the 2nd Armoured Division
holding the enemy north of the Orne, between Ecouché and
Juvigny, merely reported to General Gerow, G.O.C. V Corps,
who asked "the French artillery to support the attack of the
four American regiments."
To the right the de Langlade
Tactical Group on the headland of Exmes waited for orders
