2NO
80
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
But Kurt Meyer had foreseen the attack. He withdrew his
armour from the villages about to be bombed, having spotted
through his field glasses the Canadian column drawn up
impeccably on either side of the main road as though on
manoeuvres. The Commander of the 12th S.S. Panzer
immediately split up his forces into two offensive wings pivot-
ing on the Caen-Falaise axis like the wings of an eagle, aligned
20 tanks, including 8 Tigers, on the two segments of the Di83,
attacked Cintheaux, which he recaptured with great style, and
by halting the advance of the brand new
4th Canadian
Armoured Division, saved Falaise.
The news on the teleprinters reached Sepp Dietrich, who
passed it on to Eberbach; it reached von Kluge who telephoned
to Jodl, deferred the order to retreat, gave a reprieve to Kurt
Meyer who was destined that night to move to Mortain, and
delayed his order to withdraw to the Seine for nine days.
The faithful Kurt Meyer had just offered his master Adolf
Hitler a poisoned gift.
Von Kluge was not deceived by this ephemeral victory. An
hour later the Canadian offensive was resumed. Cramesnil fell
at I330 hours to the Royal Regiment of Canada; Bretteville, in
ruins, fell at 1400 hours to the Calgary Highlanders and Cin-
theaux was retaken from Kurt Meyer at i600 hours by the
South Alberta Regiment, overtaken in turn by two companies
of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada, who
pushed on as far as Hautmesnil.
On his right Kurt Meyer met with new opponents, the Poles.
On the road which leads to Saint-Aignan-de-Cramesnil General
Maczek's spearhead, the 2nd Polish Armoured Regiment under
Lieutenant-Colonel Koszutski, knocked out six of the 20 Tigers
dug in by the 12th S.S. Panzer, losing 26 tanks in the fray. At
the foot of a hill, nine Polish Shermans blazed, set on fire by a
single 88-mm gun. The 62-ton Tiger and 45-ton Panther both
with 88-mm
guns had
very
superior
periscopes and the
advantage of wider tracks on the soft ground. They completely
outgunned the 3o-ton Sherman with its 75-mm gun. The Tiger
armour was 150-mm thick, the Sherman armour only 76-mm.
There was an accepted loss of 4 Shermans for the loss of one
12. Otto Elfeldt, Command
Lambert-sur-Dives by th
93. At Chambois,
I9th August,
oni
Falaise Gap
the
closed.
was
Corporal
Grabowski of the
10th Polish Drag-
oons shakes hands
with
G.I.
John
Wellington of the
359th
ment.
U.S.
Regi-
OV.LT
нет.
XXXIV German Korps captured at St.
ch Dragoons on 20th August.
