148
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Berlin von Kluge conferred with Hausser, Eberbach and Funck
until dawn.
"To launch an attack now with divisions that have been bled
white, without air support, without supplies or reserves is un-
thinkable," said Eberbach.
"Only a rapid withdrawal out of the encirclement can avert
the catastrophe," admitted Lieutenant-General von Funck,
who had been battered at Mortain.
"I am ready to issue the necessary orders to evacuate the
salient as you request," agreed von Kluge. "But only after I've
referred to the Führer's HQ. Without his consent I dare not
take such far-reaching decisions."
And the Feldmarschall risked a few disillusioned comments:
"The people back there at O.K.W. are living in another
world. They have no idea of the situation here. I know it ...
from reading your reports."
Then after a pause: "And after my own personal experiences
during the past twenty-four hours."
Why should von Kluge have taken these oratorical pre-
cautions? At the very moment he was confiding in his generals,
another Field-Marshal, recalled from the Russian Front, was on
the way to La Roche-Guyon. That night while the frantic
search was going on for Feldmarschall von Kluge he had been
appointed by Hitler to be the new C.-in-C. West. It was Feld-
marschall Model. He was the bearer of a letter from the Führer
to von Kluge: "The health of Feldmarschall von Kluge," it read,
"no longer allows him to fulfil his responsibilities."
15
Convergence on Trun
On August 15th the 340 inhabitants of Jort, a village
straddling
the Dives in a valley of broken hills, had
assembled on the far side, on the eastern bank. The bridge,
which led to the hills descending from the crests of the Laison,
had been blown up and the villagers of the left bank had pre-
ferred to put the river ditch between them and the fighting.
From their attics the refugees could see the German retreat and
the advance of the Allied units; no one imagined that the latter
were Polish. The green slopes of the west bank were that
morning the scene of skirmishes between bands of Germans
defeated by General Simonds' offensive and by the boldness of
General Maczek.
How could the inhabitants of Jort, who had so far lived an
uneventful life well apart from the bombing in their houses on
the river bank in the hollow of the undulating hills leading to
the Auge heights, have suspected that their village had been
the subject of serious staff conferences? It was now included
in the northern arm of the pincers which were to encircle three
German armies.
"A very hot day that day," noted General Maczek, com-
mander of the ist Polish Armoured Division. "A sunny day, as
a day should be in August; but this sun shining on our superbly
advancing division—August 15th is the Soldier's Day in Poland
-was the sun of happiness » i
The left wing of Montgomery's armies, the Polish Armoured
Division, had accomplished an appalling, disordered crossing
at right angles to the communication lines of three Allied
divisions, some days earlier, to the west of N 158.
"A real
nightmare" in the words of General Maczek. Their task was to
throw a bridgehead over the river Dives, and now they were
advancing proudly towards the river.
The "radar" of the division, its Armoured Reconnaisance
Regiment, the 1oth P.S.K. (loty Pulk Strzelcow Konnych) —56
Cromwell and II Stuart tanks flying the emerald
green,
