The Encirclement
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Group Tac. HQ, Montgomery studied the situation as he did
each night before dinner in the mess, with Francis de Guin-
gand, an old friend from the desert.
The two men went for a moment into the map room, a
specially converted truck, and stopped in front of the large
scale two-colour map compiled a few days earlier for Operation
Totalize. On it were marked the exact positions of weapons
and strong points.
"The R.A.F.," began the Chief of Staff, "has reported the
strafing of a long column of 1,800 vehicles which was trying
to reach the Seine ferries. The destruction of the column took
place in the plain between Falaise and Argentan."
"The enemy obviously plans to extricate the largest possible
part of his infantry and armour from the salient, and to re-
form on a north-south line much further to the east," Monty
replied quietly.
"In that case why the frantic resistance? Why are they
apparently trying to hold their positions inside the salient?"
The bony, ascetic face of Monty looked up at the cheerful
ruddy face of "Freddie", 14 years his junior.
"Probably because for the moment only the 2nd line troops
are moving towards the Seine."
Montgomery pinched his left cheek and said with a depre-
catory gesture: "If we could close our pincers on the Falaise-
Alençon gap we should catch most of von Kluge's fighting
units in the trap."
Sir Francis de Guinguand noticed that on the right side panel
above the desk, Rommel's photo had been replaced by that of
von Rundstedt. Monty was one photo behindhand.
"Every hour that passes,"
"empties the sack we want to close."
remarked the Chief of Staff,
Montgomery with a nervous gesture switched on the light
above Map 40° 14' SW: a blue line, the river Laison north of
Falaise, flowing south-west, north-east, disappeared beneath a
line of inverted Y's, whose arrows threatened General Simonds'
armour-Kurt Meyer's 88's.
"To complete the encirclement won't be easy. The enemy
knows that his life depends on this corridor."
Another seven days were to pass and we shall see how.
At the same moment a few miles away at "Shellburst",
hastier retreat.
