24
The Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives Bridges
Two old stone bridges rather less than 12 feet wide cross
the branches of the Dives at the foot of the church of Saint-
These bridges lead to the Trun-Chambois road, to the ex-
tremities held respectively by the Canadians on the left and
the Americans on the right.
Joined to the Trun-Chambois road, extending the line of the
bridges, lanes climb slowly to the Auge hills.
That morning
of the 2oth they constituted the last and only exit gate, at
the still soft joint of the Canadian, Polish and American thrusts.
The Germans would try all day to hold these bridges
although they were shelled by Canadian artillery, who were
marvellously placed on a hill overlooking the village to the
north-east. Throughout the day the allies would struggle in
vain to link up.
Everything flowed towards the bridges.
"We knew that a narrow lane near Saint-Lambert could still
be used as an escape route across the Dives," General von Lutt-
witz related after the war. That morning at dawn he had
assembled the last armour of 2nd Panzer at the exit to the
village of Bailleul.
Vehicles rushed eight abreast towards this outlet, together
with all the units which had learned of the breach opened by
General Meindl during the night.
It was 0700 hours. They had to be quick for towards the
west the British were
putting pressure on the end of the
pocket, over-running the Falaise-Argentan road, entering into
the bowl and trying to join up with the Canadians
"The artillery, silent until then, burst out in a fury such as
I had never experienced before," says von Luttwitz.
along the Dives, the various convoys had to run the gauntlet
of enemy fire of all types. The vehicles turned back, some-
The Surrender
249
times turning in circles until they were demolished, thus block-
ing the roads. Columns of smoke rose from the fuel tankers as
they were hit; ammunition exploded and riderless horses, often
badly wounded, stampeded. No traffic control was possible and
only a small number of my tanks and infantry were able to
force a passage to Saint-Lambert." 1
To the left, on the same flank as the breakout, the small
Canadian post at Saint-Lambert Mill was taken by surprise.
At this point, leading away from the river, was a cart track
extension of the roads from the heart of the plain. It was only
natural that this track which leads from the plain to the hills
should be the scene of the tragic battle subsequently known
as the "Ambush of Saint-Lambert Mill".
Twenty-two Canadians guarded the sheer banks of the
Dives, mingling with refugees sheltering in the pig sties round
It was 8 o'clock, according to Abbé Launay, when
advancing tanks roared towards Tournai from across the river.
For the 150 refugees pressing round the bank of the Dives
there was no possible doubt: it was capitulation. Nobody
wanted to miss a moment of this spectacle. Actually 400 S.S.
advanced with huge white flags accompanied by tanks of all
And then without warning
attack. The flags fell to the ground, the machine-guns spat-
tered, the tanks fired from ali sides and the bullets whistled.
The refugees scattered, some towards Trun, others towards
Magny along the bed of the Dives, others into the trenches.
A wounded S.S. man fell into the river. A Canadian dived into
the water, pulled him out and bandaged him. But the .S. were
winning. The wounded man noticed this and while his rescuer
fought bravely beside his 21 comrades to repulse this treach-
erous enemy, he picked up a revolver which had been dropped
in the grass and shot in the back the soldier to whom he owed
his life." 2
Outnumbered, the Canadians, who had lost one killed, one
wounded and two prisoners, and had wounded 100 and killed
12 Germans, fell back to the rising ground which separates the
Trun-Chambois road from the river. Here they waited for the
