298
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
I found seven handbags in one armoured car."
The ground was littered with military orders, documents,
boxes of Turkish cigarettes, private correspondence, rations
and ammunition. Peter Simonds was horrified at the sight of
a German truck hit by a shell in the driver's seat; the man's
feet were still on the accelerator but the rest of the body had
been blown 20 ft in the air into a tree.
Alan Wood with his Press photographer visited the exits
of Saint-Lambert. A burnt-out tank blocked the road. The
photographer trained his camera and then turned away. Alan
Wood realized the reason: on the turret of the tank was "some-
thing which looked like a doll." It was the corpse of a German,
half consumed by the flames.
"On the 7 kilometres from Coudehard to Tournai," says
M. Esnay, the owner of Mont Vason farm,
put my foot to the ground. I walked with my handkerchief
to my nose over shells, the remains of tanks, guns and cars.
The ground was a shambles, with corpses of soldiers piled on
each other, dead cattle and disembowelled horses. We waded
in blood."
For weeks thousands of visitors came to harvest the battle-
field; they arrived in carts, in cars and in trucks. "Go to Tour-
nai, you'll find everything there," the word went round.
Clothing coupons, sheets, linen, wool, layettes, office material,
toilet articles,
all kinds of hardware
and
pharmaceutical
products; on the deserted battlefield more was to be found than
in the best stocked store.
Peter Simonds was shocked by the way the French looted.
They reminded him of "vultures stripping the carcase of a
tiger after a death-struggle with a lion."
The French, by
removing tyres from the cars "were doing the Allied cause
harm as they were immobilizing many useful German vehicles
which Twenty-first Army Group needed as extra transport in
their next big jump to the Seine. Such selfish individualism,"
says Captain Peter Simonds, "is perhaps the partial answer to
France's decline and her surprising collapse in the war." 6
Nevertheless, the Normandy villagers were not by
any
means the only looters. "Take anything you can drive," the
G.I.s of the 359th Regiment were told that Monday morning.
"In a frantic scouring of the fields," says one report, "the 'take'
The Surrender
included 35 fine cavalry horses, 25 automobiles and trucks in-
cluding one 1939 Studebaker President, converted into a truck
and driven away by Privates Stanley Grabowski and Charlie
Fuhrman. It was a gay happy convoy that moved south that
day to the cheers of the French lining the roads."
Today many of the leading citizens regret that they did
the verges of certain roads.
was still functioning in Bourg Saint-Léonard, exploring every
yard of grass, every footpath, interrogating eye witnesses, ex
huming here and there, checking the dead from lists of the
units engaged to give them names.
map in hand at a farm north of Saint-Lambert. The farmers
who had guests had decided to eat outside and the tablecloth
was laid on the ground under four apple trees. The officials
apologized for disturbing their party; but the timetable was
tight and the map coordinates had been determined in advance.
had to check and exhume the bodies.
spades went into action. The map had been right!
raise their eyes when a car pulls up for no apparent reason
plate either a maple leaf or a D.
