208
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
barrage harassed us. Our losses were very disturbing. To the
right, left, ahead and to our rear, our comrades continued to
be killed. We were distraught.
We were exhausted from
stepping over so many corpses. No one cared for his fellows,
each man thought only of his own salvation. We ransacked
the pockets of the dead in the hopes of finding a cigarette or
something to eat. Poor devils who would remain where they
lay and who would never see their homes again! The cars and
tanks still in action crushed their bodies. It was terrible. We
had one idea in our minds; to press on out of this. Dawn of
the i9th began to break on the horizon. The artillery pursued
us. The hardest to endure were the enemy planes; coming
wave after wave they took a dreadful toll. We were constantly
forced to fall flat in the mud."
Kurt Meyer met Hausser at about midday in a ditch behind
a farm. Beside the C.-in-C. studying a map, leaning against the
embankment, General von Gersdorff, Lieutenant-Colonel von
Kluge and Major Guderian were conferring.
"Our plight was
dreadful," says Kurt Meyer. To join his chiets, having heard of
their whereabouts by chance, he had had to cross, in a series of
short, sharp dashes, a terrain swept by artillery fire.?
Kurt Meyer learned from the Colonel-General himself the
part he was to play: to hold the northern flank until Meindl
broke out and to prevent the Canadians keeping their rendez-
vous in Chambois.
"The air hummed with fighter-bombers, which found as
many targets as they could cope with," notes the commander
of the 12th S.S. Panzer.
"An ammunition truck exploded,
spraying us with its blessing." Von Gersdorff was wounded, but
the conference continued.
bursting shells.
Shortly after this the Hitlerjugend leader ran into Meindl in a
woodcutter's hut; he confirmed the orders he had received
from the C.-in-C. Seventh Army in a ditch.
The total destruction of means of communication was of
little importance that day: army corps, divisions and regiments
The Pocket
209
received and transmitted top priority orders, shouting from one
orchard to the next.
To the west LXXVII Korps was the last to leave its positions;
astride the Falaise-Argentan road it gathered up the retreating
troops. Two of its six divisions held a long corridor from
Bazoches to Occagnes leading to the heart of the pocket. Three
other divisions to the north-west slowed down the progress of
the 53rd British Division, deploying on the main road from
Falaise to the northern exits of Pierrefitte.
To the south, the stretch of N 158 from Pierrefitte to Argen-
tan is like a camel's back; the peaks lead from the valley of the
Orne to the valley of the Dives; from the west the Ri-
Commeaux-Brieux road carried the German tide; to the east
the Occagnes-Bailleul bore it away; beyond, it crossed the Dives
plain in a straight line towards Chambois before ascending the
next line of crests, the one which the encircled Germans pro-
posed crossing in order to join II S.S. Panzer Korps
Along the spinneys of this road stretched the long single
column of one of the most powerful German armies, slipping
along ridges held each side by Allied troops. Along the whole
length of its path, the villages to the west of N 158, until then
undisturbed, witnessed one of the greatest retreats in military
"At Ri," reports Count de Vigneral, "the whole of Satur-
day the I9th we stayed down in our cellars, whilst shelled from
the north-west. The German troops were no longer fighting;
they were blowing up their tanks and guns and fleeing through
the woods, pursued by infantrymen who filed along each of
the drives in the park towards Commeaux." Commeaux, the
neighbouring village, like Ri, would have to wait for the
following day to see the arrival of the British. Bombarded on
the 17th, set on fire on the 18th, Commeaux was in the front
line the following afternoon. "Two Tigers, informed of the
presence of a British tank in the plain north of Commeaux to-
wards Pierrefitte-Ronai,
advanced with
carrying a six-tube mortar to within a kilometre of Commeaux
near Rotils and Buissons Pillu," reports Germaine Guillou.
