OROUS
14. 1oth Polish Armoured Regiment
near
Aignan, Crasmesnil.
I5. 2nd Polish Armoured Regiment
outside Jort.
The Decision
81
German tank and this advantage resulted in some of the Allied
tankmen having an incredible number of tanks shot from
under them. Peter Simonds, brother of the G.O.C. II Canadian
Corps, was struck by a scene which illustrated the complete
futility of war: the corpses of German anti-tank gunners
scattered in grotesque positions round their gun. It had been
put out of action by the crew, now dead, of the last of the nine
Polish Sherman tanks, which was burning merrily 65 metres
away, on its own.
To be sure, the Canadians on the left and the Poles to the
right had been halted 18 kilometres north of Falaise. Major
Stefanowicz's ist Polish Armoured Regiment on the Saint-
Aignan-de-Cramesnil height manoeuvred in tangled country
under mortar, heavy artillery and tank fire.
But von Kluge knew that his armies were now confined to
a corridor 134 kilometres wide, their flanks menaced to the
north by Montgomery in Hautmesnil and to the south by Brad-
ley in Le Mans.
On the Caen-Falaise road, in a "cage" hastily encircled with
barbed wire, were crowded the first scared German prisoners.
In their orchard pen, reported Alan Wood, they could be seen
crawling and fighting among themselves to pick from the apple
trees the still green fruit.
Not far away, Peter Simonds, whose
duties with the
Royal Canadian signals led him to supervise the laying of tele-
phone lines along a new slice of captured road, noticed a
German who appeared to be hanging over the metal fence of a
field. It was only half a man. Simonds spotted the other half, a
trunk lying in the middle of the road with its arms in the air.
He approached, whereas the other cars drove round it—it
might have been a booby trap—and read on the lapel of the
tunic the number of the 89th German Infantry Division.
At the end of the day, at the very moment von Kluge had
taken the plunge, Eisenhower, who had dined with Bradley,
returned
to Shellburst, drove on to Bayeux
and then to
Creuilly. Passing the security guard of American jeeps sur-
rounding Creullet Manor he entered the headquarters truck,
with its maps the length of two brightly-lit panels, and sat
