170
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Guyon, which he would not reach until nightfall, pondered
over the declarations he would make to his petrified Staffs "to
hold every inch of ground without aid and without hope of
salvation. To resist south of the Seine . .
and when this
directive no longer applied to resist on the Somme-Marne line
and to hold it to the death." 7
What the resilient Feldmarschall did not know was that the
moment the château gates of La Roche-Guyon were opening,
his master Adolf Hitler with death in his heart had just worked
out the general order of the day 772,916: the evacuation of
French territory in the form of the withdrawal of Army Group
G-the armies guarding the Atlantic and Mediterranean-to
behind the Marne-Saône, the Swiss frontier.
All fire and flame, the new C.-in-C. West, with incredible
optimism, had already the previous night written his first letter
to Berlin to recall thirty new divisions from the Russian front
and provide 200,000 new troops. "He certainly did not believe
this himself," writes Blumentritt.
At 1430 hours von Kluge had met Dietrich, Hausser and
Eberbach to arrange the details of the retreat, to align three
armies— the main body of which was beginning to retire over
the Orne- on the line Morteaux-Trun-Gacé-Laigle-Eure, east of
the Dives.
But to the south-west the Second British Army advancing II
kilometres east of Flers had just made contact with the First
American Army in the region of Briouze.
And to the west, the British XXX Corps which had captured
Condé-sur-Noireau was advancing towards the Orne.
To the north-west, XII Corps was advancing west of Falaise,
to the north, the Canadians had crossed the Dives near Mort-
eaux and to the south-east, the Poles at Hill 159 above Moutiers-
en-Auge, also in the hands of Lieutenant-Colonel Koszutski,
were within a stone's throw of Trun.
In his diary Abbé Launay noted at the end of the day: "The
German cavalry is falling back. The noise of its vehicles on the
road deafens us. Huge clouds at various points hide the horizon;
it is the smoke of burning vehicles."
At this moment Peter Simonds drove his Jeep to the junction
of the N 158 and the Thury-Harcourt road, a height from
which there is a view of the plain leading to Argentan. He took
The Encirclement
his glasses and to his surprise could follow the long procession
of German columns: "grey worms" —harassed by the planes
of the 2nd Tactical Air Force, whose direct hits raised thick
clouds of smoke in the air.
Focusing his glasses on a group of Germans, Peter Simonds
witnessed the following scene: "The Germans ... would come
up close enough to the high ground to make a pretence of a
counter-attack. These 'attacks' were 9o per cent purposeless.
The bewildered wretches making them obviously wanted to
surrender but the S.S. men and other units still wanting to
throw their hands up before a Canadian or British bullet got
"It was one of the most inhumanly stupid and degrading
scenes imaginable. One group of Germans was shelled and shot
up by another German unit lying in some woods, when they
stopped and failed to advance in the face of Canadian machine-
