The Battle of the Falaise Gap
west. On its left, the 2nd Battalion waited until 0930 hours to
attack from the south. Two more battalions, watching the
forest, climbed to Crennes, which they reached at 1145 hours.
Throughout these movements a strange silence descended
on the ruins as the American advance guards appeared.
"At nine o'clock we noticed to our relief that the small Ger-
man post at the cross roads had disappeared and also the large
tank which toured the neighbourhood, and there was silence."
Another citizen noted: "About 10.30, reassured by the silence
that had at last fallen on the city we climbed to the observation
post on the first floor, when there was loud knocking on the
door. Convinced that this time it was our liberators, we opened
it and saw the Americans. Admittedly they had been looking
for some German stragglers rather than being intent on paying
us a courtesy visit. Nevertheless they did not disguise their
surprise at finding civilians in such a dreadfully ravaged town.
This patrol was soon followed by a larger one."
Elsewhere "we heard cautious footsteps at 11.30. There was
a knock at the door. They were the first American scouts and
they, too, were surprised to find an inhabited house in this
devastated town. They crowded round a lady in our group
who spoke English and offered us small packets of sugar, coffee
cakes and cigarettes in exchange for which they were delighted
to drink a glass of wine."
Patrol after patrol of General MacBride's infantry, for whom
"Argentan had been their first ordeal against a well-trained,
well-equipped enemy in strength," entered the town.
was soon excitement such as we had not known for a long
time, refugees streaming in from the country and mingling
with the men in khaki," said Maurice Hommey. "The town,
said another refugee,
"was in a great state of excitement..:
Cameras worked overtime to record for the rest of the world
the plight of our city which had suffered so grievously from
the appalling seven-day bombardment. It had the sad privilege
of being the third worst damaged city in Normandy. Pre-war
Argentan with its tortuous cobbled streets, its large squares,
old manors and historic buildings of the original period had
had an indefinable individual character. In ruins, it was just
any other bombed city."
The Surrender
245
Two more battalions of Combat Team 317 captured Hill 213
having met with no resistance, and patrolled the forest to the
north, towards the British and to the east towards MacLean's
The outskirts of the village of Crennes where four roads
converge from the east and south, were the obvious place for
the rendezvous.
"Towards 13oo hours," relates Xavier Rousseau, "the Ameri-
cans en masse invaded Crennes via Hamel meadow where they
joined up with U.S. troops coming from Argentan. Houses were
searched: two or three Germans who had tried to procure
civilian clothes that morning were caught in Loudien farm;
another near the church fired but soon threw away his rifle and
put up his hands."
This was the end of the battle which took a frightful toll in
dead and wounded.
"We are finally in possession of this city of Argentan which
"We have fought well and we've lost 800 men."
"The crossing of N 24 bis was the toughest show our unit
another officer revealed on
20th to an inhabitant of Sai. "We've lost between 1000 and
1500 men killed and wounded."
Only thirty returned. Our artillery killed the rest."
Urou is a name that remains unknown in the history of the
war. It is a small village off the Paris-Granville road. Here
in Normandy met its death was closed.
That afternoon the jaws of the pincers closed.
To the right General MacBride's and General MacLean's
