126
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
forest of Ecouves, containing the gth Panzer, was not only
enclosed in a box but penetrated from both north and south!
Putz coming from the Cercueil road junction had met up in
the heart of the forest with Roumianzoff coming from the
Loges crossroads.!8
That Sunday afternoon Leclerc would enter Argentan for a
few hours only. He would then retire.
"Sergeant Taine," ordered Captain Sarrazac, O.C. 2nd and
3rd sections of No. 10 Company of the 3rd Tchad Foot
Regiment, "get together a patrol. Enter Argentan through the
gardens and tell me how many Jerries there are in the northern
part of the town between the town hall and the Falaise road
"Weapons, Captain?"
"Three sub-machines for the six of you, two fifteen-round
carbines and two Mills bombs per man. Carry on."
1630 hours. Departure in Indian file. Short sharp rushes
from house to house ... Post reached in the heart of the city.
Saint-Germain church 200 yards away. Finger on the trigger,
the six "Leclercs" approached it under cover of the apse and
took a ten-minute breather.
old man appeared from among the ruins.
"There's not a single Boche in the town, I swear to you." "Tell
us rather where is the mayor's house?" By a miracle, the Chief
Magistrate was at home.
"Embraces, a bottle of wine and
calvados," relates Sergeant Taine. And the patrol set off again
to the Falaise crossing. An enemy self-propelled gun appeared:
a volley, a hand grenade and four Germans leapt out of the
firing from all sides, soon followed by two Tigers
which, disconcerted by this strange battle, remained without
firing for 35 minutes, before plunging among the ruins. This
gave Sgt. Taine's patrol the necessary respite to return to the
At the same time a section of the grd Tchad Foot, com-
manded by Lieut. Carrage, which had set out to silence an anti-
tank gun 2 kilometres in front of Argentan, found itself in the
centre of the town. "Argentan seemed deserted. Two or three
reconnaissance cars, soon destroyed by our rockets, and a few
not very aggressive infantrymen," notes Lieut. Carrage. "We
took narrow streets which doubled back on themselves and
seemed to lead nowhere," writes Jean-François Thomas."
few local youths spotted the French. "You're crazy, the town's
full of tanks. Don't go any farther." Nevertheless the patrol
pressed on to the church and unearthed the priest, Rattier, who
had taken refuge in the tomb of Margaret of Lorraine, with the
beadle and his wife. "Good morning, Father." But the curé did
not recognize these strange uniforms. Probably Germans.
you speak French?" "Of course. We are De Gaulle's men." A
paternal embrace from the priest, who took the men to the
sacristy to pour them a glass,? and then guided them to the
Mayor. "The French flag fluttered on the balcony of the town
hall, a second and then a third were hoisted on the big tower
of Saint-Germain, announcing to the surrounding plain the
liberation of Argentan," recalls an eye witness.
to Jean-François
"destroyed 3 armoured vehicles, 5 cars, killing a host of
German officers and soldiers without losing a single man in
Allies. But the same evening the Germans re-occupied the
strategic points and posted several assault tanks with first-class
crews. At dawn on Monday the 14th, in the early morning
light, squadrons of bombers flew over the little town; hundreds
of bombs were dropped and rows of houses collapsed. In flames
and smoke the destruction of Argentan had begun." al
Although it had crossed N 24 bis at two points, at Exmes, a
Roman fort favourable for artillery observation, and at Gacé,
an escape point for the enemy
army, the 5th Armoured
Division was forbidden to go any farther.
cutting roads leading out of Gacé to the east."
General Oliver. The Shermans of Combat Command would not
