The Battle of the Falaise Gap
just about where we were to enter it. Behind a triangle of
meadows fringed with hedges was a mass of vehicles. They
seemed to glide beneath the foliage which half masked them." 8
This prey within gun range electrified Captain Buis's company:
every gun fired at the same time. The tanks sped to the Orne
bridge, bottled up 400 vehicles of the r16th Panzar and cut the
N 24 bis. The Seventh Army of the Wehrmacht had literally
cracked its head on an impenetrable barricade and lost its last
escape route to the east. Its retreat was deflected to the pot-
holed forest roads which, descending into the Dives cauldron,
cross it in open country before climbing across the Auges hills
towards the Seine. It was 0645 hours; the battle of the pocket
Colonel Billotte made a dash for the house which was to be-
come his HQ, abandoned that very moment by a Luftwaffe
company. On a table the porridge prepared for the fugitives
was still piping hot. Colonel Billotte seized the bowl, devoured
its contents and considered his breakfast well-earned.
Any farther advance for Combat Command A of the 5th
Armoured Division was banned. On Leclerc's right wing,
General Oliver's Shermans halted in front of the level crossing
at the entrance to Argentan, gunning and machine-gunning
any cover that might be suspect. This fracas disturbed no one,
because it brought liberation and was a moment worth living
through. On N 158, while the armour passed in good order, a
young girl went on milking her
cows, stopping only to
decorate horns with the branches cut by the bullets' Argentan
lay ahead. The Americans had planned to enter the town that
evening. But they reproached the French' for having taken
the liberty of passing east of the Ecouves forest, reserved for
the sth U.S. Armoured Division, for having cluttered up the
roads south of Mortrée, for having impeded the fuel supplies
of Combat Command, in short for having retarded the attack
by six hours. Six hours to the advantage of an infantry
battalion, the I16th Panzer's, coming direct from Mortain to
oppose in Mortrée the advance of the Shermans on Argentan.
On the arrival of the advance guards of 5th U.S. Armoured
Division, a citizen of Mauvaisville, Major Quatrecoup,
The Encirclement
approached a high-ranking American officer. "The enemy
troops still holding the town are weak. They are short of heavy
equipment. Their isolation, their lack of cohesion and the lack
of liaison with their artillery give us the chance of a great coup
with even a handful of troops." 11
The American called for an interpreter. What was this
civilian doing interfering?
"I have given you the near certainty of liberating Argentan
at little cost. You need only three squads of men with plenty
of grenades and tommy guns, supported by artillery and in
liaison with the tactical air force to isolate and neutralize the
The interpreter translated while Major Quatrecoup bent
over a map showing three lines of progression. The American
listened courteously and said nothing.
"This affair has been carefully studied," continued
Frenchman. "I propose leading one of these columns, and will
find you guides for the others."
The officer of the 5th Armoured Division turned to the
interpreter: "Plan of no possible interest."
The Calvary of Argentan had just been decreed.
The right wing of the 5th U.S. Armoured Division; Combat
Command R, at midday on the i3th had reached the crossroads
at Bourg-Saint-Leonard, a place of vital importance, because it
opened the road that led to Montgomery and closed the retreat
route to the Seine, Dreux and Paris. It was ordered not to
advance any farther.
"We heard shots and bullets whistling on the Chambois
road, then a loud explosion which made the few Germans who
had remained flee towards the forest, clinging to the walls. A
further explosion; an American tank advanced slowly. All the
inhabitants hailed it as they did the two or three others which
followed. The liberators were shaken by the hand, offered
flowers and cool drinks. A general distribution of cigarettes,
sweets and chewing gum... A moment of intense emotion.
There were only a few dozen people round the three tanks but
their eyes were starting out of their heads. A quarter of an hour
later the tricolors which had been stored away for four years
