COUs
68
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
deploying my division correctly, the Allies would break
through as far as Falaise and the German army to the west
would find itself completely caught in the trap." s
"Trap" was the operative word, the word of the day, when
the Allies first found themselves no longer aligned but already
enveloping the enemy forces which were trying to separate
them. Montgomery and the 2ist British Army Group were to
the north, whilst Bradley and the 12th U.S. Army Group were
to the south. The British C.-in-C. had just addressed the senior
officers of the Polish Armoured Division still in reserve in the
little village of Buhot near Bayeux.
In the orchard where General Maczek was under canvas, the
officers squatting or kneeling on the grass were all agog to hear
from this great leader who had come to pay them a visit.
Against a backcloth of an oak copse was a blackboard. The
Commander-in-Chief of the British Forces, who was in the habit
of visiting one division a day, had devoted the afternoon of
August 5th to General Maczek's Ist Polish Armoured Division.
In a rather baggy pair of corduroys, a high-necked jumper
and black beret with two badges, Monty spoke:
"Listen, gentlemen. From today your division is incorporated
with II Canadian Corps which will have the honour of taking
Monty went on to explain his intentions.
"You see, we have to open a door. And how does one open
a door? There are two ways!"
Monty turned to the blackboard but instead of taking a piece
of chalk took his stick and placed it flat against the board hold-
ing it horizontal with both hands.
"Here is the door. Let us imagine that on the other side some-
one has decided to stop you entering. Either you press with all
your might and the door will open, but what expenditure of
Releasing his left hand, Monty made an anti-clockwise
rotatory movement with his stick from top to bottom, repre-
senting the path taken by Bradley from Avranches to Le Mans.
"Or else if you haven't the necessary strength to push the
door open, you can resort to ingenuity.'
The Decision
A sea breeze blew over the electrified audience.
Monty turned once more to the blackboard and placed his
stick horizontally with a theatrical gesture:
"You bust the hinges."
Montgomery opened both hands at once and the stick fell
"Very soon, this is how we are going to attack
... My military doctrine is clear," Montgomery
went on, "it is to throw the enemy off his balance while
retaining our own."
"Monty leaves the Americans to bear the whole brunt of
the battle," Eisenhower had complained ten days earlier at a
big official dinner in London.
"You're unjust," retorted Churchill. "Montgomery is fight-
ing vigorously at Caen. He is containing the Germans on his
flank to enable you to break through at Avranches."
"That is correct," admitted Eisenhower.
"But then let us
launch major offensives at each front simultaneously, like the
"A false comparison and a most costly policy," insisted
Montgomery. "The German density in Normandy is two and a
half times that of the Russian front. A general offensive along
the whole front? My plan is better. To act so that the enemy
engages his reserves on a broad front to seal up the breaches
—made in his defences." 7
And that night of the 7/8th August the enemy could count
the breaches everywhere.
To the north, a breakthrough on the Falaise road.
To the north-west, Mont Pinçon lost the night before.
To the west, at Estry, the lith British Armoured Division
pinned down the roth S.S. Panzer which Hitler was so impatient
to throw in at Avranches.
It was the combination punch so dear to the victor of
Alamein. The left hook, then the right cross.
The Panzers immobilized in the bocage had left Bradley free
to break through in the Cotentin. And now that the Panzers
were regrouping against the Americans before Mortain, Mont-
gomery would be free to break through in the Calvados.
That night events were shaping for the Allies faster than the
most optimistic forecasts. The enemy, by persisting at Mortain,
