The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Lieut-Colonel Koszutski's battle group was not only des-
perately short of petrol, but also of ammunition, food and
medicaments. Tank crews had no sleep for three days and more
prisoners than they could cope with. The advanced guard of
the ist Armoured Regiment took positions on Hill 262 at 1240
hours 19th August having driven the demoralized enemy who
were abandoning equipment and material as they fled. Major
Stefanowicz's squadrons were supported by the Polish divi-
sional artillery and by the guns of the 4th Canadian medium
artillery Regiment, whose salvoes were ordered by Capt. Pierre
Sévigny. He was to become a popular figure with the Poles,
who twenty years later are still grateful for the work done
by this artillery observer. "My vehicle," recalls Capt. Sévigny,
"was a Sherman tank, I had two wireless sets. With one I could
give firing orders to the batteries to the rear; with the other
I could communicate with Major Stefanowicz already in the
front line. I had two Canadian signallers, a sergeant gunner
and a Polish driver for my Jeep." The observation post to which
Capt. Sévigny had been sent was on top of a precipice, from
where he could see the whole plain.
A short conference between the C.O.s of the two Polish
Armoured Regiments, organized details of the defence of the
now cut off, from its Canadian allies and sur-
rounded by the escaping Werhmacht.
Colonel Bacon's Americans
and Major Currie's
Canadians were trying to join up along the river. To the left,
on the bends of the road leading to Chambois, Major Zgorzelski
launched the loth Dragoons and the 24th Polish Lancer Regi-
ments on Chambois.
at 1300 hours, two columns of German
vehicles started to climb, one from Chambois to the south and
the other from Mont-Ormel to the east. These two roads met
at a road junction which dominates the whole valley of Dives
and which, in peacetime, is a famous beauty spot. At a pre-
arranged moment, calculated with precision, the two German
columns, huge personnel carriers, guns drawn by six horses,
staff cars, scout cars and two assault Panzers were due to meet.
This was the exact moment chosen by Sévigny to give orders
to the batteries: "Independent fire". Sixteen guns roared
simultaneously. Twenty times in succession their 100 lb shells
The Surrender
fell on this moving mass. "What a massacre! The gun layers did
a fine job. I could see several vehicles alight, terrified horses
trying to break out from their harness, men trying to flee. It
was useless. Shells soon found them and I saw bodies fly in
the air. Another blew off the turret of a tank setting its next
door neighbour on fire. Our machine-guns continued with the
slaughter. Ten minutes later the whole road was ablaze. The
ammunition exploded in the vehicles killing the occupants." 1
The Poles had not lost a single man. For them it was an
the southern peak 262, blinded as they were by the smoke
rising from the fires they had caused.
The Poles on their peak had not joined the Americans by
the afternoon, nor had they joined the Canadians: they were
on their own. They had food supplies for 24 hours, and a short-
age of water. Their medical supplies had been destroyed by an
88 and their doctor killed.
The Canadians, to whom General Maczek's division was
attached, had halted on Hill 240, north-east of Ecorches. A
gap of 8 kilometres separated them from the Poles. The "Cor-
ridor of Death" ran between the two hills and it was precisely
in this gap which separated the two hills that the II S.S. Panzer
Korps was preparing to rush-rescue launches approaching the
scene of a shipwreck to save a maximum of survivors.
"The northern peak of Hill 262 soon became a fortress," says
Captain Sévigny.
"Our only hope lay with the Americans com-
ing up from the south who were to join us during the night.
But the Americans had been halted at Chambois.
no hope of help—the Poles could only count on themselves.
As the left wing of II Canadian Corps, their fighting spirit had
driven them forward in such bold advances that they were
The Polish C.O. called the surviving officers and addressed
them in French in deference to Sévigny, as senior surviving
officer: "Gentlemen, the position is serious. Our brigade is com-
pletely cut off. The enemy is still fighting. His only retreat
routes are those which you can see to left and right. No one
except us can stop them. That is what we are going to try
to do. No question of surrender. I speak as a Pole."
