312
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
(8) The combined testimonies collected for the author by
M. François Brière. Most of the information dealing with
Avranches is the result of inquiries carried out for us
by MM. A. Osmond, Henri Béguin, Larose, Laîné, Pelchat,
Tholon, Lamotte, Ponty and, in particular, André Liot.
(9). The detail of this authentic dialogue is from Army Group
3 telephonic communications
records.
Von Schramm
transcribed it almost in full in his book The Generals
against Hitler.
(10)
Alfred Marie: op.cit.
(II)
Ibid.
(12)
From left to right, the 2ist Panzer of General Feuchtinger
- the famous division which advanced as far as the
Normandy coast from Lion-sur-Mer to Luc-sur-Mer on
the evening of June 6th — held the British east of the
Orne; the 12th Panzer and the Ist S.S. Panzer opposed
the Canadians on the Falaise road; the 2nd Panzer was
between the Laize and the Orne; the oth and roth S.S.
Panzer south of the Odon barred the way to Falaise from
south-west of Caen.
Patton: War as 1 knew it (Houghton Mifflin; Boston,
(2) Brenton Wallace: Patton and his Third Army (Military
Service Publishing Company; Harrisburg, 1946).
(3) Stars and Stripes: Ist August 1944-
Alfred Marie: op.cit.
Jean Seguin: Bilan de guerre dans la Manche (author's
MS, Avranches).
(8) On the site of the actual memorial.
(9) Ralph Ingersoll: Top Secret (Harcourt, Brace; New York,
The eventuality occurred on the night of 9/10th March
1945. An assault force (300 men) from Jersey captured
an entire American Staff in Granville. In April 1945 the
German garrison of Aurigny island managed to set foot
Notes
(II) Quoted by Bradley: A Soldier's Story (Holt, 1951).
(12) Patton: op.cit.
(13) Bradley: op.cit.
313
CHAPTER 3
(I) The only armoured division still available in France was
the Iith Panzer, stationed in the region of Bordeaux; it
hastened to engage the Americans who had landed in
Provence on August i5th, but was halted before the
Rhône bridges. In this sense Avranches explains to a great
extent the speed of Operation Dragoon.
(4) Blouet: op.cit.
Details borrowed from Dr. Gilles Buisson: La Bataille de
Mortain (Imprimerie Maurice Simon; Rennes, 1947).
Milton Shulman: Defeat in the West (Secker, 1947).
Blouet: op.cit.
(IO) Entering the line south of Caen on July 25th, then trans-
ferred on the 29th to hold the breach opened by the
Americans between Percy and Tessy, it was in front of
Gathemo on August Ist.
(II) Entering the line on June 18th opposite the Vth U.S.
Corps, at the Calvados and Contentin hinge, it was on
the Percy-Trigny line on August ist.
(I2) Entering the line on July
Ist to contain the Canadian
thrust on Caen, at midnight on August 5th it left the
May-Roquencourt parallel, in the angle formed by the
Thury-Harcourt and Falaise roads.
(13) Entering the line on July 25th in front of Rauvray dur-
ing the battle for the Odon, transferred on July 4th before
Sainteny, Lessay and Périers,
it had no more than 20
tanks left after Operation Cobra, which had forced it
back into the Forest of Saint-Sever.
(I4) Walter Warlimont: Im Hauptquartier der deutschen
