The Battle of the Falaise Gap
caused fires and crawled", in the words of Herbert Fairlie
Wood. "The flames were so intense that the night was as hot
as the midday August sun." $
At midnight the rain began to fall, helping thousands of fugi-
tives. On the ridge, to which the Chambois-Vimoutiers road
climbs before running down the plateau leading to Vimoutiers,
Meindl waited for the uninterrupted flow of infantrymen and
vehicles that had escaped via Saint-Lambert to end. Part of
the rearguard of the 3rd Parachute Division passed; the traffic
died down and ceased completely.
Dawn broke. An armoured
reconnaissance battalion, a
Panzer rearguard, loomed up, passed and reported: "Nothing
behind us!" Meindl woke the men of his escort, commandeered
two tanks and set out along the Vimoutiers road. It was 0500
Two hours later, the Il Parachute Korps commander, at the
same time as Mahlmann who had also disengaged from Mont
Ormel, entered the lines of II S.S. Panzer Korps, which nearly
3000 of his men had managed to reach.
That same night all the Allied radios broadcast Mont-
gomery's Order of the Day. "The Allied victory in the north-
west of Europe will have immense repercussions.
It will lead
to the end of German military domination. It is the beginning
of the end of the war."
"Were I allowed to send only a single dispatch concerning
this front," Alan Moorehead cabled to the Daily Express,
would be this: I began to see the end of the war today in this
village of Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives." 6
25
Maczuga - or the final duel with the Poles
from outside the pocket, II S.S. Panzer Korps counter-attacked.
The preparations, instigated by Eberbach who had inter-
vened on the 18th at the insistence of Model, had taken three
"My intention is to retire to the Seine," explained the new
C.-in-C. West at a conference held on the morning of the 18th
August in the castle of Fontaine l'Abbé. "To realize this plan
open with your armour."
In turn, Eberbach, after the conference, asked Colonel von
Gersdorff, Seventh Army Chief of Staff, representing Hausser
who had remained with his units, how this order was to be
"Feldmarschall Model's order implies that you put Bittrich
in the picture. He's the only commander who got out."
Obergruppenführer S.S. Bittrich, in a series of rearguard
actions, had unhooked the hinge on the Vire and managed to
reassemble his two divisions 25 kilometres north-east of Cham-
bois, near Meulle, between Vimoutiers and Bernay.
There, on the afternoon of the i8th, he was joined by the
G.O.C. Armour West. Eberbach, constantly attacked by fighter
bombers, his car riddled with bullets, took nearly 12 hours to
cover the 35
from Fontaine l'Abbé. When he
eventually arrived Bittrich did not mince words: "I have to
inform you that the British and the Americans have joined
up south-east of Trun."
Actually the news was 24 hours premature. The Poles alone
were approaching the Americans across the Auge hills. In truth
Bittrich had no desire to sacrifice his remaining 40 tanks.
"Night marches and air attack have reduced my units," com-
