90
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
handed, who but a few moments previously had himself been
their prisoner. Only 8 tanks escaped.
The offensive on Falaise had suffered a bloody set-back.
"The situation south of Caen has been restored," concluded
von Kluge, delighted to announce the news to von Gersdorff,
Chief of Staff of the Seventh Army.
On the inlaid Renaissance desk in the salon of La Roche-
Guyon Château, whose walls had now been stripped of their
Gobelin tapestries, despatches announcing the destruction of
the Canadian regiment poured in, each of them engendering
hopes and false calculations.
"The breakthrough has not had the effects we feared," von
Kluge reported to Berlin.
1520 hours. Jodl was jubilant.
"If the positions are held to the north of Falaise, our new
offensive on Avranches has every hope of success."
But had the positions been held to the north of Falaise?
Actually the second squadron of Major Stefanowicz's Ist
Polish Armoured regiment was to attack at nightfall between
Hill 140 and Soignolles. "We saw many burnt-out tanks of a
neighbouring division which must have attacked at dawn,"
reported the War Diary. In the cavalry tradition they had
carried out one of those rare old-fashioned charges, advancing
3 kilometres. The Polish armour would climb Hill it, a peak
on the plateau, forcing the main enemy defence line towards
I6 anti-tanks firing from favourable well-hidden
Before the Rouvres ravine, the German infantry taken by sur-
prise, surrendered. Von Kluge, as though terrified of having
played the role of sorcerer's apprentice, tried to hedge:
"Provided we establish a strong defence line south of
Alençon," rectified the C.-in-C. B Army Group. "All our fuel
and ammunition dumps are situated there."
Jodl was thinking of the north; Hitler dreamed of the west;
von Kluge was looking to the south. It was war on three fronts.
Despite the trap which was now obvious, von Kluge agreed.
"I suggest
Avranches."
retaining the idea of an offensive
against
The Encirclement
9I
And yet the news from his generals engaged in the west was
"The 2nd Panzer returned this morning to its point of
departure," reported General von Luttwitz.
"It has lost 30
armoured vehicles and 6o0 men."
"Remain on the Mayenne," Hausser cabled at 1000 hours to
the gth Panzer, which was preparing to advance on Mortain.
"Le Mans has fallen. The Americans will probably try to break
through at Alençon."
Von Kluge persisted, although with prudence.
"The new attack must not be done clumsily or in a hurry.
It needs a plan."
This plan, moment by moment, Hitler scrutinized and
amended; he gave orders, countermanded them, raged, accused
"You have piled up mistakes! You've disobeyed me! You
launched the counter-attack 24 hours too early! 72 hours too
early! You attacked on a day when weather conditions favoured
American air power!"
Von Kluge bore the brunt. The Führer could not be appeased.
"Now that you can no longer rely on surprise, you must
have recourse to force. The means you used were insufficient.
You are to assemble all the forces available in the west. I want
six armoured divisions flung into the counter-attack."
A new breakthrough on the Bocage front, and what a break-
The II S.S. Panzer Korps was to reinforce the original corps;
the famous gth S.S. and Toth S.S. Panzer Divisions which had
so far opposed General Dempsey were to be used only if the
situation should deteriorate. The situation had deteriorated.
Hitler supervised everything, down to the smallest detail.
"Instead of advancing direct on Avranches, which you were
ill-advised to do, you will use the Barenton-Saint-Hilaire-du-
Harcouet road, and then launch the attack."
It was 1745 hours. Hitler was still the master.
"I will notify you of zero hour and D-Day."
Well, that was that! Von Kluge hung up, weary, sceptical,
half-hearted, but disciplined. It was not an order: it was a
whim. It was not a counter-attack: it was woolly thinking, the
premeditated murder of two formidable armies.
