rio
94
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
On the other hand, a wounded S.S. man captured by the
Americans was surprised that he had not yet been shot. It was
merely a reprieve; as night fell a German mortar killed him
over the body of his G.I. guard.
That afternoon, two artillery spotter aircraft had tried to fly
over the summit, but were repulsed by the flak. Nevertheless,
the men fought courageously, because from their observation
post they could see their compatriots on Hill 285. Eight farmers
marooned with them shared their rabbits, chickens and vege-
tables, and the artillery prevented the S.S. from staging full-
scale attacks with tanks or infantry.
Lientenant Woody® G Company commander, whose men,
hidden in the natural pillboxes of the Montjoie scree, kept
scoring bulls-eyes on their adversaries, relates that the
efficiency and precision of their sniping made the Germans
"dance a jig". The besieged men informed General Hobbs, their
commander, "We're not too worried about the situation ... as
long as you get us out of here."
The following day, a few transport planes, escorted by
fighters, dropped 2 days supplies of food and ammunition, most
of which landed in the German lines. The same day the 23oth
Field Artillery used shell canisters to lob over blood plasma,
tablets, phials of morphia and bandages. But for the moment
the S.S. spokesman was right: the situation was desperate.
"Unless you surrender by 1o o'clock this evening I'm sorry
to inform you that your battalion will be wiped out."
Lieutenant Rohmiller knew that his battalion would not be
wiped out. Nevertheless the threat was followed by action: the
S.S. attacked on E Company's front with tanks and machine
guns, spraying the ground yard by yard, the crews roaring from
their open turrets, "Surrender, surrender!"
Eight German attacks, some carried out in American Jeeps,
and others under cover of white flags, were repulsed. Private
Shipley, who had never before used a bazooka, found no other
remedy against an on-coming Panther than to "have a go". He
scored
re and set the tank on fire. "The German
vehicles piled up in the valleys," relates Earl Mazo,
"and the
dead, too. As for the Americans, they lay in heaps on the
The martyrdom of the Lost Battalion was to continue for
The Encirclement
another 60 hours, until the American counter-offensive in Mor-
tain. But that evening the 120th Infantry Regiment clung on,
and clung on so well, that it did not hesitate to inform the
division that "there did not seem any cause for worry." E
Company Commander, Lieutenant-Colonel Ralph Kerley, "a
tall sunburnt youth from Texas with a phlegmatic manner",
showed great resolution. He refused to receive the envoys and
sent them packing.
"My men will fight until their last bullet is spent, until their
last bayonet has been buried in the belly of a Hun."
At Mortain, therefore, the Americans barred, and would
continue to bar, the route to the sea. The Lost Battalion lost 547
men on Hill 314. "The best of us, the finest heroes of the week,
fell on those heights," said one of the survivors. When the
battalion was relieved on the 12th August it was "surrounded
by a wall of German dead," according to Bradley's statement.
This feat of arms will be judged by American military historians
as one of the decisive events in the European military campaign,
a thorn in von Kluge's flesh.
Whilst the S.S. officer returned to the lines of the Das Reich
Division, the Feldmarschall passed on to General Eberbach the
orders received from East Prussia.
"The Führer has ordered a renewed attack on Avranches. You
have been appointed to lead the operation."
"Herr Feldmarschall, I consider this attack to be a desperate
throw: I find this a most unwelcome mission."
"Führer's orders," was von Kluge's curt reply. "Your own
armour is placed under Sepp Dietrich's orders.
Was this the axe or promotion? I've been axed, thought
Eberbach, who knew into what discredit the generals had fallen
since the 2oth July plot. "Otherwise," he was to say in his
interrogation, "it would have been indefensible to remove my
command after seven weeks of faultless leadership, and to en-
trust my armour to S.S. General Sepp Dietrich, who was in-
capable of carrying out this task""
"You are to form your own staff swiftly. It will be sub-
ordinate to the command of the Seventh Army," continued
von Kluge. "You're to report to Seventh Army HQ today!"
Eberbach was furious.
"It was incredible that I should put
myself under the orders of the neighbouring army, that of S.S.
