enOVO
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
General Horrocks had received this order direct from Mont-
Commander of XXX Corps, the units which had exasperated
the public by their slowness in the bocage, was determined to
justify his promotion. He was a broad-shouldered, energetic,
brilliant and experienced man who had recovered very quickly
from a wound received at Bizerta. He was also a leader of great
The British had not been inactive during the recent
American efforts.
austere slim General
Dempsey, impassive and calm, averse to all publicity, had for
two months been fighting on a rain-soaked terrain. Now he was
on the move. On his right flank VIII Corps entered Beny-Bocage
on August ist, on his left XII Corps had reached the Orne. In
the centre, General Horrocks spurred on the units which had
taken Villers-Bocage on the 3rd and Aunay-sur-Odon on the
And now the reckoning feared since D-Day was imminent.
Here, south of Aunay-sur-Odon, stood the impressive wooded
mass of Mont Pinçon, a height of 365 metres. From the top,
where the enemy had installed a radar station, the 216th Ger-
man Division had a view as far as the sea, and could spot the
of the British guns.
tele-commanded
mathematical precision all the firing of the counter-battery in
such detail that the gunners of XXX Corps constantly had to
change the position of the guns.
Long before the landing this heavily wooded plateau, its
sheer lifis cut by mountain streams into deep gorges, had pre-
occupied the planners of Overlord, who had envisaged its
capture for D-Day + 5. That afternoon of August 6th the 43rd
British Division, 56 days behind time, was still only west of the
first, steepest slopes. Between it and the massif was a narrow
stream, the Druance, its clear waters full of Teller mines. The
waters were certainly shallow enough to let the infantry of
the 129th Brigade cross, but the banks were far too steep to
allow the passage of the 13/18th Hussars' tanks.
The heat was oppressive, suffocating and stifling. The air was
still. The dust, the acrid smoke of the explosions, and the
stench of decomposing corpses under a leaden sky were sicken-
ing. On the narrow road which wound round the massif each
The Decision
caterpillar track of a Bren carrier raised a dust-storm, and
set off an enemy salvo; the Wiltshires and Somerset Light
Infantry cursed in their foxholes, waiting, blinded, for the
order to cross the river. Morale was low. The night before, an
attempt to outflank the hill from the south had failed outside
the village of Saint-Jean-le-Blanc. The Wiltshires who had been
dawdling for three days on a heath of birches and tall ferns
baked by the sun, had not received their rations. Breakfast had
to last them for the whole day. The battle for Saint-Jean-le-
Blanc had been more than bloody. The night withdrawal to
Danvou had cost 50 men. The Wiltshires were exhausted and
cursing as they waited and watched this forest, each thicket,
although it promised a certain amount of shade, hiding an
enemy ambush.
To reach the hill they had to cross a bridge; La Varinière
The first attack was entrusted to the 5th Wiltshires. 1340
hours. The troops, according to Alexander Baron, harboured
the strange illusion that the danger did not come from the
bridge, but on the contrary, that this bridge spelled safety and
that they would be all right once they crossed to the other side
of the river. They rushed forward to be greeted by a hail of
machine-gun fire; they fell with distorted faces and hands tear-
ing the soil under a flaming sky. A first message reached Brigade
HQ. "Not possible for leading troops to advance." Then a
second message, 30 minutes later. "Leading troops pinned down
by violent fire.
Still on this side of the river."
message timed 1505 hours repeated the first message. "Not
possible for leading troops to move."
A second attempt was made by the armour. 1500 hours. A
Sapper lance-corporal advanced towards the ancient narrow
stone bridge, cleared it of the mines which barred the route,
while infantrymen cut down young trees to clear the way for
the Shermans. At the same time the barrage was lifted over the
river, hammering the other bank and setting the slopes on fire.
Two tanks got through in spite of the Germans, who were
entrenched in the orchards, blinded by the explosions and
harassed by the artillery, and they allowed six more Shermans
immediately by 60
perfectly equipped fusiliers, who climbed to the crossroads of
