236
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
from three directions at once. From 2000 hours to daybreak
the Allied artillery thundered again. The enemy replied with
his tanks, a few field guns and his whining multi-barrelled
mortars. Everywhere corpses of men and horses piled up the
nearer one approached Bailleul and Tournai."
"The night of 19/20 was bad," relates Johann Bornert. "There
was a rumour that our General Meindl had left the cauldron.
We were furious with the parachutists who were in the rear.
It was raining. The mist stank of death and gunpowder. The
whole night I lay in the damp grass and mud beneath a Royal
Tiger which provided a bit of cover. The tank was stranded
for lack of fuel. The officers only were allowed to sleep inside.
I tried to do the same but soon received orders to push off.
We were still being shelled and my ears could no longer bear
the screams and the misery of the wounded, calling for
stretcher-bearers. I knew that there weren't any left."
Halfway between Bailleul and Saint-Lambert, Tournai-sur-
Dives saw the climax of the breakout.
Abbé Launay, "the Germans, harassed by the Allies who had
now reached Bailleul, poured into Tournai, trying to leave the
pocket. Just like the night before at Saint-Lambert Mill when
they were trying to reach Coudehard."
On the opposite bank Major Currie stemmed the flow. "A
frantic night," he remarks,
"with considerable infiltrations
by enemy infantry. Throughout the night we fired on small
groups of infantry. Our harvest of prisoners increased consider-
ably. This was a headache for the Canadians who had only
three men available to guard 500 captives. The prisoners slept
on the ground, watched by armoured vehicles equipped with
searchlights which, while continuing to beat off attacks, were
ordered to fire down fixed lines in case one of the prisoners of
war should attempt to cross these imaginary boundaries..." s
Beneath the tracer bullets of the Canadians, Meindl's para-
chutists, some 15 men lying in the ploughed fields at about
4 o'clock in the morning-tried to find the weak link in the
chain. Gradually stragglers swelled the ranks of the platoon,
others got caught in Major Currie's lines like the convoy of 10
vehicles and 200 men with a scout car equipped with a Bren
gun. This convoy was captured by a single Canadian lieutenant,
Lieutenant D. M. Shute. Elsewhere a German officer wandered
The Surrender
237
into the South Alberta lines carrying a map on which all the
routes for the breakout were marked.
Mont Ormel appeared in the dawn like a broken tooth,
nearly 1500 yards to the right. Both Meyer and Meindl saw
it. What they did not know was that the ridge was held by
1900 Polish soldiers with 87 tanks.
The morning mist lifted. From the ridge the Poles turned
pale at the fantastic sight. The whole plain and all the slopes
teemed with German columns in dispersed formations, crawl-
ing along the roads and crossing the meadows, growing more
numerous with each moment.
Their guns roared at the same time. "This flood," according
to an eye-witness, M. Bechamort,
"was directed in particular
to the road junctions of Coudehard, Trun and Saint-Lambert,
where the farms lay quite pulverized among grotesque heaps
of twisted iron. The next salvoes fell on the small paths which
the Canadian medium artillery could easily hit, directed by
Captain Sévigny who had perched himself in the tallest birch
of Hill 262, 15 kilometres away.
Blauensteiner's LXXXIV Korps chief of staff, sheltered his
men behind the hedgerows, in the ditches and in barns, and
decided to wait for the following night to march on Orville.
To his right, Mahlmann was in Moissy. The tiny village, stuffed
to bursting point with disorganized units, infantrymen furious
at being left in the lurch by the tanks, was crumbling beneath
the artillery fire. Losses piled up. Imperturbable, Mahlmann
tried to restore a semblance of order and to seal the breach. He
managed to retrieve a couple of derouted tanks. Apathy and
resignation had overtaken their crews when they were hit as
soon as they set off, and now they were looking for any cover
Mahlmann, too, looked towards the Mont Ormel peak on
his right, Calling for twelve volunteers he discovered,
exit to the village, a small path leading eastward, which came
out on
the Chambois-Coudehard road—the very path that
Meindl was striving to force at that precise moment. Abandon-
ing guns and vehicles, he collected the wounded, salvaged two
or three amphibious trucks and set out slowly for the summit.
