2n0
72
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
from the neighbouring streets rushed up, old men recovered
their youth, the crowd surged and applauded and threw
flowers."
But the bridge was still in the hands of the Germans, and the
northern suburbs of Le Mans awaited the Americans who had
massed 200 bombers ready to plaster the town, to make way
for the advance of XV Corps.
"And then the incredible happened," said Canon Breteau.
"The Germans, on the orders of the Feldwebel, suddenly
abandoned the bridge and rushed to the radio station to blow
it up."
The "Commando", led by the Curé of Saint-Benôit, an ex-
gunner, leapt into action. Alcide Quentin, a pedlar, fervently
assisted by Gabriel Bordereau, a former Chasseur d'Afrique,
rushed on to the bridge and cut the wires of the land-mines
while Marcel Baudon, a metal worker, ran to the neighbour-
ing quay to neutralize the six land-mines which were intended
to blow it up. Two young boys of 14 and 15 tore out the wires
as soon as they were cut. A defaulter, Gilbert Lebreton, un-
primed one mine after the other. Shots rang out from the
Germans on the other bank, wounding two of the saboteurs.
Where were the American tanks? They were waiting on the
Sablé road. They must be told that the bridge was intact, and
General Haislip's artillery massed on the heights of the Allonne
must be warned. Seventeen-year-old Jacqueline Debray ran to-
wards the crest, fell into a mine crater, fainted, pressed on to
the Allied lines and finally informed the Americans that it was
useless to bombard the Gambetta Bridge because its defenders
had fled. Emile Coguel, an American ex-combatant, managed
to climb on a Sherman, persuading the NCO to let him guide
the tank to the approaches of the bridge under a hail of
machine-gun fire. The German gunners were taken prisoner.
The tank fired two shots at the opposite bank and pressed on.
It was 1700 hours.
The tank bearing the number U.S.A./956458 cleared the way
for the long procession of Lieutenant-Colonel John A. Mac-
Alister's 3i5th motorized infantry. "Thousands of Frenchmen
lined the pavements, shouting at the top of their voices,"
reported the Reuter correspondent. "All eyes were fixed on the
south tower of the Saint-Julien Cathedral from which the tri-
The Decision
color fluttered; it had been run up under fire by two of the
inhabitants, one climbing up on the other's back. The town
was a sea of blue, white and red."
On crossing the Gambetta Bridge, the Americans had set off
the movement which Patton later called his "left hook".
General Eisenhower was announced at General Bradley's
HQ at the precise moment when the first American tanks were
patrolling the quays of Le Mans.
Oddly enough, the Supreme Commander had only taken up
his quarters in Normandy the night before: his advance HQ,
Shellburst, consisted of a few caravans and tents in an orchard
surrounded by hedges near Tournières, north of Cerisy Forest.
An improvised airstrip allowed him to remain in touch with
But on his first day in France, Ike preferred to be on the
road. He drove to Saint-Sauveur-en-Lendelin in General Brad-
ley's territory, and stopped his command car by the roadside to
eat with units of V Corps which were about to enter Cerisy
Forest. He was not displeased to hear an occasional: "Hi there,
Bradley took Eisenhower to his maple-panelled chart-truck;
it communicated by a steel verandah with the 2½-tonner
which served as his quarters. Four ports of plexiglass let into
the roof allowed the daylight to enter.
"Hodges is holding on," announced Bradley, brandishing
the reports from the Mortain front.
Surprised the preceding day, the formidable infantrymen of
the zoth Infantry Division had reformed. To support their
flanks, the G.O.C. First Army, Hodges, had despatched three
first class units: the 4th U.S. Infantry Division to the north
opposed the 116th Panzer along the Gathemo-Périers road; in
the centre, the gth U.S. Infantry Division barred the valley of
the Sée to the 2nd Panzer; to the south, the 3rd U.S. Armoured
Division advanced on Domfront to take the Panzer spearhead
"Hitler has made a bad mistake. Had he struck a bit farther
south he would have met with no opposition; Patton was too
south, near Fougères. And yesterday Hitler could have
