284
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
kilometre from Tournai, and entering Trun to give a helping
hand to the 9th Canadian Brigade. To the south the iIth British
Armoured Division was crossing the plain at the foot of the
Gouffern Forest slopes in advance of the American front, en
route for Chambois. To the east, at Chambois, being mopped
up by the Poles, 30 Germans with a Tiger tank surrendered to
two Polish dragoons armed with Sten guns. To the south-west,
the de Langlade Group of the 2nd French Armoured Division
had passed Oméel to join up with the Poles encircled round
Hill 122, where at the end of the morning the Americans had
dropped ammunition. To the north-west, the Canadians, by-
passing Saint-Lambert by the hills, met the Americans near
Moissy and closed the circle.
From Tournai-sur-Dives a new envoy decided to go on his
own account to the Canadians: Abbé Doffagne took the road
to Trun carrying a missive from a German colonel. Three men
accompanied him—a German N.C.O., a British airman and a
Canadian soldier captured near Argentan.
At the edge of the village where the road narrows into a
dark gully, dominated by clay escarpments-a
gloomy spot, that morning positively sinister in the mist and
cloud of dust veiling the battlefield-Abbé Doffagne came
to a Canadian post and was conducted to Trun where he
handed over the message from the Colonel: "I am prepared to
surrender with all my men and request medical supplies for
The German was held prisoner; the priest, convinced of the
success of his mission, was allowed to proceed to Trun, a little
farther on, alone. Alas, the Canadian commander was not in-
clined to listen. The memory of Saint-Lambert Mill was still
"The Germans have already asked for peace in this way.
It was merely to be treacherous. For this reason, I can't cease
fire. We will do our best to send them medical supplies and
bandages by car. But
for you to go back"t you must stay here, it's too dangerous
Thus the third surrender attempt came to an end on August
The Surrender
It was in fact far too dangerous to venture on the roads to
village two enemy vehicles sporting white
had enough," said the Germans.
front surrender, or take the consequences of their refusal,"
replied the Canadians. Seven hundred soldiers with arms raised
credited to Major D. V. Currie by the end of the day.
and the company of Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of
Canada no longer attacked but were on the defensive; the Ger-
man assaults to widen the walls of the Corridor of Death were
so nearly successful that orders to retire had been prepared
and the Canadian artillery was ready to flatten the village
entirely. The reason this was not done was because there were
Allied troops in Chambois.
The Germans needed the Saint-Lambert bridges. They needed
the chance of escape provided up to the last minute by the
Corridor of Death between Moissy and Hennecourt. The Ger-
man infantry were elbow to elbow facing both the Canadians
and Americans, entrenched in a brook and on the embank-
ment. Their supplies were assured by the contents of trucks
which had broken down along the roadside or in the grass.
Americans and Canadians were separated by a mere kilometre.
But what a kilometre! Two days later Chaplain Al Stopa would
write: "None of us as long as he lives will ever forget this
nightmarish Chambois-Trun road, at certain places so thick
with corpses that we had to clear it with a bulldozer."
Major Currie was relieved at last early that afternoon; the
3rd Canadian Division contemplated the area in consterna-
tion. Nine burnt-out tank hulks, twelve self-propelled guns
destroyed, forty armoured vehicles and numerous trucks lay
scattered around. 4000 killed, wounded or taken prisoner in
three days fighting. Major Currie also stared at what remained
of the village: "It seemed incredible that so much could have
been devastated in so little time. When we first came to Saint-
