158
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
human. They no longer heard the whistle, the scream and the
bursts of the Canadian shells, and Kurt Meyer no longer under-
stood the enemy or his wastage of ammunition and bombs to
destroy the unhappy remains of the 12th S.S. Panzer. "Had
the tanks used full throttle it would soon have been all over
with us." 9
But that afternoon of the 16th August, Typhoons supported
the attack of the Regina Rifle Regiment. It was during this
decisive rush that the commander of the 12th S.S. Panzer had
been wounded.
Kurt Meyer in his ditch watching the duel between the Sher-
mans and the Panzers, waiting for aid which could not come,
suddenly saw his driver, Max Burnholst, return to the car.
The car, framed by shells bursting in the tarred road, drove
off to the dressing station; a few stitches in his head and Kurt
Meyer returned to the hill where the situation-according to
the evidence of Standartenführer Max Wunsche, commander
of the 12th Tank Regiment—had become untenable, so un-
tenable that Hill 159 fell that afternoon.
A few hours later the South Saskatchewans on the left of N
158, the Cameron Highlanders on the right, launched their
attack on Falaise, and entered the City of William the
Conqueror.
But for Montgomery Falaise was already past history. It no
longer interested him.
"Speed up the movement on Trun," he telephoned at 153°
hours. "It is the centre of the pass. Its possession is vital."
"But what about Falaise?" asked General Simonds.
"Falaise remains the job of Il Canadian Corps, which you
have the honour to command. Foulkes can deal with it; a single
infantry division will suffice."
General Foulkes's 2nd Canadian Division was in fact
advancing west
of the Caen-Falaise line, next to General
Dempsey's First British Army which had passed Thury-Har-
court.
The main body of II Canadian Corps was to abandon the all-
out drive to the south and concentrate its efforts to the left.
"You must reach Trun, even if you have only one tank left,"
The Encirclement
General Maczek.
But three rivers remained to be crossed before entering Trun,
also a target for the Americans from the south: the Traine, the
Ante and the Dives, all watercourses across where one could
General Simonds, pushing his line of advance to the left.
neutralizing Hill 159, came up against the battlements of Ver-
sainville and decided to seek on its left the weak point of the
In the centre, the 1oth Canadian Infantry Brigade crossed the
N 8i1 and set course for Damblainville, proposing to cross the
Ante held by the Hitlerjugend survivors of Hill 159. South of
the village, the hill was bristling with guns and mortars. The
light bridges with iron railings would make the Canadian
armour hesitate. In turn the 1oth Canadian Brigade tried to
veer north-east to find a less formidable crossing.
It seemed as though an evil spirit from one barrage
another turned the direction of the Canadian thrust, carrying
Simonds' front, held by the Poles.
"What a strange silence," remarked znd Lieut. Pietrawski,
straining his eyes in the grey dawn of August I6th to spot the
first houses
of Vicquette
on the slopes of the recently
conquered heights overlooking Trun.
The riflemen of the Polish Podhale Battalion-veterans of
Narvik-slept in the ditches beside the road which climbs
out of Jort. A kilometre away the village of Vicquette was in a
fitful sleep. The hedges, gardens and houses seemed suspiciously
empty, probably held by the enemy.
"Patrol," ordered 2nd Lieut. Pietrawski.
Three riflemen and a corporal, dragged from sleep, set out
to explore the folds in the terrain; they had covered 600 yards
when unexpected machine-gun fire broke out from a garden
to their left.
