I16
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Alençon, and the rest of the Third Army directed on the Loire,
there was nothing. So much so, that Patton had to borrow an
infantry division from XXth Corps-the brand new 8oth,
which had disembarked at the artificial harbour at Saint-
Martin-de-Varreville, and been taken rapidly by truck to Laval
-so that its three regiments could guard the bridges of Le
Mans and the Evron and Sillé-le-Guillaume crossroads. (The
reader should remember the arrival of General MacBride's
division. We shall meet this division again in a few days' time
in Argentan.)
But von Kluge's reasoning held. Again, the means had to be
obtained to realize this desperate plan. A rational reply was
worked out to cut Patton off from Hodges at the Avranches
bottleneck, a free interpretation of the wish expressed by the
Führer that morning.
"Eberbach will break through to the south-east," suggested
von Kluge. "Starting from a base Carrouges-La Lacelle, the
armoured group will make for Mortain, and there pivot 90°
north; on the date of our attack, the 14th, there is every reason
to hope that XV Corps will be massed along N 24 bis between
Argentan and Laigle. Our movement will allow us to bag the
lot."
"An interesting plan," replied Eberbach, exhausted that
evening by another transfer of his HQ, the third in 24 hours
from Vieux-Pont to Chenedouit, "a move which despite the
short distance of 20 kilometres, took us 6 hours. Our move-
ment was slowed down by traffic jams. Everywhere there were
burning vehicles. All the roads were crowded, every yard was
covered at a snail's pace. The transfer of units had to take place
in several sections,
more sections than would have
been
necessary in normal conditions. Supplies of course were en-
dangered, and literally blocked on the few roads available
between Falaise and Argentan."
The Panzer General, too, did not hesitate to raise objections.
"My forces
comprise 80 tanks in all. Facing me,
the
Americans and the French have 70,000 men and 700 tanks.
Another objection: the Panzer Group from the logistic point of
view, depends on the Fifth Panzer, which is fully engaged at
Thury-Harcourt with XIIth British Corps. And that's not all!
Only three roads link me with Sepp Dietrich, and these north-
south roads are harassed all day by fighter bombers and
congested at night by the movement of units travelling east."
Sepp Dietrich was not in a mood to argue. He did not express
his opinion until next day at 1035 hours.
"If the front held by Fifth and Seventh Panzer is not
immediately moved," he cabled to General Speidel, "and unless
an effort is made to move eastwards so as to escape the
threatened encirclement, the Army Group will merely have
to erase the name of these two armies."
And the veteran of the 3oth June 1935, Hitler's old comrade
of the 9th November 1933 Putsch, and therefore the least
suspect of the army commanders he had appointed, did not
"Soon it will become impossible to supply the troops with
either ammunition or fuel. Immediate measures must be taken
to turn east before it's too late. The enemy can fire into the
pocket with all his artillery from all sides."
The word "pocket" had been officially uttered. The term,
however, was premature: through a 37 kilometre wide corridor
the Seventh Army which still held Falaise and Argentan could
still escape to Vimoutiers, Orbec and Bernay, gateways to the
Seine, to Picardy and thence to Germany, where the reserve
forces could re-form and organize a more rational counter-
attack—like the one which would be launched three months
later in the Ardennes.
Von Kluge was frantic, having requested a withdrawal for
twelve days. He was caught in the maelstrom of the fluctua-
tions of war, and at 2100 hours issued the orders of despair: five
armoured divisions, or what remained of them, starting from
Carrouges were to cut from west to east across the hilly forest
of Ecouves to hack Patton's columns advancing north, descend
on Mesle-sur-Sarthe and from there make a quarter turn left
to Gacé, and encircle the Allied forces in that same pocket
which would later enclose the German forces in Normandy.
It was madness; but, that night of 12th August, nothing
made sense any longer.
At Creullet Manor,
whose shrubbery of oleanders and
rhododendrons hid the three cars of the Twenty First Army
