9
Von Kluge retreats
For two days the German generals on the Normandy front
called Saint-Germain-en-Laye one after the other, to plead with
von Kluge.
"We must abandon the attack," said Hausser
morning of the roth August. "Or else send me reinforcements.
Give me more ammunition."
"The enemy has started to push north and north-east of Le
Mans," Küntzen, commander of LXXXI Korps, telephoned a
quarter of an hour later. "They are in contact with the divisions
advancing on Alençon to occupy the Carrouges-Sées heights
overlooking the Argentan plateau. I have only four battalions
at my disposal. I cannot halt the American advance. It is
probable that Alençon will fall during the day."
"The Canadians have been temporarily halted on the
Laison,"
announced Sepp Dietrich.
"They will resume their
attack. Falaise can only be held for a day or two."
"It is out of
the question
to pursue the attack on
Avranches," admitted Eberbach. "At least for the moment,"
corrected the G.O.C. Panzer Group.
From west, south and north it was the same story: Army
Group B was pinned in a V, with Mont-Saint-Michel the
meeting-point of two long flanks, one north of Falaise opposite
Hill 195 now in the hands of the Canadians, and the other the
northern suburbs of Le Mans; respectively 206, and 120, kilo-
Rather than remain deaf to these appeals from his fighting
men, von Kluge telephoned to the blind commanders at O.K. W.
Military language
diplomatic tongue.
to the subtleties of the
"I suggest,"
began the Feldmarschall to the O.K.W., "that
we should temporarily withdraw the Eberbach Panzer Group
trom Mortain and use it to launch briet shock attacks on the
The Encirclement
99
enemy points to the north to disengage our southern flank."
This meant abandoning Avranches, using Alençon as the
"How am I to interpret this suggestion?" replied Jodl.
On the teleprinters there was an exchange of questions and
answers tinged with the suspicion left by the July Plot. Hitler
was tense, irritable and distrustful.
"Why don't you attack before the 20th? What does von
Funck say to a resumption of the attack? When are you re-
taking Le Mans? With what forces? From what base? When
will the lIth Panzer Division reach the Loire?"
Hitler's intention was to recall the lith Panzer, the only
division still available in the French theatre of war, the only
one capable of opposing an eventual landing on the coast of
"The Canadians are descending upon Falaise. The Americans
are moving north on Alençon. This pincer movement seems to
indicate that the meeting point has already been decided,"
insisted von Kluge.
The C.-in-C. West took the precaution of "passing the buck"
on to his generals.
"All the generals under my orders think that we should
withdraw," he confessed at dawn on August I1th.
has received reinforcements and we have lost the element of
surprise. We are short of armour, troops, fuel and ammunition.
Weather conditions are unfavourable."
Berlin acknowledged the message but did not reply.
Hausser telephoned von Kluge once more.
"I ask permission to carry out a new withdrawal. I must dis-
engage the necessary forces to protect my southern flank."
Von Kluge replied by calling a conference, demanding the
presence of the two generals who opposed Montgomery and
Bradley respectively. Eberbach and Hausser were both dyed-
covered... by his subordinates!
in consequence von Kluge would be
The news was depressing. In the north the Laize was lost; in
the north-west Thury-Harcourt was under attack from the
British XII Corps and Tinchebray threatened by the con-
vergence of three Army Corps; to the west, Mesnil-Tove, Bion
Saint-Jean-du-Corail had been
recaptured by the
