Leno!
26
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
five army corps, from the Drone to the Orne, opposed by five
Panzer and eight infantry divisions.
To withdraw the Panzers and launch them against the
Americans was to abandon the Falaise road. To keep the
Panzers below Caen was to lose Avranches.
Falaise or Avranches? Avranches or Falaise?
The terrifying swing of the see-saw, desired by Montgomery
and so much feared by von Kluge, had begun.
2
The Americans invade Brittany
George Smith Patton Junior maintains that he woke on July
3ist solely preoccupied by a
"violent love affair" between
Willie, his white bull terrier, and a
"French lady dog", an
affair which irritated him even more since Willie had also
exhumed a recently buried German,
"to the shame and dis-
grace of the military service." 1
George Smith Patton was in fact to live through a formid-
able day. Since July 6th the future commander of the Third
U.S. Army had been hiding in an orchard near Cricquebec—
at Nehou-where Bradley had given him a headquarters. It
was kept strictly secret, so that no one on the enemy side might
suspect the presence in France of the leader who was to exploit
the forthcoming breakthrough.
"I shall always remember very unpleasantly the time spent
in the apple orchard," relates Patton,
"because I was obsessed
with the belief that the war would end before I got into it."
On that sunny July day, zist, Patton was to go into action.
Telegrams followed in the wake of this Tac HQ which left
for Coutances to be closer to future events. Communiqués
victories; they reported the fall of Torigni-sur-
Vire, the liberation of Granville, and the wiping out of the
last pockets of German resistance between Coutances and the
coast. In short, they heralded the invasion of Brittany.
For some days "Georgie", as he was affectionately called by
the members of his staff, had not shown his face among his
officers; he was preoccupied by his take-over of VIII and XV
Corps, the spear-head of the army he was about to command.
But that morning the commander of this brand new Third
Army had given a briefing; when he appeared everyone raved.
He was showy and immaculate, according to General Brenton
Wallace,
"He looked like a fighting cock which had just
knocked out its opponent and was ready to attack the next." ?
With a gesture Patton-three stars on his cap, six on his
