220
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
division, we had not the slightest idea of their true positions." 1o
Between the Allies as they tried to co-ordinate their fire,
columns of German infantry fled from Chambois, under cover
of the Vimoutiers road. They were still capable of counter-
attacking the 358th Infantry Regiment with such fury that the
right of the 3rd Battalion was forced to yield and to call its
Shermans to the rescue.
"The enemy is trying desperately by attacking from the east,
south and west, to keep open a narrow passage through which
its forces could retire," noted Montgomery.
"The roads were so jammed,"
Bailleul, Maurice Dormois,
"that even the Germans coming
from N 158 could not get through Tournai."
I63o hours. The firing ceased. The 2nd American battalion
sent a patrol into Chambois: shells burst. This time their
origin was located: the Poles were also descending on the town
preceded by an artillery barrage.
"No-fire line on Chambois,"
General MacLean once more requested of General Maczek.
Major Zgorzelski's Dragoon squadrons dominated the exits
north of the town. His formations posted as i on ename yes
resembled the outlines of a plane: the right wing on the slopes,
Captain Gieras' No 1 Squadron, the leit wing at the foot of
the slopes, Lieutenant Kintzi's No. 2 Squadron. Slightly to the
rear, astride the bends in the road, was Captain Bojanowski's
No. 4 Squadron, one of whose platoons was commanded by 2nd
Lieutenant Karcz. In reserve the regimental HQ and the tanks
of the loth P.S.K. (Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment). Below
were the crossroads.
2nd Lieutenant Karcz relates, "The roth Dragoons had been
heavily engaged the whole day. We had been looking forward
to a well-deserved night of comparative rest, when we were
informed of a new task." "The Dragoons," says Lieutenant
"advanced through orchards heavily protected by
hedgerows, which concealed occasional German machine-gun
posts. Contrary to our expectations resistance was light. But
our progress was slow. The hedges were dense and tangled. The
Germans seemed terrified. I think they had been appalled by
our ceaseless fire."
On the right of Lieutenant Kintzi, the anti-tanks and Bren
carriers requested by Karcz lost contact with the regiment be-
cause "our wireless packed up at 1700 hours. It scares me now
to think of it: I did not know that the attack had been post-
poned by half an hour and that I was on my own. I decided to
eave the road and to advance through the gardens above
Chambois to the east, and to descend upon
the centre of
the village. We were able to advance without incident and to
ambush so many Germans that my sixty men soon found
themselves hampered by 200 prisoners whom they did not
know what to do with. Nevertheless I was alone without
support and the artillery fire seemed to have been shifted by
my own gunners." Parallel to 2nd Lieutenant Karcz's advance,
which had now cut the lines of the 2nd Squadron, Lieut, Kintzi
on his right approached Chambois from the
village was delivered to the flames," recalls the Polish officer.
"It was merely a formality. Our men winkled out prisoners
from everywhere. In the keep of the old castle overlooking the
plain alone they captured forty. I was surprised to see them on
the tower with their hands raised. It would have been simple
to fire on us as we approached. One of the prisoners later gave
me the explanation for his conduct. They knew who their
opponents were and were terrified of reprisals."
2nd Lieutenant Karcz, passing through orchards and gardens,
reached the Avenelles road which enters the town from the
east, took on a German defensive position, silenced a machine-
gun post with a grenade and was wounded by another. The
Lieutenant sent a patrol to the west to the road junction which
his brothers in arms had just reached: Lieutenant Kintzi held
the keep, preoccupied with this gathering of prisoners whom,
not without irony, were to cost him half his men,
while a reconnaissance to the south from where the Americans
could arrive at any moment was imperative.
Karcz at the eastern exits of Chambois discovered a wire-
less in working order in a Canadian derelict tank abandoned
by the Germans and notified the roth Dragoons RHQ that his
platoon was in Chambois.
