156
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
which will take you through Argentan despite the mines laid
last night by the enemy."
"Yes. Very interesting," replied the French colonel.
"The Americans rejected my proposal three days ago. But
I'm sure that you won't do the same."
The colonel took the map and considered the plan. Major
Quatrecoup insisted: "The task will be more difficult, I admit,
than it would have been three days ago, because the enemy has
been reinforced, but the plan has been carefully studied."
Roumianzoff hesitated for a moment:
"If we were on our
own," he sighed, "that is, if the 2nd French Armoured Division
was independent, it's possible, in fact probable, that General
Leclerc would consider your proposal because its audacity
would appeal to him."
"In that case there's no difficulty,
Armoured Division can take possession of the Argentan road
network at very small cost."
"But our Allies have a different way of waging war."
"If you don't accept my plan, you will not be able to prevent
a French town from being shelled by your guns, a bombard-
ment which will destroy all that the Boches have spared."
"I know, but it's up to the Corps. We are ahead of schedule.
I cannot see the GOC liquidating Argentan before the arrival
of his main forces."
"What is your decision?" Major Quatrecoup asked anxiously.
"I'm going to HQ. Come and see me at about II o'clock."
The plan was submitted and rejected.
Johann Bornert, a parachutist of Meindl's division, would
never forget that morning of August I6th. "My main task the
night before had been to lay mines, to saw down trees and to
lay all sorts of booby traps to hold the Americans at bay as long
as possible. Our company was still the rearguard; we retreated
slowly laying mines as we went. A corporal at the age of 17, I
was in command of a section. But of my original men only 9
were left at the beginning of August. The old hands could not
get on with these young boys of 15 and 16; they cried and wept
as soon as the first grenades whistled. They were wounded and
would lose their lives in the Falaise pocket. That morning we
The Encirclement
left hand. At the moment he was in no pain. I bound his arm
with a piece of brass wire. We had no medical orderlies. What
should I do? Retreat? The Americans were ahead and behind
us. The corporal lying on my left had lost his right leg. He was
screaming and groaning. We could not help him. Even though
we had survived, we
were covered with blood from the
wounded."
down his face.' Instinctively the 12th S.S. Panzer commander
head. Kurt Meyer looked at the straight road—the N 8II-
partially held to the east by the Canadians who had crossed it
from Perrières on the way to Couliboeuf and Damblainville.
Kurt Meyer was alone: his car had disappeared. The commander
of the Hitlerjugend flung himself in the ditch and started to
crawl, to hide from the armour of the Regina Rifle Regiment
now on the slopes of Hill 159.
The high ground was barely visible but the last height
north-east of Falaise, Hill 159, overlooked the Falaise-Lisieux
artery and descended into the Dives valley, already under
American artillery fire. Its conquest had been fixed for the 3rd
Canadian Infantry Division, the right wing of General Kitch-
ing's 4th Armoured Division.
500 grenadiers of the 12th S.S. Panzer, their morale accord-
ing to Kurt Meyer, "very high", held a perfect cone confront-
ing "impressive squares of Canadian tanks, advancing in close
formation side by side as though on parade, a strange but power-
ful tactic which has always remained a mystery to me; to
dispersal, mobility and the rational use of their guns, the
Canadians preferred
tank charges rendered difficult by the
nature of the terrain."
For two days, from the morning of August 14th, Hill 159
was pitted with shell craters was like a volcano,
Hitlerjugend wondered if they could still consider themselves
