10
Solution dictated by despair
Everything was reviewed afresh on the morning of the 12th
by Hitler, and the same evening by von Kluge.
wanted Avranches, and the latter wanted to encircle U.S. XV
At 0730 hours, the teleprinters from the HQ of Hausser,
Eberbach and Sepp Dietrich crackled with alarming directives,
transmitted from Saint-Germain-en-Laye but originating from
Rastenburg, signed by the Führer: "Eberbach will restore the
situation at Alençon, will destroy the enemy there, and then
will resume forthwith the offensive in the direction
But could Eberbach restore the situation at Alençon?
At daybreak the German army on the Normandy front was
divided into three commands: in the west, Hausser admitted
the withdrawal of his Seventh Army; in the north, confronting
Montgomery, Sepp Dietrich maintained strict control over the
rest of the 12th S.S. Panzer and Il Panzer Korps, both fanatical
units; in the south, confronting the American divisions, Eber-
bach's Panzer
Group
coming from Mortain, pivoted and
aligned itself east-west:
29 tanks for Il Panzer north
Ecouché, 15 tanks for the 116th Panzer below Argentan and
30 for I S.S. Panzer below Carrouges.
General Eberbach had installed himself that morning near
Vieux-Pont,
14 kilometres
expected the
south-east of Argentan.
enemy to arrive any moment at our HQ!'
During the afternoon of the lith, our gth Panzer reported
that enemy forces in superior numbers had broken through.
The rest of the division— one battalion, an artillery detachment
and half a dozen tanks— on the fringe of the forest north of
Alençon was endeavouring to hold on. Kuntzen, G.O.C. LXXXI
Korps, had given orders for an immediate withdrawal to the
east of Argentan. At the same moment, a very short distance
away, the gunfire from enemy armour could be heard. The
The Encirclement
III
aviation had made my movement impossible. We were heavily
shelled. All around us vehicles burned in thick clouds of smoke.
At last, during the evening, we were able to strike camp,
having had to leave the defence of Sées in the hands of a
company of bakers. It had been evacuated by our rearguards,
now blocking all the roads leading to the north."
Eberbach was never able to restore the situation at Alençon.
At the same time as he received the Führer's message, his
opponent Leclerc, sitting on the parapet of the bridge in the
Rue de Sarthe, which the inhabitants of Alençon had decked
with flowers, issued his orders.
"My friends, on the N 24 bis by Ecouves and Ecouché,"
ordered Leclerc, drinking several glasses of milk,
"Attention!
The sector allocated to you is narrow: 8 kilometres from the
which we shall be moving—the Lacelle road on the left for
their 3rd Armoured Division; the Sées-Argentan road to the
right for their 5th. No troubles with them, please! Press on!"
"What about the enemy disposition?"
"We know it in detail," said Leclerc with a grin.
Everyone was talking about the providential incident that
night, which had enabled the "boss" to get hold of the German
plans for that day between Alençon and N 24 bis. While
waiting patiently in the suburbs, Leclerc, thanks to an error on
the part of his driver, came face to face with a German car.
Time enough for Lt. Col. de Guillebon to draw his revolver
and to aim; the occupants of the car surrendered but their
driver was killed. When searched, the whole of that day's
German plans for the area were found.
"Ahead of us 3 Panzer divisions, each in one of the
corridors leading to the Pavs d'Argentan. To the lef+ Dio will
meet the 2nd Panzer in the Pré-en-Pail-Carrouges valley; to the
right Billotte will clash with the r16th Panzer in the Sées Gap."
"What about 'our' oth Panzer?" someone asked ironically.
"The gth Panzer as usual is just opposite us, in the forest of
Ecouves. In any case there is no question of a frontal penetra-
tion. De Langlade will by-pass the hill to the south-west."
