238
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
All the western slopes were covered with an amorphous mass
of soldiers struggling towards the peak. An American observa-
tion plane circled overhead as though suspended in the sky,
directing artillery fire.
"The whole country was saturated with dead or wounded
German soldiers," notes Kurt Meyer, still reeling from the
tragedy he had lived through that morning. Jumping onto one
of the Ist S.S. Panzer tanks trying to break out west of Cham-
bois, Kurt Meyer had managed to cling on to one of the crew on
the outside of the tank, but he lost his balance and fell to the
ground. As he stood up Kurt Meyer discovered that the man
had just been cut to pieces by one of the anti-tank guns which
was firing on the column from the forest.
In fact the 3rd Battalion of 359th Infantry Regiment, halted
on the slopes north of Hill 129 before Chambois, clashed with
a column of infantry and half-tracks. "It was not really an
attack," reads the logbook of the goth Infantry Division,
"but
rather a desperate attempt on the part of the Boches to make
for safety. A part of this column tried to break through the
screen of fire let loose by our tanks."
The rest fell back along the Dives, horses and riders rolling
into the ravine, while a few panic-stricken men tried to hoist
themselves out of the death-trap, only to be shot down on sight
by the Canadians.
In the ensuing panic, everyone split up. The infantry, terri-
fied by the bombardment of the tanks, preferred to scatter, to
split up into small groups, some advancing towards the Allied
positions waving white flags, the others looking for the river
west of Chambois.
Elfeldt also had deserted Meyer. It was ozoo hours. The
commander of LXXXIV Korps, a lone wolf, did not agree with
the tactics chosen for the breakout. "It seems to me," he told
Liddell Hart after the war, "that a single powerful attack would
have had more success than several small ones." Elfeldt made
for Saint-Lambert. Accompanied by his staff he was defeated
in the village, tried an attack with 200 men and a few tanks
then, having fired his last cartridge after 2 hours fighting, he
surrendered in a sunken road to the Poles. "The officer com-
manding the division, a handsome man and a gentleman,
offered me his last cigarette. His division itself was in a difficult
The Surrender
239
position and short of water. The troops of both sides found
themselves caught up in the most extraordinary tangle."
From the landing beaches on the 6th June 1944, to the spurs
of the Auge Hills on August 20th 1944, the staff of LXXXIV
Korps-one of the two staffs which out of 20 were captured in
their entirety-had come full circle. The movement initiated
at the onset of the battle was drawing to its inexorable close.
Kurt Meyer collapsed into the ditch only to discover to his
horror that it was choked full of dead soldiers crushed by the
Meindl was conferring in a shell hole with Hausser. The
G.O.C. Seventh Army, an automatic weapon round his neck,
having lost his right eye at Moscow, was a moment later to
have his jaw smashed by a shell coming from Coudehard, from
whose chapel there was a first class view of the carnage.
Under fire the two leaders encouraged each other. Meindl
promised to open a path for all the units floundering in the
plain. Hausser, who had just come from the Vimoutiers plateau,
announced the arrival of forces launched by Bittrich against
It was true. On Hill 262 the tragedy had begun. The Poles
were surrounded. From 9 o'clock in the morning they had been
at grips with two columns of Panzers which had taken them
by surprise from the rear. The Poles were fighting in a circle.
The conference in the shell hole had hardly finished when a
possible deus ex machina arrived in the shape of two Panzers;
Meindl immediately commandeered them to lead the attack.
Towards the middle of the afternoon, the slopes leading to
the hills and freedom were covered with thousands of men left
to their own devices, caught in the barrage put up by the Poles.
Alas, the latter were also hemmed in. From Vimoutiers the Il
S.S. Panzer Korps descending to
round up fugitives, dis-
organized General Maczek's strongpoints to give Meindl a
The Commander of II Parachute Korps regrouped his men
at the very moment when up above Lieutenant Brzozowski's
tanks took up their positions.
Simultaneously, Mahlmann approached from Ormel by the
