184
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
von Gersdorff's simple statement.
Model revealed his plans.
"As a start we must stabilize our front on the line of the
Touques."
Everyone was in favour of this. At this moment von Gers-
dorff wondered what the new C.-in-C. West was going to
suggest which was different from what von Kluge had decided.
"The Seventh Army
..." Model went on. Von Gersdorff was
all ears. "
... will continue its movement and retire from the
pocket as quickly as possible, so as to be behind the Dives 48
hours from now."
Turning to Eberbach, the new C.-in-C. West insisted:
"The Panzer Group in future linked to the Seventh Army
will keep open the two sides of the gap: to the north with the
II S.S. Panzer Korps, to the south with the XLVII Panzer Korps."
Model had no idea what these words II S.S. Panzer Korps,
and XLVII Panzer Korps, meant. Actually a few tanks of what
had once been the most formidable German armoured units
had been withdrawn from the battle; they were regrouping on
the heights of Vimoutiers, far from the battle to which they
were now requested to return. The 2ist Panzer, one of the
divisions now assigned to contain the north jaw, was still
bogged down at the end of the pocket near Flers trying to hack
its way out towards the Dives.
"Time-table of the movement," Model continued. "Tonight
our units will cross the Falaise-Argentan road. Tomorrow night
they will cross the Dives; on the night of the 20th, Seventh
Army will align itself from the Touques to Laigle."
And he added: "These units will continue to fight as they
In short, the new C.-in-C. West could do nothing more nor
less than what his predecessor had already decided: to retreat.
And while the conference was making its arrangements, a
message put an end to these Utopian plans: "Trun is in the
hands of the British."
The decisions taken at the conference were already out
Midday. Poles and Canadians descending from the heights
occupied that morning, from hedgerow to hedgerow, ditch to
ditch, reached the first houses of deserted Trun. From their
shelter, the refugees on the race course raised the white flag.
Their camp was searched. They progressed cautiously along
the devastated streets in which no enemy was to be seen. The
last Germans had fled at 1000 hours.
"Only slight resistance to the advance of our armour," was
the report that morning of the 4th Armoured Division which,
so that they might cut the Trun-Vimoutiers road during the
day, left the task of taking Trun, now enveloped in a thick pall
of smoke, to the Lincoln and Welland Regiment.
"About 1400 hours," relates M. Perrière, "through the Leroy
and Myosotis porches, I saw the arrival of half-tracks and light
tanks followed by infantry, with tommy guns and rifles in
hand. These khaki uniforms belonged to our Allies, of course. I
ran towards them waving my tricolor which had been kept in
readiness for a long time to greet them. I begged that the
bombardment of Trun should cease. At the orders of an officer
two flares were fired and the barrage was lifted." 10
On the other hand, the bombardment continued to lash the
"It is a sea of flame," reported one of the 3,057 pilots engaged
that day over the battlefield, the second of the three
christened by the 2nd Tactical Air Force the "Bank Holiday
Rush". Another pilot reported: "I,000 repeat 1,000
transport Vimoutiers-Orbec now dispersed and static." Every
message used the same words:
"I,ooo plus motor transport,
tanks and horse-drawn transport in area," reported one pilot.
"Very little movement. Facing
south-east packed
bumper to bumper. Much congested traffic moving east on road
Vimoutiers-Orbec." 11
Concentrating at first on the destruction of the crossings
over the Risles, preoccupied with the difficulties of bombing
in a moving sector where Allied units ran the danger of being
their own victims, the Air Force now deliberately attacked the
exits. That August I8th, it recorded the highest figures since
D-Day: 124 enemy tanks destroyed, 96 damaged, 1,159 trans-
ports destroyed, 112 damaged."
It is not surprising that in this rush the Allies suffered losses
from their own aircraft, because in this sector of dense forest
