180
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
On Hill 118, on the morning of the 18th, about o600 to 0700
hours, the noise of engines heralded the tanks coming from
Louvières-en-Auge. They had passed through Moutiers, and had
engaged and destroyed three German tanks. The fourth had
escaped but was soon hit in turn.'
"A very difficult conflict ensued at close range," reports the
war diary of the 24th Polish Lancers.
"The terrain was very
overgrown, with a minimum of paths.
with the enemy
tanks took place
yards. Our regiment suffered losses", while messages sent by the
Ist Polish Armoured Regiment complained of
"very difficult
overgrown terrain with
visibility of a few yards". These
difficulties did not prevent Major Stefanowicz from taking 2
new heights in succession, Hills 258 and 240, after a struggle
with German rearguards.
"A tank suddenly dived on the trench," said Madame Picot.
"The anxiety of our people can be imagined, although they
had the presence of mind to wave a white cloth. The tank
stopped just in time. One of the crew had seen the signal. He
shouted to the civilians-most of these Poles spoke French-to
make for Louvières, which had just been liberated. Other tanks
arrived; we did not think of counting them, but I should say
about fifty. Then as though from out of the blue Polish and
Canadian infantry appeared from the fields and roads. Their
eyes and ears were on the qui vive, suspicious, and their fingers
on the trigger."
The 2ist Canadian Reconnaissance Regiment on the flank
of the Polish units had the task of advancing east to cut the
Vimoutiers road, to push on to Camembert and block the
escape exits of the Seventh Army.
"The Canadians spoke our language," remarked Madame
Picot; "but in a curious archaic manner, babbling words in
our dialect which surprised and at the same time excited the
people of Trun, thinking that they had been liberated by the
French. One of them, Pierre Fournier, remarked: 'Take it easy.
We are 48 hours ahead of our battle time-table. Unless our
supply and ambulance services have been able to keep up with
us, we may have to retire'."
The Pocket
181
This eventuality did not occur. Hill 118, one of the ten head-
lands which, since the 15th had given a lot of trouble to II
Canadian Corps was put in a state of defence. It was a hilly
terrain difficult for tanks where the slopes and ridges, and often
even the hollows, were dangerously exposed to German fire.
Twelve kilometres to the south, the same morning, U.S.
Provisional Corps advanced in the direction of N 24 bis,
attempting to join up with the Canadians who, a few hours
earlier, had received an explicit order: "Join up with the
Americans and hold the Dives line."
"What a wonderful panoramic view of the Dives valley,"
exclaimed Major D. V. Currie, commanding C Squadron of the
South Alberta Regiment, consisting of 15 tanks and 75 men.
This light force had, in an inky black night, tried to find its
way on the heights; it had travelled 25 kilometres without
The officers had a sharp exchange when it came to taking a
bearing and finally agreed: they were undoubtedly on the hills
north of Trun.
Dawn broke. The white veils of mist lifted gently, gradually
revealing woods to the west and to the south a long forest
which enclosed the panorama, leading the eyes towards the
A river, the Dives, cut the battlefield in two.
"Wonderful," said one of the lieutenants.
of our navigation. We're 1o yards inside our objective, proud
Below, Trun was burning.
Major D. V. Currie took his field glasses and scanned the
valley now clearly outlined from south to north, noting on the
left a steeple which indicated the position of a Normandy
village much like any other: Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives.
"What's that?" Currie suddenly shouted.
The Major adjusted the focus and saw 8 kilometres away a
column which appeared to be a sample of all possible types of
vehicles, guns, tanks and horse-drawn equipment that the
German army possessed, stretching out as far as the eye could
