182
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"A crushing force," remarked the Major. "A fine sight but
rather awe-inspiring. Notify RHQ."
"Hold your present position and be prepared to stop any,
attempted breakthrough by any part of the German Army,
replied South Alberta.
The Squadron deployed facing the valley.
Major Currie spent the whole afternoon watching
the
German columns "inching along in a never-ending stream."
That same morning of the 18th, Feldmarschall Model, who
had not wanted to remain at La Roche-Guyon for ever, was on
the road to Fontaine l'Abbé to meet the commanders of the
encircled armies at Sepp Dietrich's HQ.
Eberbach was also on the way to Fontaine l'Abbé, but he
came from Montabard, the bleeding heart of the pocket. It took
him eight hours to cover the 75 kilometres which separated
him from the conference.
panes of La Rochefoucauld Château.
At Fontaine l'Abbé too, machine-guns stuttered. "The
church shook during Mass," relates the curé, Abbé Vadez.' "I
tried to find in the host I was holding, which embodies God—
Him who governs the storm—the strength not to tremble.
Besides, it was only machine-gun fire and small bombs. In the
west there was a violent bombardment coming from the scene
of the battle, of which we knew nothing except that it must
be horrible, ruthless and murderous to judge by the number of
ambulances which travelled along our roads."
"The conference began," reports Countess Hélion de Beau-
mont, who scribbled these notes' in the kitchen to which
Sepp Dietrich had literally banished her, "while the Lightnings
reconnoitred the importance of this building. The weather was
fine, several squadrons of Flying Fortresses flew over the castle.
Everything was magnificently camouflaged. At any moment
we expected to see the village annihilated by the bombs."
"Where is Hausser?" asked Model, quite unperturbed by this
"At the front, Herr Feldmarschall," replied Major-General
The Pocket
183
Rudolf Christoff Freiherr von Gersdorff, the Seventh Army
Chief of Staff. "With your permission I will represent him at
this conference."
The situation in each of the sectors was then examined.
Eberbach was the most forthright.
"The morale of the German troops in the West has received
an irreparable blow. The Atlantic Wall has been represented
to the
German soldier as impregnable for too long.
invasion has been represented as certain defeat for the invader.
We have been promised in vain new armies, new air forces and
new submarines. And here we are waging a poor man's war."?
These complaints had not been foreseen on the agenda. Eber-
bach continued in front of the stunned Generals:
"Allow me, Herr Feldmarschall, to inform you of this state
of mind, for it is with this that the High Command must reckon
decisions. The morale of the German troops
has collapsed. The German soldier has witnessed the arrival of
hundreds of enemy ships, has fought hundreds of air squadrons
on their way to a completely bewildered Germany who return
as if on a fly past-and apparently without loss. The mail
which reaches the German soldier brings him nothing but news
of cities in ruins."
"These are opinions, not facts," replied Model.
"Well, here are the facts, Herr Feldmarschall. For the first
time in the history of this war our deserters are no longer
conscripted Alsatians or Poles but Germans. Serviceable tanks
are found on the terrain, deserted by their crews, brand new
rifles clutter up the ditches and trucks are abandoned. There
are laggards everywhere. Posts for arresting deserters behind
the lines have been formed. Even the S.S. has not escaped this
The Ist S.S. Panzer Division have never fought so
Feldmarschall Model proceeded with the briefing.
"We are fighting inch by inch in Falaise," volunteered Sepp
"We have reoccupied Bourg Saint-Léonard," claimed Eber-
bach, "but Bittrich's attempts to reach his divisions and lead
them back to Trun failed."
"The withdrawal of the Seventh Army continues in
order between the Orne and the Falaise-Argentan road,"
good
was
