216
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
The tanks will
lead the attack „give support. Lieutenant G. G. Armour will
The Argyll and Sutherlands met with no opposition, attacked
the few Germans and reached the bridge. They crossed it clear-
ing a few houses, and saw the Tiger on guard near a house at
the road junction of the road leading from the plain and the
Trun-Chambois road.
Lieutenant Armour weighed up his chances: men against a
"I want three volunteers."
Corporal S. N. Hannivan, Private J. Forrest and Private H. W.
Code fell out. "Lieutenant Armour climbed on top of the tank
with a 36 grenade in his hand. Just as he was about to drop the
grenade in the open turret, a German officer thrust his head
out. Armour forced the German to come out of his tank but
the latter, armed with an automatic pistol, closed with the
Canadian. Lieutenant Armour eventually pushed his opponent
off the tank, but, in doing so, lost his own balance and fell off
too. Private Forrest promptly shot and seriously wounded the
German."
Inside the tank the crew had reacted, sounded the alarm and
closed down. They slowly moved off, manoeuvred and the
cupola reopened: a face peered out to have a look. Corporal
Hannivan fired and killed the German. Lieutenant Armour
flung his grenade which exploded inside the tank.
This was the end of the Tiger which had prevented Major
Currie, too, from advancing to Chambois. It was a temporary
success. Later that morning, convoys of German armour, con-
voys of trucks and infantry coming from the west, attacked
the village, and hordes of desperate unshaven men swept
through.
From Hill 117 the Canadians saw the retreat and could have
slammed into them, but hesitated
and gave up
the idea,
knowing that the Argyll and Sutherlands were in the village.
They adjusted their range, causing such a panic that the
columns dispersed into the fields. The rushes however were so
massive that the Canadians, swamped despite their success, had
to go over to the defensive. They watched the hour for meeting
their Allies three kilometres ahead in the southern suburbs of
Chambois pass by.
The Pocket
"I'm certain I shall get through," said Colonel de Langlade,'
pointing on his map to Mont-Ormel.
The de Langlade Tactical Group—80 tanks—protected the
right flank of the American advance on Chambois. His two sub-
groups, the 2nd battalion of the Tchad Foot under Major Massu
and the 12th Chasseurs d'Afrique under Major Minjonnet,
found their progress barred by two aligned ridges, the Egreffin
on the left and the Butte du Jardin on the right, the last of the
Auge ridges to the south-east, taken by the Poles.
At the foot of these heights, Hills 262 and 226, two hamlets
stood on the French line of advance: Ommeel, three kilometres
east of Chambois, and Frenée, half way up the occupied Cham-
bois-Vimoutiers road.
The de Langlade Tactical Group had been lent by Leclerc on
August i7th in the hope of speeding up the movement of the
2nd French Armoured Division on Paris. Leclerc had also
suggested the collaboration of all the
divisional artillery
commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Crépin, an offer cheerfully
accepted by General MacLean. As the sole condition Leclerc
had requested that the de Langlade Group should be returned
to him immediately after the link-up had taken place.
The
clause would not be respected by General Gerow who retained
them for two days more than arranged, to open the way for
the British division which on August 22nd relieved the
Americans.
Colonel de Langlade was reluctant, because, like Leclerc
and according to Leclerc's secret instructions, was no longer
interested in the pocket but in Paris.
"If I push on to Cour-du-Boscq on the ridge," Colonel de
Langlade told his officers at o20o hours, after a conference with
the Americans, "I shall leave my feathers behind."
But Leclerc had said: the de Langlade Group must remain
intact for the rush on Paris.
"Impossible to advance on Mont Ormel and Chambois, unless
we are in possession of these heights."
Minjonnet on his return from a patrol confirmed this:®
"The Egreffin is infested with Germans. Stop the artillery fire
which is hampering the advance of our tanks. We are advancing
