324
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Rousseau in his excellent regional magazine Le Pays
d' Argentan. The times given here are German time, two
hours behind British Double Summer time.
(2) Interview with General MacHugh
kindly lent to the
author by the National Archives and Records Service.
(3) Marching orders of the goth U.S. Division, kindly lent to
the author by the N.A.R.S.
CHAPTER 19
(I) D'Arcy Dawson: European Victory (Macdonald).
(2) Doubtless Major D. V. Currie, whose Regiment occupied
the place in question.
(3) Johnnie Johnson: op.cit.
(4) Karl-Ludwig Opitz: Eisenes Kreuz. Jabo is the German
term for a fighter-bomber.
CHAPTER 20
(I) All the quotations are taken from memories collected in
the various numbers of Le Pays d' Argentan.
(2) Kurt Meyer: Grenadier (Schild Verlag; Munich).
(3) Ibid.
CHAPTER 21
(I) Alan Wood: op.cit.
(2) The Log of the South Alberta Regiment.
(3) The author has used the details of Lieutenant Karcz's
personal letter in this chapter.
(4) Major D. V. Currie, today Sergeant-at-Arms, of the House
of Commons, Ottawa, was chosen to illustrate the jacket
of this book. Our readers can see him on the left of the
photo, revolver in hand, accepting the surrender of Saint-
Lambert-sur-Dives on the road to Chambois. The quota-
tions are taken from
the Log of the South Alberta
Regiment, kindly lent to the author by the Historical
Services of the Canadian Army.
(5)
This paragraph is the outcome of a conversation between
the author and General de Langlade.
Notes
325
(6) Personal letter to the author from Lieutenant-Colonel
Minjonnet.
(7) Detail reported by Herbert Fairlie Wood in the story
Encounter at Saint-Lambert, which appeared in January
1964 in The Legionary, a magazine of the Canadian
(8) The photo used for the jacket of this book is the work of
one of the two photographers: Lieutenant Grant.
(9) Pierre Sévigny: Face à l'ennemi (Beauchemin; Montreal).
(10) If Lt. Karcz is correct-"about ten miles from Chambois"
—one can understand the confusion since the Americans
had already entered the town.
Personal letter to the
(II) Inquiries carried out among Polish veterans in Paris, later
in London and subsequently in the United States to find
Lieutenant Karcz and Captain Waters took many months
of interminable correspondence-letters returned
known and cables. We finally managed to discover the
former in North Carolina where he practises political
economy and the latter in California where he is a law
officer. Neither knew the
wondered if he were still alive. It was a great pleasure to
be able to put them in touch once more twenty years
(12) What became of the protagonists of this encounter?
Major Dull was killed at Metz near the
"Ferme
Moscou". General MacLean, Captain Waters informed
us, died some years ago: "he was a splendid general, the
best under whom I ever served." General Maczek,
who
honours the author with his friendship
lives in Edin-
burgh: a great friend of France he presided on June 13th,
1965 at the unveiling
of a monument to the Falaise
Pocket on Mount Ormel.
(13) Personal letter to the author from Lt.-Col. Zgorzelski,
remount specialist at Cambridge.
CHAPTER 22
(I) Kurt Meyer: Grenadier (Schild Verlag; Munich).
(2) Abbé Launay: op.cit.
