264
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
of Chambois by new waves coming from the Dives plain. No
one knew who would come out on top and no one knew the
exact situation? Artillery strafed the town: it was Canadian
- artillery firing in ignorance of the American positions. Shells
rained down
on the Americans—and they were American
shells. Chambois continued to be the "hot spot all day and the
coffin of the Boches,"
records the log book of goth U.S.
Infantry Division. All the battalions of the 359th Infantry
Regiment were now engaged.
Three German soldiers emerged from a barn and surrendered
to the men who had been their neighbours during the night.
Americans and Germans had slept, without knowing it, in
neighbouring stalls. The first rays of the sun lit up the horizon.
In the distance towards the south-west, a long enemy convoy
clashed with Colonel Bacon's 3rd Battalion. Five thousand
shells flew through the air in two hours.
"Our mortars hit
everything they were aimed at," records the log book of the
hole fired a single bullet at a few of the enemy clinging to a
Panzer. The tank turned about without returning his fire.
tary art," records one
groups of seven or eight the enemy prepared to fire, then un-
Texans of E Company were soon hampered by 1500 prisoners,
some of whom were sent to the rear and others to the Poles
who could well have dispensed with them.
Three German tanks counter-attacked out of bazooka range.
With their mortars
Sergeant John P. Lamb and Private
Porter registered a hit on one of the tanks while the two others
continued to advance blazing away furiously. The Americans
to the west of the town entrenched themselves in the Dives
ravine. Lieut. Budd ran to HQ and grabbed a few extra men
with bazookas. They halted the leading Panther, then the other
tanks. The An
fell silent
s red hot after the morning salvoes,
here were a hundred of
The Germans attacked supported by 20-mm guns.
them. Lieut. Budd called up
1S PTR
24th
P.I.B
i 2nd PTR
1st & and En Polish
Armoured Regiment
PIntantry Battalion.
18t apt. &t squadron:
2 Lieut. 1& Squadron:
24th P.L
10th P.M.R
> 10th P.D
10th P.D
TO TRUN
ST. LAMRERVES
* 4th C.A.D.
3rd apt. El Sandron:
CHAMBOIS
to Boirg/St. Leonard
I 90th American Division 6th Co.
Capt. Waters
Built up areas X
Cemetery & Churches 'ng Hill Slopes • Roads
• German Positions 7 Direction of German retreat Polish Positions
***Canadian and American Positions
Direction of American advance
Dragoon
5tHeadquarters.
1t8 Ban Armoired
Direction of Polish advance
Position of forces around Chambois on 19/20 August
