The Battle of the Falaise Gap
short Polish doctor," Captain Vinson writes in Stars and Stripes,
"the dressing station became a medical tower of Babel. For his
part Dr. Gunsberg of the loth Polish Dragoons performed emer-
gency operations on Poles and Germans. There was soon no
medical equipment left. Many wounded soldiers, dozens of
German civilians and prisoners were left untended and without
food to die in the flame-swept streets amid the explosions."
"There was no question of evacuating the wounded. The
marvellous work of our doctor was hampered. The stock of
medical supplies had been exhausted. Later the capture of a
perfectly equipped German medical car brought a little relief
to the seriously wounded. No supplies arrived... We had been
cut off and encircled. The German attacks increased. During
the evening a hail of American shells raked the Polish
companies, at the same time hitting 50 German wounded,
I5 of whom were killed. 800 Germans were captured, fully
aware that they outnumbered their captors who had not even
enough ammunition to fight them. They taunted the Polish
Commander, whom they threatened to capture with all his
"Seriously wounded Germans with a few doctors took
refuge in destroyed farms, in sunken roads and in the woods,"
recounts Major Friederich Hayn, who had just lost contact
with luckier units. Blocked with his orderly in a horse-drawn
column, deprived of his car which had broken an axle in Tour-
nai, the la LXXXIV Korps had arrived that morning of the 20th
on the banks of the Dives behind a tank. But the Mark IV had
been put out of action; the column dispersed and the vehicles
began to drive round in circles before ending up in the park of
Aubry château. "Without tanks, with exhausted drivers, ham-
pered by slightly wounded men, a breakout seemed quite
ridiculous." Major Hayn
seeing American columns driving
along the Bourg-Chambois road, about to close the gap, pre-
ferred to devote his attention to the wounded. They lay on
the roads untended, covered with dust which congealed with
the blood of their wounds. A Red Cross flag was laid out on the
lawn while drivers and soldiers sought cover in the old circular
medieval tower. In the park a radio car transmitted the whole
The Surrender
afternoon asking the Allies to spare this dressing station. "But,"
says Friederich Hayn, "either the messages were not picked
up, or the transmission was too weak, for the shells continued
to rain down on the wounded." 3 "Many of the American
gunners saw their targets for the first time in the war," Andy
Rooney writes in Stars and Stripes. "We used our glasses and
wards the hills. A strong column of 200 men surrendered and
"At the end of the day," reports Captain Waters in a long
letter which he wrote to us for this book,
with everything
Germans could muster: tanks, self-
propelled guns, trucks and armoured cars. We were often cut
off from our rear. We had losses but we held on.
"From time to time we made contact with the Poles who
I soon realized had quite a lot on their plate from all sides."
Chaplain Stopa of the roth Polish Dragoons wondered
whether in this general mêlée he had the right to kill or not.
"There's a farm near here," Corporal Saron said to him.
"And in that farm is a score of Germans ready to surrender."
"Ready to surrender?" Chaplain Stopa was not so convinced
as Corporal Saron. It would have been better to send a strongly
armed patrol, but the whole battalion was engaged in fighting
in Chambois.
"The Germans are mostly wounded," said Saron, "and I
think there are a number of civilians with them."
"Okay!" Stopa took charge, commandeered a driver, a scout
car and a Sten-gun for Saron.
"Listen, Corporal, we are going to pick up these 20 Ger-
mans ... the three of us. Got it? I haven't the right to carry a
weapon so you've got to fire as if we were a hundred. It's a big
gamble for three men." And he added: "But you'd better lend
me your revolver."
The Chaplain sat in front with Saron on the bonnet, and
