The Battle of the Falaise Gap
To the left of 2nd Lieutenant Karcz on Hill 262, the ist and
2nd Polish Armoured Regiments prepared to occupy the height
chosen by General Maczek as the key position to support the
capture of Chambois.
"Look at your map," the general had said the previous night
to Major Czarnecki, Chief of Staff of the oth Armoured
Brigade. "You will see two small brown spots separated by a
bottleneck. It looks like a bone. Or more like a 'maczuga'."
This was the origin of the name by which the tragic Hill 262
would in future be known in Normandy history so christened
because of General Maczek's horror of map references and his
preference for a code-name which could be understood
immediately by his officers
"Maczuga" is the Polish word for a cudgel; the topmost
contour lines depicting
two camel-humps of equal height
(262m) on either side of the Vimoutiers road did in fact look
like some primitive bludgeon with swollen ends, and was
nearly 4 kilometres long.
On the wireless
the dialogue between the two leaders
continued, while each in his turret studied the map.
"Montgomery has ordered us to take the small cross, I agree.
But that's not enough. It is the heights we must seize. Whoever
holds Maczuga holds 'small cross'. Whoever holds the heights
holds the valley."
The die was cast.
"The loth Dragoon Regiment and the 24th Polish Lancers (a
tank regiment), leaving Cour-du-Boscq will descend into the
valley, while the ist and 2nd armoured Polish regiments with
8th and 9th Infantry Battalions occupy the hills."
'Small cross' was another of General Maczek's inventions,
much more than a topographical symbol. It was
the road junction which would decide the fate of the day.
"If we take Chambois," Major D. V. Currie, whose units
held the right bank of the Dives, said that morning,
"we shall
close the last gap through which the Germans could escape."
"But to reach Chambois—our final objective" —argued the
commanding officer of the South Alberta Regiment, "we have
to pass through Saint-Lambert, a bridge over the Dives. This
will allow the remains of the Seventh Army to leave the plain
for the heights by three roads, along the slopes leading to the
Vimoutiers plateau."
"Everybody stood to, waiting for some movement which
would start things flying."
A hotch-potch force was stretched out from Hill 117, a
hillock north-east of Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives, to the meander-
ing banks of the narrow stream. Outside Trun, they came face
to face, on a front one kilometre wide, with German infantry
who were dug in round the village with 88s and mortars.
Major Currie was to wage a battle with everything he had: 125
officers and other ranks: Squadron C of the South Alberta
Regiment (4 Shermans, 5 Stuarts and 4 Crusaders); B Company
Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (3 scout cars, 4 self-
The night before he had been unlucky. Posted at the village
crossroads on the Trun-Chambois road itself a Tiger had hit
his leading tank. And to make matters worse 2 Spitfires
strafing the Canadian column with rockets by mistake had set
fire to the major's own tank and wounded one of his officers.
Alone and on foot Major Currie crossed the lines to fetch the
crew who were lying wounded in a ditch, while the ambulances
he had alerted turned up unexpectedly.
All night at the northern outskirts of the village he had heard
the enemy crossing the bridge, passing his lines on foot or in
horsedrawn vehicles. He preferred not to engage his troops in
a nocturnal fray but to preserve his forces for a day, which he
sensed would prove exceptional.
dawn, the Major,
accompanied, entered the village towards the arm of the Dives
which separated it from the enemy lines, hoping to meet tanks.
He found the bridge intact. "I could hear the Germans talking
in the houses but did not meet a single one on my lone recce.
The Major then returned to his own lines to work out his plan
"Ahead of us lies the road. On either side there are houses.
On the road, a Tiger tank. The object of the exercise is to mop
up the village and to silence that
Tiger. The infantry will
advance along the Chambois road using the houses as cover.
