I54
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
the Führer is impossible to carry out. To cling to a hope which
no power in the world could fulfil is a cardinal error, a
disastrous mistake. Well, that is the situation!"
This time Jodl saw that it was best to give way.
"I promise you a certain degree of action," was the evasive
reply of the Chief of Staff of the Wehrmacht Supreme
But von Kluge did not want a compromise.
"The Führer must authorize the withdrawal of the Army
Groups to behind the Orne, on the Dives."
"Indisputably, the armies must withdraw to the east,"
"But this retreat is unrealizable unless the
corridor is widened. And it can only be widened by an attack
to the south-east."
So there was to be a repetition of these Utopian discussions!
"An offensive through Argentan and Sées is out of the
question," raged von Kluge. "You can send all the orders in the
world. The troops are at the end of their tether. You cannot
halt the enemy."
Jodl preserved his calm.
"I understand you perfectly. I will let you know the Führer's
decision with a minimum of delay."
The decision arrived twenty minutes later. The Seventh
Army was authorized to retire the following day. Without
waiting for written confirmation von Kluge informed Hausser,
Sepp Dietrich and Eberbach that their armies were to fall back
on the Dives. It was 1439 hours.
Broadcasting to its listeners, Berlin radio at that moment
defied the Allies to annihilate the German armies in Normandy
and represented the stagnation on the Argentan front as a
"desperate throw" on the part of the Americans.
Bel
prey escaped."
rovisional Corps"
looked on impotently as
y now
they'v
all
thrust asid
gotten out."
the handful of
Koch, his assistant Chief
pen the Seventh Army,
apparently in good order, was slipping away under his nose.
"We should go on," roared Blood and Guts.
"There's nothing
out there. Nothing between me and the Seine."
The balance sheet that morning looked particularly brilliant:
Gilbert R. Cook entered Orléans at the head of XII Corps.
Walton H. Walker at the head of XX Corps was fighting for
Provisional Corps, on the other hand, had come to a stand-
still by a ford in the marshes south of Argentan. Provisional
Corps! The name spoke for itself. A Provisional Corps,®
entrusted to Major-General Hugh J. Gaffey, Chief of Staff of
Third Army, guarded the southern frontier of a pocket which
it no longer seemed urgent to close.
Admittedly, Colonel Billotte had come to disturb the Major-
General; had not Leclerc's artillery just deployed to the right
on the Argentan line to fill the gap left by General Oliver, now
on his way to the Seine?
is in the sector of the next division, General MacBride's."
May hell chateau con churi to pound Argentan
looked each other up and down and burst out laughing.
three days earlier.
"I am at your disposal, my friends. Here are the three routes
