190
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
from the goth U.S. Infantry Division to which it had been lent
by Leclerc.
On these heights, mostly facing Colonel McHugh's infantry,
were 2,500 Germans protected by tanks, artillery, flak guns,
automatic weapons, barbed wire and minefields. The enemy
had a panoramic view over the plain where the Americans
were assembling.
Behind this formidable rampart were the
remains of some "20 divisions which for more than a week had
been retreating east of the Falaise-Argentan line," according to
General Gerow's order of the day.
Dated the 17th at 1800
hours, in other words six hours after the chaotic conversation
of that morning, Field Order No. 20 proved to be accurate: "A
considerable confusion undoubtedly exists on the enemy side,"
recognized the new commander of Provisional Corps.
General Gerow was right.
Behind the German lines, beyond the Gouffern Forest, the
enclosed villages observed a new spirit in the enemy, which no
longer retreated but on the contrary was reforming.
Between Villedieu and Tournai, Abbé Launay worried by the
machine-gun posts installed since the i6th at La Croix-Basse,
questioned the S.S. guarding them. "Tommy still far off?"
"No, Monsieur, over there quite near in the forest."
"You're defending yourselves?"
"Don't understand"
"Are you going to fight?"
"Oh, Monsieur, we always fight. We're here for that."
The fuse was lit and the villagers sought shelter in the
ditches, leaving their dwellings to the mercy of the combatants
and looters.
This front, which seemed uncannily quiet, suddenly sprang
to life.
"I attacked in the direction of Bordeaux, Crennes and Sai,"
writes Colonel MacHugh.
"We had no trouble till we got
to the Argentan-Paris road. But dominating the road,
the
hedgerows and beyond the road, were two hedgerowed fields,
then a considerable stretch of perfectly open ground. The
Germans were well placed behind the hedgerows in the open
field and beyond it and commanded a beautiful field of fire.
This was our first real combat." ?
Colonel MacHugh's regiment had in fact arrived at Aunou-
le-Faucon the night before at 2210 hours, after being on the
road from Evron for eighteen hours. His was the only one of
the three regiments of the 8oth Infantry Division to be trans-
ferred to guard the N 24 bis slightly to the south-east of Argen-
tan. The town, still outside the front, attended to its wounds of
the night: the fires in the north-west districts and the fire in the
roof of Saint Martin's church.
Colonel MacHugh, according to Field Order No 6 signed by
General MacBride, had the task of "capturing Hill 213, north
of Argentan and, in conjunction with other forces, of taking
Argentan, helping to close the Falaise-Argentan pocket and by
so doing to destroy the whole of the Seventh German Army."
This plan was to be delayed for two days.
Colonel MacHugh had immediately seen the difficulties:
fighting in the ruins controlled by a spur held by armour of the
Iloth Panzer and the infantry of the 728th Infantry Regiment
of the Wehrmacht, and the dense forest rising to 244 feet,
hiding the horizon, a forest which the French had reported as
being heavily defended. "I wanted to flank the wood to the
right, but was not permitted to do so, because I would then
be going into the goth U.S. Division territory. This annoyed me
extremely because there was a gap of three miles between my
unit and troops of the goth Infantry Division."
His three battalions therefore hoped to take the heights
north-east of Argentan and thus hook the town, by-passing
it on the northern half and penetrating it from the south-west;
to mop up and "pursue the attack in the direction of Trun" as
General MacBride had ordered and to join up with the British
and Canadians: an ambitious plan which came to grief before
"I had difficulty in getting the men to move forward. I
literally had to kick the men from the ground in order to get
the attack started," confesses Colonel MacHugh. "To encourage
them I crossed the road without any cover and showed them
a way across. I was not fired at and it was a big boost to the
A few of the inhabitants of Urou helped one of the three
