290
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
They treated us correctly. Passing through Trun in long files
the civilians spat in our faces and flung flowerpots at us. I
should not like to go through that again."
Tournai remained a no man's land until the dawn of the
22nd August; at four o'clock in the morning Canadian patrols
in Indian file armed with sub-machine guns picked up some
200 more prisoners. In turn Shermans of the 8oth American
Infantry Division appeared.
The final link-up planned by Montgomery and Bradley took
place in the centre of the village at o80o hours the morning of
Tuesday 22nd. Tournai deserved it.
The Battle of Normandy was at an end. A colossal bag of
prisoners was taken during which elements of 22 of the main
units fighting on the Normandy front were identified.
The Germans surrendered that morning in their thousands,
both on the west bank of the Dives and on the hills to the west.
"It was a real pleasure to go into the woods," relates an Ameri-
can major. "One of my lieutenants and I captured 9o prisoners
in a single beat." & Every shellhole revealed some straggler who
had lost contact with his unit.
The goth U.S. Infantry Division alone (now relieved by 50th
British Division which had reformed on the Argentan-Exmes
road with operations east of Paris in view) in four days fight-
ing claimed 13,000 prisoners, 8000 Germans killed or wounded,
1800 horses killed and more than 1000 others freed. 220 tanks
were destroyed, 990 guns, 130 half-tracks, 5000 vehicles, and
2000 trucks. "Our intelligence service could not tally the wire-
less equipment, baggage, vans, medical and surgical equipment
captured," adds General MacLean, who had paid for this vast
number of trophies with five tanks destroyed, 600 men killed,
2 anti-tank guns and 6 vehicles put out of action.
"Had the
division not been held up for 25 hours in its attack on Cham-
bois, the results would have been even more spectacular," was
the somewhat bitter official conclusion of the goth Divisional
commander.
On his left the 80th U.S. Infantry Division-also relieved
on August 2ist during the evening by 50th British Division,
preparatory to marching on Sens-had to its credit 1000
prisoners, several tanks and self-propelled guns and, in par-
ticular, a dump containing 27,000 tons of ammunition.
less than 208 officers and 13,475 other ranks.
"Hundreds of men came towards me," relates R.M. Wing-
except their rags on a weary body, desperate, as though
poisoned by their combat." 9
small groups of Germans "defending to the last man", writes
General Haislip, "used the woods and ditches to fight with
grenades and rockets against the American tanks, delaying the
outcome of the battle until August 24th, the date that the
Vernon crossing was closed to them."
Close now to Paris, already up in arms, other German col-
umns which had escaped from the pocket tried the Seine road
to Jumeauville, Beynes and Poissy, strongly held by 106th
Cavalry and General Oliver's 5th Armoured
Feldmarschall Model delayed until August 22nd before giv-
ing II S.S. Panzer Korps orders to call off the counter-attack
and to join the general retreat. But the night before at 1600
hours Bittrich's armour turned not towards Vimoutiers but
for keeping open the Coudehard-Champosoult road, for organ-
izing a rallying point for units which had shown themselves
capable of leaving the pocket: in truth, the only success factor
