OUS
96
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
General Hausser. In fact it was extraordinary to entrust me
with an attack which I had declared to be hopeless, and for
which into the bargain I was not indispensable."
This intrusion of
a provisional staff between the Seventh
Army Staff and the Armoured Korps commanders, dangerously
prolonged the chain of command. It was to cause a host of
conflicts. "It would have been more reasonable to dissolve this
ridiculous and useless staff."
Von Kluge next called Hausser. The Feldmarschall hitherto
reserved but now in a panic, was insistent:
"The preparations for the attack are under way. Everything
we've got will be thrown into the battle. I consider
improbable that the operation can start before tomorrow,
August Ioth."
"Not before the lIth," protested Eberbach. "What do you
expect me to do with 77 Mark IVs and 47 Panther tanks. I need
vehicles, ammunition and fuel."
"Not for several days," agreed General Buhle, the O.K.W.
Chief of Staff, who had been sent specially by Hitler to boost
morale.
"Not before August 20th," said Eberbach.
"Because
of
the Allied air supremacy I can only attack at night or if
need be in the morning mist. In practice between 0400 and
I000 hours. Otherwise the Typhoons will blast me as they did
von Funck. The full moon, which will give me the necessary
light, will be on the 2oth. And this date is also forecast by the
meteorologists for a change in the weather."
It was an excuse. Eberbach had compiled his balance sheet.
"My staff never managed to join me," related the O.C. Panzer
Group. "I never had more than 3 wireless posts at my disposal,
and usually only one of them was in working order. As for the
armoured divisions, which had taken part in the first Avranches
offensive, they
were at grips with the enemy whereas, had
they broken off the engagement in time, they would have been
available for the second attempt. There were too few infantry
to relieve them. A shortening of the front would have been
desirable to ensure a general relief."
Eberbach continued: "It is incredible that the Supreme
Command did not realize that nothing would stop the enemy
advancing to close the trap into which the Seventh Army had
16. Bretteville-le-Rab:
The British "Flail
in the foregroun
August.
i be seen
17. The plain near Falaise, the battle-
field of the Il Canadian Corps.
