The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Americans, who were now entering Gathemo and Périers-en-
After the conference which ended at midday, von Kluge
called Jodl, Hitler's confidant.
"In the opinion of Obergruppenführer S.S. Hausser and
General Eberbach, which I totally endorse... the consequences
will be unpalatable." Von Kluge had not forgotten that he
figured on the list of suspects of July 2oth. Then the wretched
Feldmarschall plucked up courage:
"The offensive in the direction of Avranches is no longer
possible. The enemy is all out to encircle the Army Group. He
has fresh troops. The thrust to the sea will be a bitter long
drawn out battle. The Panzers are outnumbered."
"Am I to inform the Führer that
abandoned a breakthrough at Avranchat you have definitely
"The offensive could be renewed. But first we must destroy
the spearheads which are thrusting north. LXXXI Korps is no
longer in a state to guarantee freedom of movement on the
Alençon-Flers road, which is essential for our supplies."
Jodl was in no hurry to report this news to his master. Was
not Hitler at this moment listening to Warlimont, who had
changed his role from prosecutor to defence counsel?
"Believe me, mein Führer, everyone is doing his duty. Each
one is doing the impossible to succeed... from von Kluge down
to the junior subalterns."
But Hitler was adamant. The G.S.O.I.'s exposition lasted an
hour. Hitler did not interrupt once. Then he exploded: "Von
Kluge wanted to prove that it was impossible to carry out my
Possibly the baker of Bourg-le-Roi imagined it was just a
simple military parade: it was always flattering to ride on a
tank even in a singlet, particularly when after having waited
for the Americans you suddenly discover Shermans on the
village
square bearing the
"Bourges", "Blois"
names:
"Brive-la-Gaillarde",
, "Brantôme" or "Saint-Chamond"!
Louis Martin, the baker, like everyone else, had followed
the gunfire heralding the liberation; since dawn the battle had
The Encirclement
IOI
dragged on over Rouessé-le-Fontaine, a promontory in the
Maine plateau held by the gth Panzer to protect the great
escape routes of the Seventh Army from Mamers to Mesles
against the American divisions approaching from Le Mans.
The gunfire which had thundered throughout that sunny
morning, although no one in Bourg-le-Roi knew it, was from
Leclerc marching on Alençon.
The left wing of XV Corps—65,000 men constituting the
2nd Armoured Division, had been given the task by General
Haislip of cutting off the retreat of the German armies in the
direction of Paris on N 12 and N 24 bis, i.e. towards Alençon
and Ecouché. Supported by General MacLean's infantry, the
French division was flanked on the right by the armour of
General Oliver who, with the 79th Infantry Division, had
claimed the right to use N 138 bis.
The plateau hindered the French. "The hedges, embank-
ments, copses and winding roads favoured the enemy, his
ambushes and his retreat," relates Colonel de Guillebon.'
"They prevented us from deploying and charging as was our
custom. We were forced to mark time in endless columns, the
van alone fighting.
EFFE
For two days the fighting consisted of short sharp actions
interrupting the advance as little as possible: it was the assault,
the charge, the duel, against headlands, keeps and "domes".
Beaumont, Montbizot, Courcemont, Courcival, Monhondou,
Moncé, Ballon-such were the names on the maps of this
particularly undulating country.
The last of these "domes" before the plain leading to Alençon
was Bourg-le-Roi. It figured on the route of the Rouvillois
column, the second of four columns' despatched by Leclerc
to seize the capital of the Orne. The Panzers in the streets with-
Artillery Regiment, clearing a path of the 12th Cuirassiers.
It was 163o hours. The German infantry had evacuated the
village an hour before,
"hugging the walls"s to take
had ceased to fall ten minutes before Louis Martin, leaving his
oven, caught sight of
"Brive-la-Gaillarde"
and
offered
services to Lieutenant Krebs to guide the tank with the Lorraine
Cross across the cart tracks leading to Alençon.
