318
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Some details of this chapter have been borrowed from
Dr. Buisson's important work: La Contre-attaque des
Blindés Allemands à Mortain (Cahiers Normands) and
from Stars and Stripes of August 2Ist.
(3)
Lieutenant E. Woody who lives in
Virginia, sends a
Christmas message each year to the inhabitants of Mor-
tain. The last one dated Christmas 1963 ran as follows:
"May peace and Christmas Joy be with you now and in
the New Year."
CHAPTER 9
(I) Speech made by General de Guillebon at Alençon in
(2) Dio Group on the left (Col. Noiret along the Sarthe,
Major Rouvillois on the N 831). De Langlade Group on
the right, Colonel Massu on the Nouans-René-Thoiré line
towards the south-east corner of Perseigne Forest (Major
Minjonnet tangential to N 138 bis).
(3) Letter to the author from Louis Martin's wife. He was
the baker of Bourg-le-Roi, who died in 1953 from the
shock of the fighting in Champfleur.
(4) Personal communication to the author from M. Besnard
de Barnadac, an eye-witness to the battle.
(6) Letter to the author from Louis Martin's wife.
Dialogue published in the official history of the I2th
Cuirassiers in Caravanes, No. 235.
(8) & (9) An account kindly provided for the author by Lieut-
Col. Krebs himself.
(IO) Log book of No. 4 Squadron, by courtesy of Lieutenant
(II) Dialogue published in the official history of the 12th
Cuirassiers in Caravanes, No. 235.
Account provided by Lieut-Col. Krebs.
(14) Lieut. Mucchelli: op.cit.
From Mme Martin.
( 16) Lieut-Col. Krebs.
( 17)
Account supplied to the author (augmented by testi-
monies quoted in Caravanes, Nos. 46 and 126) by Colonel
Notes
319
Gaudet, who later liberated Carrouges, the Eiffel Tower,
Le Bourget airfield and at Nod-sur-Seine, joined up with
the forces landed in Provence, thrust on to Berchtesgaden
and fought in the Royan pocket.
(18) Lieut-Col.
Repiton-Préneuf in 2e D.B. Combats et
Combattants.
(19) Lieut. Mucchelli: op.cit.
(20) Testimony of M. Reymond Ciroux in Caravanes, No. 46.
(21) Lieut. Mucchelli: op.cit.
(22) Lieut-Col. Repiton-Préneuf: op.cit.
CHAPTER 10
(I) Panzer Group Eberbach and the Falaise Encirclement.
Interrogation of General Eberbach, whose photograph
was lent to the author by the O.C.M.H. of the United
(2) The official report of the XVth Corps attributes to the
2nd Armoured Division that day the destruction of 15
enemy tanks, 800 Germans killed
and 1,000 taken
Private letter to the author from General Gribius.
Abbé Launay: Dans la tourments de la Guerre (Vilaire,
Le Mans, 1945).
(6) Le Pays d'Argentan, No. 58.
Le Pays d'Argentan, No. 6I.
Le Pays d'Argentan,
Karl-Ludwig Opitz: Eisenes Kreuz.
Ernst Junger: Journal (Julliard).
(12) Eisenhower: Report to the Allied Chiefs of Staff.
CHAPTER II
(I) Did Patton exaggerate? This movement,
referred to in
Bradley's Memoirs and in those of Patton, is also reported
by Chester Wilmot and Ralph Ingersoll. But Argentan
was not crossed by any Allied unit before August 2oth.
Nor was the N 24 bis reached from either direction:
Leclerc and Oliver merely skirted it next day, without
