31OVO
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Faced with the Canadian thrust on the Odon, the German High
Command had decided to recall Hausser. Crossing Europe, the
II S.S. Panzer Korps had taken up positions round the height,
which was later to play a tragic part in the history of the Nor-
mandy front as Hill 112. Less than a week after arriving in the
line Hausser was
spectacular promotion: the
Seventh Army had just lost the man who had commanded it
for four years-Generaloberst Dollman. He had paid for the
emotion caused by the first three weeks of the invasion with a
heart attack. He had to be replaced; Hitler appointed Hausser,
who on July znd was the first S.S. officer to be given command
Von Kluge recalled all this as he prepared to leave for
Bion -A.O.K. 7-tactical HQ of the Seventh Army. It could
be said that he went to the conference more to confront than to
give orders, more to listen than to sanction the conduct of a
subordinate whom he feared.
A few minutes before getting into his car the C.-in-C. West
telephoned his Chief of Staff Blumentritt at Saint-Germain-en-
"It's a madhouse here," began the Feldmarschall.
"I've just received a telegram," replied Blumentritt,
what barrages have been organized, and what are our points of
withdrawal in Normandy."
"That's really funny. Don't they ever read my reports?
They've still got their
in the clouds."
kommando der
the German High
Wehr
Command, the Ober-
were Hitler.
macht—Warlimont, Jodl
and Keitel.
the Normandy orders from
Thev were "t
gentlemen" who gave
"The
East Prussia
grum
seem to
be au
courant
with anything,"
they
are not,"
was Günther Blumentritt's
o be put off; he insisted that he
ng to Bion
er must be told that if the enemy
•e a
will encounter no further obstacle; he
ough butter. He will do what
The Decision
23
Two German soldiers wept before the Mother Superior: they
both wore wedding rings.
Seven more argued loudly: they did not want to surrender
to the Americans.
The Mother Superior never discovered how this squad had
landed up in the garden of the Carmelite convent. Possibly to
fight. Possibly to take cover.
"All I ask is that you do not use your machine-gun," the
Mother Superior had appealed. "Otherwise the Americans will
fire on the convent."
The Germans argued in the refectory and the Americans on
the first floor sprayed the Pontaubault road.
The battle on Mont-Jarry had already been going on for two
hours; as far as Bacherer was concerned these nine Germans
were out of action; no doubt they were impressed by the
service which continued to the accompaniment of bullets
smashing against the pillars of the cloister, while outside their
compatriots were trying to recapture the hastily abandoned
The Germans kept quiet, waiting for the nuns to finish their
service: and for the outcome of the battle in progress. Should
they surrender or not? The Germans deliberated and the sisters
It was raining outside. This rain was a help to Bacherer.
American Air Force absent, the G.O.C. 77th
Infantry Division, at the head of an assorted column of men—
survivors from his own division, field artillery, remnants of the
5th Parachute Division-was able to launch an attack on the
hairpin bends, supported by artillery hidden in the villages of
Saint-Quentin and Saint-Martin.
General Dager had nothing with which to resist the return-
ing Germans: the commander of Combat Command B did not
even know—he had just warned his superiors-whether he
could hold Avranches.
For four hours the battle raged in these bends; it reached the
first houses and developed into fierce hand-to-hand fighting,
much to the amazement of the Americans and the citizens of
Avranches. The infantrymen of Combat Command B who had
