Lenovo
6. Commanders of the First Canadian Army which encin
ded Falaise.
XXIX X
2 3 45 x
(1) Brigadier-General Foster led the 7th Canadian moured
Division on 22nd August.
(2) General Maczek, Commander of the ist Polish Division,
closed the pocket from the north-west.
(3) Lieutenant-General Simonds, Commander of the Il Canadian
Corps, was in charge of Operation Totalize.
(4) General Crerar, Commander of the Canadian First Army.
(5) Lieutenant-General Foulkes, whose
2nd Division took
Falaise and closed the pocket from the west.
4
Patton turns the Seventh Army
"Dammit, George seems more interested in making head-
lines with the capture of Brest than in using his head on
tactics. Get me the Third Army CP."
"The general is not here. He's making a tour of the front!"
"Sorry to have to shortcut him. About turn for the 79th
Infantry Division! Get them down to Fougères. Personal order
from G.O.C. 12th Army Group."
Bradley hung up and sent for his driver.
"To Bingard. George will see who's in command here ...
The command car crossed the village of camouflaged tents
in the bushes of the magnificent estate which at Saint-Sauveur-
en-Lendelin had become Eagle Main, GHQ of the 12th Army
Group, and took the Coutances road, crammed with units
newly landed from the artificial harbours of Utah Beach.
Omar Bradley, after having commanded the First American
Army since June 6th, which he had now handed over to
General Hodges, had just taken over 12th Army Group two
days ago: Hodges in the Cotentin, Patton in Brittany, totalling
His mission of course consisted in putting into practice
plans elaborately worked out by the Allied High Command at
Overlord: the occupation of the Breton Peninsula; here the
Allied Forces hoped to deploy themselves on a sufficiently vast
springboard
to break
through
towards the Seine
before
advancing to the frontiers of the Reich. Such was the plan of
the French campaign.
In this case Patton was right. He was putting the plan into
practice. Let us say he interpreted it, for at the moment Brad-
ley's immediate orders did not extend so far.
The supreme commander of the American land forces fore-
saw the possibility of a counter attack in the direction of the
sea. Now, Middleton was right: the hinge of Mont-Saint-Michel
