266
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
artillery on his walkie-talkie. His message received at HQ was
telephoned to the 915th Artillery. Under the ensuing barrage,
the German attack foundered.
Sergeant John D. Hawk asked a tank-destroyer to open fire
on a barn. The fourth shell caused a white flag to be hoisted.
A German soldier came forward bearing a note of surrender
signed by his commanding officer and addressed to Lieut. Budd.
"Let the Major come and see me personally," replied No. 2
section leader.
The German was accompanied by an interpreter.
"Your personal surrender is not enough," said the American.
"I'm sorry," replied the German Major, "the soldiers I have
with me are not under my orders."
"Take it or leave it," replied Budd.
"I'll go back to my lines and try to persuade the tank com-
mander to give himself up."
The German left. A few moments passed. The American
artillery resumed their fire. A white flag was hoisted on the
enemy tank. A soldier came forward carrying a paper. The
German was ready to surrender as soon as the artillery fire
"You have our word," said Capt. Edward S. Lienhart.
Immediately, 500 Germans with their arms raised ran to-
wards E. Company's lines. Among these prisoners were the
Major, the Tank Commander and four other officers. Thirty
of the fit prisoners were detailed to evacuate as many as pos-
sible of their wounded comrades.
In the town itself No. I section facing the Trun road were
supported by a Mark IV tank, which was kept busy. Its single
gun put out of action in turn 27 vehicles; set on fire at 600
yards, they blocked the road leading to Major Currie on the
other side of the three-kilometres-wide German corridor. The
same tank with one shot cut off the barrel of a 205; its crew
was grilled alive.
Capt. Waters who had made his headquarters in the Mayor's
house, "probably the prettiest house in the town with its court-
yard stacked high with
German rifles", glued his ear to
the wireless and listened anxiously to a non-identified General
ordering the artillery to fire on a German column at that
moment
crossing Chambois. It was being continuously
The Surrender
"could only complicate our task by creating obstructions since
there were so many tanks and armoured vehicles hit." On the
other hand, convoys blocked in this way, according to Captain
"became marvellous targets for our artillery. I never
knew who the General was whose orders I could follow, but
it was obvious he had not only divisional artillery, not only
Corps artillery but also Army artillery at his disposal. He
A battle group of the Tenth Polish Armoured Brigade-the
Ioth Dragoons and 24th Lancers-was close to the Americans.
"But their calibre being different from ours," relates Chaplain
Captain Al Stopa,
troops appeared and continued the conflict. This
only increased the courage and enthusiasm of our men, and
such was the impetus that everyone was in the line, even the
unoccupied signallers, the office staff and the repair shop
"There were moments when our machine-guns overheated.
We then used the enemy machine-guns we had captured. Their
anti-tanks, heavy
artillery against armour, mortars,
machine-guns and hundreds of sub-machine-guns of both sides.
Company. A terrible combat with grenades began.
could know how it would end."
Germans. "With the help of a very tall German and a very
