166
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
was waiting for Bradley's O.K. Gerow, on the other hand, could
act without referring to anyone. This difference in power left
the task of clarifying the situation to time; in fact during this
briefing messages crossed from First Army and Third Army,
which would clarify the positions of these two commanders:
Bradley had decided to dissolve the Staff of Provisional Corps;
he had also decided to place the Trun-Chambois sector in the
First Army zone, so as to relieve Patton of the task of closing
the gap and allow him to expend all his energy in forcing the
Seine crossings below and above Paris. Now the nearest Army
Corps to Provisional Corps was Gerow's.
So Gerow would lead the operations against Chambois.
"Let me study the situation. Cancel all orders now under
way. I need twenty-four hours to reflect. Besides I must wait
for V Corps' artillery to join us."
Below N 24 bis the phoney war continued.
The 23 kilometre gap still remained open.
But the orders that morning of the 17th were clear at last in
both opposing camps: the race was now on between fugitives
and pursuers, while no one was yet aware that Bastogne lay
between Falaise and Argentan.
16
A " Model"
"the decisive day of the campaign on the Western
Front", in the words of a German observer! He was the third
commander-in-chief appointed by Hitler since D-Day.
At this moment General Crerar's South
Saskatchewans,
acclaimed by a full peal of bells from the Trinity Church,
captured, from shell hole to shell hole, the smoking ruins of
Falaise, thus depriving the Seventh Army of the last metalled
road to the east.
an enemy counter-attack designed to re-occupy La Boulaie road
junction in the vain hope that they would recapture the
important strategic height of Exmes from the Americans.
Caught between Canadian and American
villages now encircled awoke to find themselves in the front
line of battle. At Tournai-sur-Dives Abbé Launay realized in
dismay that his village had become the rallying point for a
routed army. In the villages of Aubry and Villedieu the farms
were crowded with trucks under sheds and apple trees, while
the Tigers pointed their guns at the fringes of Gouffern Forest,
from where the Americans would emerge.
The Allied airmen of 35 Wing Reconnaissance who were the
eyes of the First Canadian Army reported that the enemy
movements were such that they presented "ideal targets for the
Air Force", while another unit, the Tactical Air Force this
time, reported a column of "at least 2,000 vehicles of all types,
including some
concentrations so dense that it would
difficult to count them."
The Air Forces would probably never have better targets at
their mercy throughout the war, General Montgomery said
that day. The air formations attacked interminable transport
columns driving bumper to bumper, immobilized by the
