I6
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
this time, to wheel in a conquered sky.
On the road the children met a tank, were seized with fear,
but soon burst out laughing; it was called the Mole. It was
followed by four other heavy tanks.
They bore a white star; they were not German.
Led personally by General Dager, Combat Command B-
the right wing of Major-General John S. Wood's 4th U.S.
Armoured Division—had just entered Avranches, taken un-
expectedly, without specific orders, without a plan, without
bridging equipment to throw over the Sée, without a fight.
"The left flank has collapsed, Herr Feldmarschall!"
Von Kluge, on receiving this communication from Speidel,
Chief of Staff, Army Group B,5
ringed two names on his
map: Villedieu-les-Poles to the north and Pontaubault to the
south. A distance of 3o kilometres. Four American armoured
divisions had poured into this breach.'
Mauled by the most gigantic saturation bombing attack of
the war--2246 Fortresses and Liberators with 60.000 bombs
had plastered twelve square kilometres of the bocage round La
Chapelle-en-Juger for
more than two hours-the LXXXIV
Korps had surrendered? The breakthrough was on an un-
precedented scale. A breakthrough such as no Staff, even the
Allied Command, who had prepared Operation Cobra, could
In sleepy Le Mans no one suspected the presence of von
Kluge in the pillboxes beneath the girls' school: the man whose
combined functions were now Supreme Commander West and
G.O.C. Army Group B since Rommel had been wounded. The
night before, he had left the citadel hollowed out in the hillside
at Saint-Germain-en-Laye to take over command at Seventh
Army HQ and to direct the movements of General Hausser's
The offices of the Mutuelle générale française- a formidable
stronghold protected by anti-tank ditches, stuffed with land-
mines, laced with barbed wire and protected by four Tobruk
pillboxes at street level, each housing a machine-gun post-
teemed with feverish activity.
That sultry night von Kluge was not to return to his bed-
The Decision
room at the Hôtel de Paris: telephone calls and cables flowed
into the Command stronghold expressing the panic and also
the chaos; faithful Marschall Günther von Kluge, a short,
stocky pale-faced man of 61, had lost the optimism which a
month earlier had earned him the post of C.-in-C. West, suc-
ceeding von Rundstedt who had been in disgrace since the fall
That night the Feldmarschall also felt himself obliged to
authorize a withdrawal; the units of the Seventh Army were
asked to regroup on the Granville-Troisgots line, south of
Saint-Lô, on an oblique line to keep the continuity of the front.
It was a reasonable decision.
Actually Hausser, G.O.C. Seventh German Army, exceeded
his orders. The Obergruppenfürer SS thought differently. He
ordered the units of LXXXIV Korps to retire towards Percy;
This meant towards the heart of the peninsula, towards the
bocage, to prevent being cornered with their backs to the sea.
"Who's to guard the coast then?" roared von Kluge.
The coast was guarded by nobody; General Dager's tanks,
cleaving a passage
along the lower road which skirts
Avranches height, advanced that night on Pontaubault, the
gateway to Brittany, to the Loire and to Maine.
Pontaubault was primarily a bridge; a bridge which had
received 56 bombing attacks in four years on account of its
vital role, a bridge which the Americans were to take almost
intact the following day, so indispensable was it to both sides,
although the 9o houses around it were a mass of ruins.
This bridge, the carotid artery leading to the heart of the
country, was von Kluge's obsession that night. At the end of
the bridge stretched a crow's foot the size of a continent: three
main roads leading to Brest, Nantes and Alençon. To lose this
bridge was to lose the campaign. It had to be held.
But by whom and with what?
On the Cotentin roads, through the ruins of villages and the
obstacle of smashed vehicles, under continuous fire from the
Allied fighter-bombers, the units which had broken off the
combat obeyed the orders of the Seventh Army commander:
they were falling back to the south-east.
"The south-east! What a lousy trick!" repeated von Kluge.
This was not the first time Hausser had exceeded the
