The Battle of the Falaise Gap
according to a Canadian chaplain, nearly 5000 corpses were
"All these German corpses in the fields, all these empty
helmets on the roads do not allow us to sing a paean of vic-
tory," Alan Wood cabled on 22nd August to the Daily Express.
"A German army in its death throes is certainly no more pleas-
ant to observe than a dying German soldier."
"It was as though an avenging angel had hovered over the
plain to destroy everything that was German," wrote an
American officer who spent August zist in the sector south-
west of Trun, on the route therefore of the retreat. "I found
myself in a lane surrounded by 20 or zo dead or mutilated
horses most of them still harnessed to their trucks or carts. As
far as the eye could see over 200 yards there were vehicles,
carts, tanks, guns, field kitchens in various stages of destruction.
I walked over thousands of rifles in the mud, and hundreds of
others lay piled up in the sheds. On one path over a stretch of
1000 yards some shelled vehicles were a mass of twisted metal.
On the other hand, I saw 300 field guns and tanks, not to men-
tion guns of large calibre, which seemed in perfect order." This
officer mentions a significant detail: "I saw no foxholes or
other types of fortification. The Germans had tried to flee far
too swiftly to dig in, and were perhaps even too tired to sur-
render. I left this sector rather regretting what I had seen. In
such conditions there were no supermen: all men were rabbits
looking for cover."
"On the Vimoutiers road," reports Alan Wood, "a convoy
of 40 vehicles had been surprised by Typhoons. You could walk
along them for 330 yards. Each vehicle was a hulk and the
crews were rotting corpses on the verges. This is the type of
thing you do not try to describe, but to forget."
The British investigators of No. 2 Operational Research
Section counted
between Pierrefitte and Vimoutiers,
and
between Argentan and Trun 187 tanks and self-propelled guns,
I57 light armoured cars, 1778 trucks, 669 cars, 3297 guns and
transport of all types. The greatest booty was counted south
and south-west of Saint-Lambert, in other words in the sector
of the main flow of troops. But as Colonel Stacey reports, "No
complete account was made of wagons and carts, for the re-
searchers found the stench from the dead horses so overpower-
ing that when they came across horse-drawn transport, they
The Surrender
preferred to pass by as quickly as possible."
The roads and the fields were saturated with the wreckage
cartridges, shells,
grenades, flamethrowers, capes,
canvas, boots and blankets," writes Abbé Launay. At Bailleul
the German débâcle," relates Maurice Dornois.
by fire, war material and abandoned loot, corpses of men and
various stages of decomposition."
"It was so hot at the end of August," relates Peter Simonds,
"that you only had to touch a piece of metal to have your
hand burnt. In this temperature the corpses
decomposed
rapidly; the whole battlefield gave forth a fetid stench which
I shall never forget, and which lingered in our nostrils and
lungs long after we had left the region."
French Armoured Division would say: "Chambois will remain
in our memory as a kind of vast graveyard. To open a passage
with a bulldozer."
"It was like one of those paintings of Waterloo or Boro-
were different. Each staff car-and I must have seen hundreds
—was laden with booty looted from the French and German
equipment. There was a profusion of everything—binoculars,
"In practically every German car," says Peter Simonds,
"there were silk stockings, lingerie, silverware and jewellery.
