The Battle of the Falaise Gap
On the morning of the 16th, General Maczek arrived with
his tank. The Polish general had much in common with Leclerc.
"It was very rare for an armoured divisional
normally confined to his command tank with a whole system
of control and co-ordination, to change from the acoustic to
the visual plane on the actual battlefield. It was on the spot in
my own voice that I gave the order that morning to the Ioth
Armoured Brigade to proceed to Louvagny and Barou, and to
the 3rd Motorized Infantry Brigade to proceed to Courcy and
mop up the forest." 4
Stanislaw Maczek,
stocky and smiling, with an iron con-
stitution, viewed the river now behind him and the hills ahead,
and his comrades in arms around him.
"I appreciate the fact that everything we have shed our
blood for for a whole week has this morning become a reality.
Our division is today the sole large unit of the Canadian army
to find itself on the south bank of the Dives. We have overcome
all organized defence. We have regained the freedom of move-
ment indispensable for cutting off the German retreat."
Among his audience was Major J. Maciejowski, whose bony
spectacles made him look more like a college
professor. His regiment was the 1oth Mounted Rifles Regiment
(the Ioth P.S.K.). This divisional armoured reconnaissance
regiment had, around Saint-Sylvain,
Tigers and Panthers massed against it by Kurt Meyer. It had
constantly reconnoitered the Polish advance and had just made
possible the crossing of the Dives.
"You have fought magnificently, Major Maciejowski," con-
importance of what you have accomplished."
Von Kluge, while his adversaries were congratulating them-
selves on the banks of the Dives, fully realized what had been
accomplished. He returned from his trip to the end of the
pocket, reaching Fontaine-l'Abbé through which trucks were
streaming in headlong flight. At 1100 hours he entered the
gates of the château, the Battle HQ of the Fifth Armoured
Army, a stage on the return journey to La Roche-Guyon. Allied
fighters circled above the village, probably unaware of the
The Encirclement
presence of the guests it sheltered. They were threatening
enough for the Feldmarschall to get out of the armoured car
which had brought him back, and take cover against a lime in
the drive, dirtying his full dress uniform which he had been
obliged to wear after his baggage had been destroyed by the
machine-gunning. He was somewhat embarrassed to be in this
rig surrounded by men in rags. Sepp Dietrich handed the
C.-in-C. West the letter he had received during the night. It was
signed by the Führer: "The C.-in-C. West will leave the pocket
immediately and conduct operations outside this sector."
Von Kluge shrugged his shoulders.
"What does he imagine? That I'm going over to the enemy
or going to negotiate a surrender?"
He climbed the Louis XV horseshoe staircase and, passing on
his left the north wing which had been reserved for him-it
possessed a private bath-went to the suite occupied by Sepp
Dietrich. A few days before, this had been the bedroom of
Countess Hélion de Beaumont and now eleven telephone lines
had been hastily installed there.
Von Kluge immediately put a call through to Jodl at Rasten-
"There's no question now of launching a full scale attack to
improve the situation of the Army Groups. All the Army com-
manders are of this opinion."
His next call was to Speidel at La Roche-Guyon.
"The situation on the southern front is critical. Shortage of
fuel is a decisive factor. The western salient must be evacuated
while the corridor between Argentan and Falaise is still open."
He also called Blumentritt at Saint-Germain-en-Laye.
"The situation of the Fifth Army has greatly deteriorated.
All our orders may have to be modified from one moment to
the next, according to events."
"Herr Feldmarschall, you must be free to act ... The front
is nearing Paris ... enemy patrols are not far from Ram-
bouillet... The enemy is very near Chartres.. His advanced
armoured reconnaissance units are not far from Versailles."
"I see," murmured von Kluge.
It was 1207 hours.
The C.-in-C. West put through another call to Jodl and this
time did not mince his words:
"The counter-attack ordered by
