The Battle of the Falaise Gap
passing through. One must therefore conclude that the
famous phrase refers to reconnaissances round Argentan
Station, perhaps to the spot known as "La Saponite". The
Americans were never to cross this level crossing: ahead
of them Argentan straffed, hammered, pillaged and burnt
would wait, a Norman Warsaw, separated from its
liberators by a railway Vistula.
(2) Chief of the Deuxième Bureau of the 12th G.A.
(3) Patton: op.cit.
The line of demarcation separating the movements of
Bradley and those of Monty, had been drawn on August
3rd in a curve: Vire-south of Tinchebray-south of
Briouze, south of Rânes, north of Sées. It was modified
twice during the improvizations of Falaise: firstly on the
I3th to the line Briouze-Argentan-Gacé, then on the 17th,
Argentan-Chambois-Gacé, still, therefore,
to the advantage of the Americans.
Pierre Bourdan: Carnet de Retour
avec la Division
Leclerc (Trémois, 1945). At Francheville and at Le Cer-
cueil, Captain Branet had a remarkable "bag".
Abbé Dumont: Le Pays d' Argentan, No. 59.
La ze D.B. en France: (Article by Lieut-Col. Repiton-
Major Quatrecoup: Le Pays d'Argentan, No. 63, followed
by a conversation with the author.
(IO) Blumenson: Breakdown and Pursuit (History Department
of the United States Army, 1960).
(II) Major Quatrecoup: op.cit.
Eye-witness accounts collected by Le Pays d'Argentan.
Eye-witness accounts.
Eye-witness accounts.
Major Quatrecoup: op.cit.
Eye-witness accounts.
Eye-witness accounts.
The tank Valois, hit in the battle for the Croix Rouge
crossroads, has since been removed to the crossroads at
la Croix-Medavi, to recall this junction.
(I9) Jean François Thomas: Journal de Route avec la 2e D.B.
in Le Pays d' Argentan.
Notes
(20) According to Caravanes, No. 46.
(21) Thomas: op.cit.
(22) Le Pays d'Argentan, Nos. 58 and 61.
Stoughton, 1947).
(24) Robert S. Allen: Lucky Forward (Vanguard Press, New
York, 1947).
(25) Appleton Century Crofts editions, N.Y.
(26) Abbé Dumont: op.cit.
(27) Letter to the author from General de Boissieu who was
Armoured Division.
CHAPTER 12
(I) Shulman: op.cit.
(2) Le Pays d'Argentan, No. 62.
(3)
Abbé Launay: Dans la Tourment de la Guerre (Vilaire,
1951).
(4) Pierre Goubie: in Le Pays d'Argentan, No. 59.
(5)
Von Schramm: The Generals against Hitler.
(6)
According to Chester Wilmot: The Struggle for Europe,
(Collins)
and Blumenson: Breakdown and
Pursuit
(O.C.M.H./U.S.A.).
CHAPTER 13
(I) Major-General Pliker, Chief of Staff of the Luftwaffe
Forces in the West maintains, not without acrimony,
that he was deprived of 96 of these A.A. guns from D-
Day onwards in favour of the land forces, then at the
beginning of August of 40 more in favour of Sepp Diet-
rich (quoted by Shulman: Defeat in the West).
(2) Peter Simonds: op.cit.
(3)
Bradley dates this conversation the 14th August. Martin
Blumenson voices the theory that it seems more probable
on the i6th. This is the view
expressed by
Colonel
Stacey, the historian of the Canadian Army.
(4)
Ralph Ingersoll: op.cit.
(5)
C. P. Stacey: The Victory Campaign (The Queen's Printer;
Ottawa.
