OROUS
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
nothing with which to reply except mortar shells looked up in
vain at the dense blanket of grey sky for the promised support,
hopefully displaying the red ground signal.
A ray of sunshine broke through the clouds. It must have
been midday by German time. A chance squadron of P47s flew
over. It did not take long. "An indescribable chaos and car-
nage," says Alfred Marie. "The column was dispersed and some
of its vehicles destroyed by rifle fire."
The Germans in the convent realized that the tide had
definitely turned.
"There are dead everywhere ... it's terrible,"
surrender to him „and fetch an American officer; we will
The Mother Superior went up to the first floor but on her
return found no one. The nine Germans had changed their
minds and escaped over the convent wall.?º
On the plateau the German convoy had been literally
atomized by the bombing.
"The horses had bolted, some galloped unharnessed in
all directions with the shafts banging against their flanks;
or wounded, blocked the road. Ninety-five
vehicles remained on the plateau. Eleven thousand prisoners
were taken and more than 15o horses were loose. There were
unforgettable scenes of looting which lasted for three days;
thousands of tins of food, sacks of tobacco, thousands of
blankets, chests of tools, guns, cartridges, helmets, sacks of hay
were taken. Mechanics even removed the tyres from cars." "
The Americans, with typical efficiency, cleared the road at
once. General Dager's tanks were now joined by Combat Com-
mand A and, in the bright afternoon sunlight, proceeded to-
wards Pontaubault.
"I's impossible to hold the Americans," von Kluge tele-
phoned to Warlimont, the O.K.W. operational Chief of Staff.
"They have shattered all the strongpoints which held them
in July. It is a blow to the Führer who wants to hold every-
thing at all costs."
Von Kluge however would try to halt the Americans.
The Decision
"It's all quite crazy," the Feldmarschall said quite openly.
"I'm off to Mortain."
Midday. The conference began in the La Magendière manor
at Bion. In front were parked the staff cars, guarded by
sentries and all the approach roads were barred. In the nearby
farms, under the apple trees, the staff officers unrolled their
maps, while the American guns thundered from the coast
nearby. Von Kluge, the aristocrat, conferred with Hausser of
The theme of the conference: to recapture Avranches.
The attempt appeared reasonable. The N 176—only 7 kilo-
metres-was still covered by German artillery. On the other
side was the sea. Pontaubault was in the hands of the Germans
for another few hours. It seemed an easy job to stop the rot.
Avranches recaptured, the front would be restored.
the operation could not be viewed as a local counter-offensive.
The best troops available had to be assembled under cover of
the Mortain hills, an ideal jumping-off point for an attack on
the Mont-Saint-Michel bay. Reinforcements were vital.
But where to find them?
"Evacuate the Channel Islands," suggested Hausser. "Give
me the 319th Division."
Von Kluge agreed.
"Give me two Infantry divisions."
Von Kluge agreed; he would obtain them from von Salmuth
in the Pas-de-Calais.
"Give me mortars, guns, ammunition and fuel."
Von Kluge granted it all.
armour: I need at least two armoured
This time von Kluge hesitated. Two-thirds of the available
Panzer divisions in the West were concentrated in the narrow
30 kilometres
Noyers and
threatened by Montgomery.
"I'll ask for the II S.S. Panzer Korps," sighed the Feld-
marschall. "I've asked the Führer for the gth Panzer which is
still south of Avignon. I'll let you have all I can scrape
Von Kluge gave his promise. But to organize a counter-attack
was to rob the British front of the Panzers who held it in check:
