The Battle of the Falaise Gap
2130 hours. A green flare rose and burst, and the Il Canadian
Corps set off in a cloud of dust. "I have no doubt that we shall
make August 8th 1944 an even blacker day for the German
army than the same day twenty-six years ago," the C.-in-C.
First Canadian Army had just proclaimed. General Crerar was
referring to the great Canadian offensive south-east of Amiens
on August 8th, 1918.
Start line: ten kilometres from Saint-Martin to Soliers. Mont-
gomery always attacked on a narrow front.
On the other side of the straight N158, an open plateau
above the hollows of Falaise
and Caen, eight columns of
armour in lines four abreast, preceeded by the tanks of the
Engineers, cleaved a path with flails through the German
communication
Canadian infantry of the 2nd Division pressed on in the
direction of Brettville-sur-Laize, across the undulating plateau
west of Verrières and Rocquancourt. The Bren-gun carriers of
the 5ist Highland Division sped in the direction of Cramesnil.
A thousand vehicles raised a cloud of dust in the darkness
slashed by the tracer shells of the Beauforts. At the same
moment a smokescreen rose above the lines of the 8gth
Division of the Wehrmacht. Navigators were blinded. Drivers
strained their eyes to make out the faint light of the vehicle
ahead. Nearby, Height 122, selected to separate the Canadian
and British objectives, shone a metallic green under the target-
indicator shells. An extraordinary artificial moonlight from
sixteen searchlights lit up this
fantastic," murmured a sergean Pandemonium. "By God, it's
2745 hours -15 minutes after the departure of the infantry
and not a moment sooner —the 36o guns in position on the hill,
an arc of 5 kilometres from Ifs to Soliers, were soon followed
by 36o more guns whose range covered a rectangle of "4050 X
6000 yards on either side of the main arterial road." Their
barrage had to progress minute by minute in leaps of 200
yards, conforming to the prescribed progress of the units.
"From the turret of my tank, I could see thousands of shells
from our artillery bursting hardly 200 yards away," Captain
Sévigny related after the battle.?
The refugees from Caen heard the whole massed British
artillery on the heights of the left river bank go into action
simultaneously. A barrage
of extraordinary intensity was
sustained for hours and hours on end. Flames spurted from the
mouths of the guns, seeming to touch each other, forming a
ring of fire round the town. The bombers flew over at tree-top
uninterrupted waves.' "A
enveloped my column," related Captain Sévigny, whose tank
was on the right wing. "It grew so thick that I could not even
see the tank ahead of mine. The tracer shells of the Beauforts
disappeared in turn behind this strange green screen."
There were spectacular collisions, lamentable
range, tanks firing against friendly tanks, while the blazing
hulks proved a magnet for the German guns and mortars. The
Germans had 60 tanks in hull-down position, self-propelled
guns, 90 88-mm flak guns serving as anti-tank guns, in fact the
whole arsenal deployed by Sepp Dietrich to prevent the British
"It was soon evident," relates Lieutenant-Colonel Jolly,
who had to descend from the leading tank to guide his whole
column by waving a light, "that the blind were leading the
blind," while Captain Sévigny said, "I could not see two feet
The Canadian guns ceased for a moment.
"Our men were
so inextricably tangled with the Germans that they could not
fire," wrote Alan Wood.
Elsewhere officers got out, shouting and waving to guide
small groups of tanks which had completely lost their way.
The Royal Regiment of Canada lost its way and passed to
the east instead of to the west of Rocquancourt. The Royal
Hamilton Light Infantry, ordered to bypass Rocquancourt,
suddenly found itself in the village. The Essex Scottish lost itself
completely, together with a great part of its vehicles and also
its commanding officer who was wounded.
Despite this chaos Rocquancourt fell at 0045 hours. Crames-
nil, Garcelles, Sacqueville and Saint-Aignan fell at dawn; Tilly-
la-Campagne at 0700 hours and Caillouet about midday.
related Kurt Meyer, commanding the
I2th S.S. Panzer, "cleaving a path along the road in a disorderly
rabble ran the panic-stricken troops of the 89th German
Infantry Division. My clothes were soaked with sweat. I was
terrified, because I realized that if I did not now succeed in
