The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Suddenly Karcz's second in command yelled: "There's a
whole battalion of enemy
infantry attacking in open forma-
tion about 800 yards away."
Karcz took his field glasses.
"You're right. Long files of infantrymen are approaching the
village across the fields."
He looked anxiously at his sixty men.
"There aren't enough of us to defend the town against such
a force. Notify the regiment that we must have immediate
reinforcements. As for us, free machine-gun fire."
The Germans, now 600 yards away, stopped and unfurled
"It wouldn't be a bad idea to capture a whole German
battalion," volunteered the Polish sergeant.
"Cease fire!" ordered Karcz.
"A small group of soldiers waving a white flag, detached
itself from the 'enemy' and advanced towards us, in fact at the
double. The nearer they approached, the more I blushed. No
doubt about it. American steel helmets. At a distance the Ger-
man and American steel helmets were almost indistinguishable
and the mistake was comprehensible. I began desperately to
hope that my firing had hit no one." (Actually there were no
"Feeling rather crestfallen I jumped onto the road and waved
my hand in the direction of the American. He ran towards me
and, still running, caught hold of me and lifted me in the air as
if I had been a child. Shouting at the top of his voice he finally
put me down and cried: 'Buddy, I sure am glad to see you folks
"This was the precise moment," writes Lieutenant Karcz,
"when the Falaise pocket was closed. It was nearly 1800 hours
and the American's name was L. E. Waters." 11
Captain Waters for his part was preparing to cross the
Avenelle road with part of his company when, he tells us, he
noticed in the distance on the enemy side "a British uniform.
The man stood there, right out on the road, looking in vary-
ing directions, completely oblivious to the small arms fire
coming from some unidentified troops in the vicinity of my
right flank. I must confess I was somewhat reluctant to join
this officer, but it seemed that the least I could do was to repre-
sent our troops as he was representing his, and so I got up and
walked out into the middle of the road."
Captain Waters had just met the commander of the Polish
battle group, Major Zgorzelski.
that I carried the names of our organizations and ourselves, and
we exchanged these pages. I admit that when I remember those
greetings we exchanged with the names of our officers, our
generals and our countries under tommy-gun fire and a hail of
shells, I feel like smiling today. They were curious circum-
stances for such solemnities."
Captain Waters concluded, "I have often wondered what-
ever did become of this officer because he made a great
impression on me. He was a very brave man."
The battle was in progress in the village. A few villagers, mad
with excitement, according to Sergeant Wilton H. Bargar, had
taken cover in a large house with a courtyard. Some of them,
old and young, rushed out into the streets to see the Nazi
corpses. The fire spread from the houses to the ammunition
dumps which exploded "crazily" and these in turn made new
houses collapse. The fire spread to the supply trucks. At the
road junction two Panthers were on fire. Between two ruined
houses two field
guns
towed by half-tracks had been
abandoned.
Captain Edward R. Lienhart led E Company to the north
across these obstructions: from courtyard to courtyard, over
wall after wall, through exploding ammunition dumps. Then
Sergeant Walter A. Mitros caught sight of his first Poles towards
the east.
The meeting took place 400 yards to the north-east of the
crossroads which cut Chambois into four districts.
A demolished German car full of looted objects stood there.
Ironically enough, Karez discovered some Polish Vodka. A toast
