218
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
without knowing who is on our right or our left. We don't
know who is firing,
the British, the Americans or our own
Yes; if I move, thought de Langlade, there will be losses,
hand-to-hand fighting, and a head-on clash. Leclerc does not
In any case, the Americans-whose grd Battalion of the
358th Infantry on the French left flank had at 1215 hours cut
the Chambois-Avenelles road north of Fel, I kilometre south of
Chambois-asked only to be protected by their Allies; now at
midday the de Langlade Group were at the apex of a right
angle, the south-east angle of the last square on the map.
Four kilometres away, Major D. V. Currie had just received
the support of the 15th Field Regiment: Captain C. H. Clark-
son had managed to haul, across a path hidden in the corn, a
few guns trained direct on Saint-Lambert from Hill 117.
"An artilleryman's dream," he would say later. "In the valley
targets appeared one after the other. Roads and fields were
filled with Germans retreating east, trying to find an exit from
the trap. The resultant carnage was appalling."
Prisoners flowed in. Major Currie's adjutant emerged from
the turret of his tank to accept the surrender of a group of the
enemy preceded by a white flag. A sniper wounded him in the
chest. Lieutenants Roberts, Reed and Stewart were wounded
while advancing towards columns of men whom they presumed
German prisoners. Two more Canadian tanks were hit and
Major Currie did not know how long he could still hold the
village; the prisoners increased to such an extent that Currie
appointed a leader and sent them back unescorted along the
Trun road. Not saying a word, these prisoners went off to their
'cages' without escort and were shelled on the way by German
guns. A Sherman posted on a hill covered the whole route
of the column, which had been warned of its presence. Only
one prisoner chanced his luck and tried to escape: he was
Two Canadian army photographers, cameras over their
shoulders, arrived.
"We've just come from Trun. The Fritzes surprised us. They
The Pocket
219
nicked our Jeep," they complained to Major Currie.
"I think we can arrange that," replied the Major.
"I'll get
one of the Headquarters Squadron tanks to go back the way
you came and we'll find your Jeep."
The Jeep was duly found in a wood. The Germans who had
stolen it surrendered. A member of the tank crew drove the
Jeep back to Saint-Lambert.
"We can now take the most dramatic photos of the whole
Canadian campaign," said Lieut. D. I. Grant and Sergeant Jack
Stollery, as they thanked the Major.®
"The situation is far too hot in the village. I order you to
return to Trun," replied Major Currie, who had now been
reinforced by two new companies—C Company Argyll and
Sutherland Highlanders, and C Company the Lincoln and Wel-
land Regiment. "The war is one thing and photos are another."
"From the hill," recalls Captain Pierre Sévigny, whose
Canadian medium artillery regiment was attached to the Poles,
"there was a panoramic view of the combat zone; it was an
unforgettable sight. At our feet the battle raged for possession
of the villages of Saint-Lambert and Chambois. We could see
the Shermans advancing,
blazing away with their guns and
machine-guns. The attacking tanks and infantry exploited the
folds in the ground for cover." °
On the heights, Canadian tanks hampered by the hilly going
did not manage to take Neauphe-sur-Dives, a village which
them from their own infantry.
The Governor
General's Foot Guards who had been in Ecorches since 1100
hours and the Canadian Grenadier Guards round Hardouseaux
could pivot towards the Dives, but General Simonds despatched
them north-east to Vimoutiers. This was a fatal order for the
Poles because it laid them open to the counter-attack prepared
by Bittrich, who had already halted the Canadians on Hills 258
"All we knew," relates 2nd Lieutenant Karcz, "was that the
situation around Chambois was extremely fluid and that our
troops were engaged with the enemy. We were told that the
Americans were approximately 16 kilometres from Chambois,
but as a result of a break in radio communications with our
