202
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
prisoners into a column and led them to Drieu Mill without
the enemy having sounded the alarm.
"What are they, Charles?"
Air vice-marshal Harry
Broadhurst anxiously questioned
his ground-attack leader Charles Green, who was flying over
the Chambois-Vimoutiers road in his Typhoon. The Poles had
in fact reported their presence in Chambois earlier, but they
were nearer Champeaux—the heart of the enemy lines.
Broadhurst, in command
of the twenty-two squadrons
and Typhoons controlling the
pocket, did not want to make any mistake. He wanted to re-
assure himself that the columns of armour hurrying along the
road to the heights really were Polish.
"What are they, Charles?" said Harry Broadhurst.
"Huns, sir," replied the wing commander.
"How low were you?" said the air vice-marshal.
"Fifty feet, Sir," answered Green.
"Are you absolutely sure they're Germans?" persisted the
"I saw their black crosses-and the square heads of the
This reply quoted by Johnnie Johnson® irrevocably un-
leashed the bombing of the columns sighted; the Allied units
were actually so close that bombing attacks were now only
made on the only remaining exits of the retreat.
To the east, where the line of the Auge hills was broken by
two roads climbing to the Vimoutiers plateau, the Air Force, in
spite of the bad light, strafed those units which were under the
impression that they had escaped from the encirclement.
the convoys immediately halted and an indescribable jam
writes A. Bechamort.
"There was no end to it,"
"Every two or three minutes the
Karl-Ludwig Opitz.
spotters shouted "Jabo!'
Trucks telescoped. Touring cars, heavily laden with luggage,
past. Self-propelled guns broke down and had to be
scuttled. The planes shrieked down, firing straight along the
cases ricocheted: rockets, shells,
machine-gun bullets, bombs: every attack was a winner."
the following day a bloody hand-to-hand encounter was to
an eye witness. "Many of them suddenly erupted in violent
with the noise of farms and barns burning and lasted day and
was drawn in blood.
From Chambois to Vimoutiers the people, pounded for 15
hours by three artillery batteries, abandoned their houses
adjoining the road.
"That night the French, sheltering in
ditches, cowsheds and tunnels, emerged for a breath of air—
air which smelt of gunpowder," recalls Jean Bard. He was there
when the Panzers beyond Vimoutiers prepared to come down
in the opposite direction to the retreating columns and clashed
with the Poles, Canadians and Americans converging on
Chambois at dawn on the 19th.
