The Battle of the Falaise Gap
In Alençon the inhabitants on whom the Germans had
imposed a curfew from 2000-0600 hours were also asleep. M.
Chesnaux, the mayor, was also asleep in the Town Hall.
A mortar shell burst.
It woke everyone.
It accelerated the whole development of events.
It burst at about o200 hours in the "square" formed by the
officers of the Dio group in the meadow at Champfleur, where
General Leclerc was still preoccupied by the capture of the
bridges over the Sarthe. They were as precious to the fleeing
Seventh Army as to the 2nd Armoured Division in its advance.
In the light of the half-track hit by the enemy fire, whose
ammunition kept
night, General Leclerc
summoned Captain Gachet, his liaison officer, and sent him to
gather information, while his men recovered the bodies of the
two officers killed and removed the other vehicles out of range
of the fire. Where was the reconnaissance on Alençon? He
that the executants
importance of their mission.!8
For the sleeping Captain Gaudet, this direct intervention by
presented itself in the shape of a tap on the
shoulder from his orderly Aït Abbat, accompanied by a phrase
which robbed him of any desire to sleep: "Captain Sir, ze
General he's here."
Leclerc was there. He was waving his cane and shouting to
anyone who could hear, even to those who did not want to
hear: "On your feet. On your feet! Everyone get moving. For-
ward!" Captain Gaudet without putting on his shoes leaped
to his feet and called the Squadron on his mike.
"Man your
tanks." It was 0300 hours. The eleven tanks of No. 4 Squadron
assembled and moved off. Soon a long column of destroyer
tanks and machine-gun carriers formed up in the suburbs of the
town.
"An interminable
column
was
Lieutenant Muccheli! "We could see nothing.
en route,"
relates
Not a shot
fired. Nothing to be heard except the engines revving at slow
speed. No shouts. The squadron was somewhere in this slow
narch, in the smoke that thickened the darkness. We passed
nouses, streets and more houses. We were in Alençon."
Far ahead a Jeep, driven by Captain Da—at his side a young
refugee, Raymond Ciroux, who had volunteered to guide them
The Encirclement
The two men got out, made sure that the bridge was not mined
and signalled to the tanks to proceed. The city was asleep,
wrapped in the silence of the night. Not a shot, not a sniper ...
along deserted streets and took up their positions at the exits.
Captain Da's Jeep headed for the town hall. The Captain
"A pale dawn broke," relates Lieutenant Muccheli, "and the
inhabitants began to appear. It was day, and we were received
with tremendous acclaim. Groups of men and women shouted
'Vive les Americains!'
news ran through the town and there were tears of joy. A
patrol of No. 2 Squadron sent to reconnoitre a barricade was
plied with glasses of powerful Calvados." 21
General Leclerc sitting on the parapet of the captured bridge,
punctuated with his cane the orders for the occupation of the
other passages, thought for a moment and left unhurriedly.?3
In this way, by dragging Captain Gaudet from his sleep,
General Leclerc robbed von Kluge of the last possible strong-
point of the Seventh Army.
