COUS
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
shirt collar and six on his shoulder flaps-silenced the ovation.
"Gentlemen, we are at the cross roads. Great events are
impending. Our forces are to see action; they can bring us the
end of the war sooner than people think."
Then the future leader of the Third Army pretended to
consult his map, puffed at his cigar and calmly went on:
quicker we advance, the more Germans we shall kill. And the
more Germans we kill, fewer of our men will be killed. Rapid
progress means a minimum of losses. I want you all to
remember that."
The officers realized that the Third American Army, which
had so far been held in reserve, was to become operational that
Its task was to pour into the Avranches bottleneck, to
leave by the Pontaubault bridge and to "explode" into Brittany.
The first surprise for the recently liberated inhabitants of
Avranches it was 1600 hours and Bacherer's vehicles were
burning outside the town—was the bulldozer.
The word was new, and so was the machine. The crowd
"were throwing flowers at our men, waving flags and shouting
"les Boches kaputt'" Some in admiration called it "the engine",
others better informed referred to it as the "excavator"
"shoveller"
. Someone caught the word "bulldozer"
which
passing from mouth to mouth, quickly became distorted,
mutilated and naturalized into "boulldozère".
Before the onslaught of the Caterpillar, the debris, rubble
and plaster which blocked the Rue de la Constitution, the main
artery leading from Avranches to the Pontaubault road, was
rolled in noisy avalanches into the cellar openings, soon making
a sufficiently
directions.
for convoys to pass in both
Behind the bulldozer, an endless American column waited
for the way to be cleared.
"Huge tanks and machine-gun-
carriers, a tremendous mass of artillery, truckloads of infantry,
tankers, cranes and bridge-building equipment, massive tank
transporters, huge platforms
had never seen before an
noted
transporting machines which we
never have imagined to exist,"
The Decision
The way was clear by 2000 hours. General Clarke's Combat
Command A set off through a double line of villagers, throw-
ing them cigarettes,
chocolate, and even French banknotes
taken from prisoners.'
At the end of the Rue de la Constitution the convoy split up
into four columns: three took the Ducey road towards the
Sélune dams and the Ducey bridge; a fourth column passed
between the vehicles overturned on the Mont-Jarry in the
morning battle, and descended the hairpin bends still blocked
by a hundred or so German waggons with their horses dead in
the harness, which let to Pontaubault.
The people of Avranches only learned several months later:
the V signs they gave these first tanks were the send-off for the
At the same time dinner was over at Third Army HQ.
"Let's go and see Middleton," suggested George Patton. "You
come with me, Gaffey, and you too, Harkins." The Chief of
Staff, General Hugh J. Gaffey and the G.S.O.2 got into the open
jeep, easily recognized by its noisy horn—a real ship's siren
which could be heard five miles away—and its two big red
markers with three stars, one in front and one behind. They
set off in the direction of Bréhal, the HQ of Middleton's VIII
Middleton, too, was taking his revenge for July. His divisions
had floundered in the Cotentin marshes below La Haye-du-
Puits. Later they had suffered on the Lessay moors, which in
July 1944 were riddled with mines. Then came the break-
through: since July 27th Middleton had attacked Coutances,
crossed the Sienne, taken Avranches and that evening would
be leaving that "damned Normandy with its hedges, swamps
and bloody bocage"; his tanks would be drawn up in front of
Pontaubault bridge abutments.
"I'm on the Sélune," he shouted to Patton as soon as the
latter entered his HQ. "Now what do I do?"
"Which bank, ours or the opposite?"
"Ours of course."
"Goddamn it, man! History is full of wars lost because units
halted one side of a river."
