258
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
plained the Il S.S. Panzer Korps commander. "My troops are
short of fuel, ammunition, food and wireless equipment."
Eberbach told him of the decisions taken at the Supreme
Bittrich resisted but obeyed, although he faltered slightly.
"I can't tell you when the Korps will be able to return to
"I'm sorry but II S.S. Panzer Korps will attack on the night
of the 19/20th."
In the plain itself, the night Eberbach and Bittrich conferred,
Meindl was planning a breakout to join up with the armour
which was to give him a hand.
"We must bring all our aid to the troops which are trying
to break the encirclement," insisted Eberbach.
"And this is
how. You will split into two columns and descend on either side
of Vimoutiers. You will attack south-east of Trun so as to
sweep down into the plain and bring back anything you meet."
Despite Bittrich's protests, Eberbach put a call through to
Sepp Dietrich, commander of Fifth Panzer Group, who was
still in touch with the pocket from Fontaine l'Abbé.
"I have just given Bittrich orders to return to the pocket.
Notify Seventh Army. The attacks will be coordinated from
within and without.'
All the encircled Korps commanders were informed by
radio. This information explains the keennwere informich the
columns of desperadoes were to cross the Dives on the night
of the 19/20, in conjunction with the counter-offensive from
Eberbach outlined his plan to Sepp Dietrich.
"Fifth Panzer Group will furnish forthwith all the necessary
supplies to the Il Panzer Korps."
The delay was longer than expected and the supplies less
When Eberbach returned to see Bittrich the following day,
Saturday, at 1500 hours, it was to hear the eternal litany which
the German leaders had repented ever since Avranches.
haven't enough fuel. I haven't been sent enough ammunition."
Eberbach announced that the offensive was to be launched
that evening.
"I hope I shall be ready," replied Bittrich.
The Surrender
259
It was the hour when the Americans and the Poles were to
meet in Chambois. It was also the hour when the Poles were
organizing themselves in Boisjos which they had occupied
Boisjos, 262 metres, is the highest of the Auge Hills. A sugar-
loaf hill with an all round view, including the battlefield to-
wards the south and the routes descending from Vimoutiers,
from where Seventh Army looked for its deliverer-Bittrich.
Boisjos was a landmark for the troops encircled in the
Boisjos, the western crest of Mont Ormel (Maczuga—4 kilo-
metres long) was also the link needed to close the chain as far
since midday, under the south-east slopes of Mont Ormel—and
as far as the Americans of the goth Division, who were below
in Chambois on the southern slopes of Mont Ormel.
On the top of a hill whose slopes are now scarred with
trenches was an old barn. Its outhouses were to shelter the
enemy. The slope facing the battlefield was marked by the
charming Coudehard chapel which dominated the valley of the
the waves of German infantrymen were launched.
lery could fire with open sights at targets constantly in the
open and constantly dominated from these positions on the
For the Seventh Army to escape towards Vimoutiers, it had
to pass the northern Hill 262 from which three roads led to
the north-east. For II S.S. Panzer Korps to come to the rescue
of Seventh Army, it had to pass by the same Hill 262 where
these same three roads converged.
The left wing of General Maczek's division, the 2nd Polish
Armoured Regiment with the 8th Infantry Battalion, after
of 19th August to the northern slopes of Hill 262, already in
9th Polish Infantry Battalion.
