The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Point 195 rose to the right of the main road. The start line
for the British Columbia Regiment was to the left of this road.
To reach his objective, Lieutenant-Colonel Worthington had
to bear in an arc to the right, by-pass Bretteville-le-Rabet, still
occupied by the enemy, cross the Caen-Falaise road, and bear
still farther to the right.
They advanced across open country, devoid of landmarks,
church towers, tracks to guide them, or roads to align them-
selves with. From time to time, the 28th Armoured crossed
minor roads at right angles, all of which converged on the
Polish sector far to the left.
On either side the battle raged. Smoke from the explosions
hid Bretteville-le-Rabet; dust thrown up by the tanks screened
the main road, route nationale 158, and the Normandy mist
shrouded the horizon with a yellowish haze. Nevertheless,
Lieutenant-Colonel Worthington's tanks fairly soon found
themselves on the summit of the hill-or, rather, a hill.
"Objective reached at 0650 hours. No sign of the enemy, but
recent signs of occupation."
"Message received," replied 4th Armoured Brigade.
They were, however, surprised at HQ that no fighting had
been necessary. Hill 195 was believed to be firmly held by Kurt
The Commander of the 12th S.S. Panzer was at the moment
himself on Hill 183, the apex of a triangle formed by Hill
195 on his left and 140 on his right. Through his field glasses
Kurt Meyer followed the installation of one of his groups on
Hill 140. There were his tanks taking possession of the height,
but hell!-why that smoke, why those explosions? "British,
not German tanks on Hill 140", was the message he received.
The tanks were those of the British Columbia Regiment!
The 28th had lost its way. It was not on Hill 195, though
unaware of this fact. It had turned south-east, and continued
in an arc to its left, thus mistaking the Estrèes-Maizières road
for the N 158, which it should have crossed.
Worthington.
"Give your position," Brigadier Booth requested Lt.-Col.
"Reference 0964."
The HQ wireless operator consulted the map: "Reference
0964? There must be some misunderstanding: that position
The Encirclement
refers to the suburbs south of Caen." The operator looked for
Hill 195, and read with satisfaction: "Reference 0946." His
colleague must obviously have transposed the numbers. Re-
assured, he transmitted: "The Regiment is at reference 0946."
The Brigade therefore judged that everything was in order.
Actually things could not have been worse.
Kurt Meyer attacked without waiting for orders. His Tigers
were in fact on the east flank of Hill 140, and his Panthers on
"Panzer advance! Objective: Hill 140." The two groups of
tanks converged on the Canadian armour and infiltrated into
the woods. The 88-mms rang out. In their panic the Canadians,
strafed at point-blank range, called on the Brigade for help. It
was 0841 hours.
"Enemy engaged, ten tanks lost."
The duel had lasted barely 30 minutes. One Sherman put out
of action every three minutes.
"Request artillery support."
"Give the enemy's position for our range," replied HQ.
"Position already reported 2 hours ago, approximately 500
yards south-east."
And the 4th Armoured Division's artillery pasted the position
reported …. Hill 195!
"Are you getting the artillery support requested?"
"Are you getting the artillery support requested?"
Silence. It was 0907 hours.
Consternation could be read on the faces at HQ.
A reconnaissance was ordered. The Governor-General's Foot
Guards were sent to see what was happening. But the 2Ist
Armoured Regiment naturally could not find the 28th on Hill
195 ... where nothing was happening. It was complete chaos.
The unit sent to the rescue lost 14 tanks on the way and gave
Completely abandoned by their own troops, bombed by
Typhoons which mistook them for the armour of the 12th S.S.,
bombarded by the Polish artillery, the
Canadians were deci-
mated. By the end of the day 47 of their tanks were smoulder-
ing hulks on the hill, with 40 officers and 82 men dead. 34 men
had been captured, 23 by Obersturmführer Meitzel
