ChOUeT
30
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"Yes ... but there's no bridge left at Pontaubault."
"Well, get on and cross the river all the same. The Jerries can
blow up the Sélune dams any moment now. That would be
At this moment the telephone rang. Wood, the commander
of the 4th U.S. Armoured Division announced an almost un-
believable piece of news.
"Clarke is at the bridge. It's hardly damaged; we're crossing
it! Enemy vehicles in sight; our artillery and armour are dis-
persing them."
Patton turned to Middleton.
"It's perfectly obvious. The road to Brest is open. Tonight."
A further telephone call. New message. New victory.
"The Selune dams in our hands. 4000 prisoners taken."
Patton burst out laughing.
"And now I'll tell you what I think. Those are troops who
know their job. We can be sure that we shall continue to
advance, and at top speed."
That night Patton and Middleton worked out the campaign
in a very short time: the 6th Armoured Division to Brest; the
79th Infantry Division to Mont-Saint-Michel; the 4th Armoured
Division to Rennes and the 5th to Fougères.
Patton must have realized that if the Pontaubault bridge was
not crossed that night the whole French campaign would be in
"The ist August, a sunny day, was spent in exchanging
flowers, packets of cigarettes and chewing gum, and also the
distribution of French banknotes found overflowing in certain
German coffers. Spirits were high," records Jean Seguin?
undamaged suburbs. Only about one thousand people remained
The few inhabitants of Avranches still clung together in the
in this attractive city of flowers, now completely burnt out,
who remember the deafening noise of the armoured columns
arriving from the direction of Marcey, skirting the Avranches
height by the "route de quarante sous", and then filing one by
one into the straight road which descends to Pontaubault. The
uproar lasted 72 hours, Patton supervising personally at the
Mortain, Ducey and Pontaubault crossroads? "The passage of
The Decision
two army corps through Avranches is something impossible to
imagine, but it will be done," roared "Blood and Guts" tower-
ing in his gleaming light yellow boots with Mexican spurs,
broad silver-studded belt and four rows of decorations, over his
petrified officers.
It was done: the lightning march began, which was not to
halt until the Bohemian mountains had been crossed and Pilsen
All along the precious seven kilometres guarded by ack-ack,
and with full air cover, M.P.s in white gloves and revolvers in
their holsters directed operations according to a strict regula-
tion timing. To the left of the smashed but unbroken bridge
(two arches hastily reinforced with beams) a pontoon bridge
opening out behind Pontaubault church absorbed the heavy
stream of traffic.
The vehicles of the 6th Armoured Division led the way in
the direction of Brest. "You could follow its trail by the wrecks
of the vehicles it had lost to the few anti-tank guns the Germans
had left behind them-and by the ranks of cheery faces in the
little Breton villages through which it had hurried, leaving
only the memory of its dust-grimed faces."'
Armoured Division hastened towards Rennes,
Vannes, Chateaubriant, Nantes and Angers: the American Press
were to call it "the knife which cut Brittany". The 8th Infantry
Division followed behind. Patton, in his impeccable skin-tight
battle dress, two heavy revolvers banging against his thighs,
personally directed the traffic whilst standing next to his corps
"If a single salvo hits us our losses will be
terrible," he shouted to one of them.
"Forget your fears," he
roared to a second. "To Hell with your flanks. Press on! Press
Task Force Earnest passed in the direction of Dol and
Saint-Brieuc. Rapidly improvised formations of mechanized
cavalry, tank battalions and tank destroyers, motorized sappers
and infantry were detailed to protect the Breton creeks against
oncoming raids from Jersey and Guernsey.!º
The 80,000 men of Middleton's VIII Corps had crossed the
"The main roads were like ribbons of steel, the trucks
advanced bumper to bumper in files of between 50 and 60
