OROUET
English
CHERBOURG
LE HAVRE
PARIS
•Chambois
ARGENTAN_.
ranches
A Pontantain
ALENCON
RIVERS→~~
Kilometres
LE MANS
Map of Normandy
showing principal towns
Falaise Gap
involved in
Battle
of the
The Decision
orders of the C.-in-C. West. A few days before, the Feld-
marschall had remarked to the G.O.C. Seventh Army that he
was out of his mind to bog down his armour-Panzer Group
Lehr and the Division Das Reich-along the Cotentin front.
"Recall your armour. Replace it by the infantry who are un-
beatable in the hedges! Regroup the two divisions under the
control of the Army. Then we shall have a force to counter-
attack, in case there should be a breakthrough."
The breakthrough had occurred. Hausser had not moved his
armour. And the counter-attack force had evaporated under
the hail of bombs dropped on la Chapelle-en-Juger. But it was
too late that night for regrets. The vital thing was to limit the
"I must have troops to hold Pontaubault. Get me Zimmer-
It was 0210 hours. A call was put through to Oberbefehls-
haber West. At Saint-Germain-en-Laye, the C.-in-C. West's
Chief of Staff (operational) replied: "No troops available, Herr
Feldmarschall."
Von Kluge hung up, consulted his map, called the G.O.C.
LXXXIV Korps, was unable to reach von Choltitz, thought for
a moment and then asked for Farmbacher, G.O.C. XXV Korps
"You must retake and hold Avranches at all costs. Your 77th
Division is at the approaches to the bridge over the Sélune.
Avranches is the corner stone of our defensive action."
Von Kluge now had in front of him a panicky message from
"Unless the door to Avranches is closed at once, the whole
German front will collapse."
Then as though afraid he had not stressed the importance
of the order given to Farmbacher, the C.-in-C. West insisted:
"The outcome of the battle in the West depends on the fall of
Avranches or on its being held."
François Brière rose very early on the morning of July zist.
The previous night like many other citizens of Avranches he
had cheered the American column-twelve armoured cars,
twenty-five jeeps and a few pieces of light artillery-which
