U8
34
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"Contact with my divisions practically nil," he cabled on
August 2nd. None of the columns now scattered in Brittany
had any support. Between Rennes and the Seventh German
Army, eager for revenge, was open space.
The meticulous and methodical commander of VIII Corps
who up till now had been accustomed to the cautious General
Hodges, short-circuited Patton and approached Bradley direct.
"I hate to attack with so much of the enemy at my rear,
especially while it's so exposed." A new complaint three days
later, this time to Patton: "I have no control over the 6th
Armoured Division. I imagine it to be 240 kilometres south-
west of Avranches. I don't know what it's doing. I deny all
responsibility."
And pointing on his map to the Mont-Saint-Michel: "If the
other fellow were to breakthrough at Avranches to the coast,
I'a be cut off way out here in Brittany.' 13
He did not know how right he was. The "other fellows"
wanted to recapture Avranches.
The same day that these fears had been expressed,
Berlin
telephoned to Saint-Germain-en-Laye: "The Führer has observed
the movement of the American armies," Jodl informed von
Kluge. "He thinks it would be excellent to let as many troops
as possible pass through the Avranches bottleneck before we
cut them off at this point."
And Jodl, with a complacent sigh, added smugly, "In this
way we shall take far more in our trap."
3
The Falaise Front weakened to reinforce
Avranches
The order reached von Kluge on August 2nd at 2345 hours.
It was signed by the Leader of the Third Reich.
Von Kluge shook his head, made a little grimace of despair,
stormed, complied and transmitted the order: "Army Group B
all its main
armoured units will prepare a
counter-offensive aiming to break through to Avranches, with
the objective of isolating the enemy forces and ensuring their
destruction."
The Feldmarschall asked nothing better of course than to
retake Avranches, but only in order to establish a rampart be-
hind which the Seventh Army could retire. For the Führer, on
Avranches was primarily
separate the forces of Patton which had ventured into Brittany
from the forces of Hodges, bogged down in the Cotentin, and
to annihilate them.
"An operation which History will qualify as grandiose,"
commented von Kluge.
"An operation of extreme boldness.
But ... impossible to realize in practice."
In order to realize it, Hitler specified: "All the armour avail-
able must be transferred from their present positions without
being replaced."
Collect all the armoured divisions available on Army Group
B's theatre of operations? Von Kluge was appalled. Was
he to run the risk at Caen? Was he to open the road to Falaise?
"The decision of the French campaign depends on this
offensive," concluded Hitler.
Von Kluge had a foreboding that this order signed the death
warrant of the German forces in Normandy.
Attached by Hitler to C.-in-C. West to enforce the decisions
of the German High Command, artillery General Walter Warli-
