The Battle of the Falaise Gap
despite his wish to calm the terrified refugees.
Since 1800 hours, in fact, the artillery of the goth Infantry
Division had concentrated on the road from Bas-Aubry to the
village, and now the fire line had reached the fleeing army:
every ten minutes a huge cloud of smoke and dust slowed down
their march, and Abbé Launay could count up to 28 fires glow-
ing in the plain while
"trucks, tanks, tankers and cars
demolished by the shells or by the fighters raised a huge black
pillar to the sky, and the village itself was wreathed in black
Tournay-sur-Dives was the centre of the arena and the stands
all round were occupied by the Allied forces: to the east the
Auge Heights which rise to 262 metres barred the horizon held
by the Poles; the Germans would try to scale these heights and
break out of the circle which was now about to be closed; to
the south the open spaces of the Gouffern Forest that evening
were teeming with General MacLean's infantry, making for the
slopes leading down to Chambois; to the west the headlands of
Feuillet wood were threatened by the British.
Between the geographical contour lines defining a real en-
closed field and the military lines, therefore, the coincidence
was perfect on the four sides of a square in which the Seventh
Army was trapped. From their battlements the Allies were
trying to descend into the arena. The Germans were trying to
escape from the arena by crossing the "stands" leading to the
The diameter of the arena was composed of ten kilometres
of rich fertile plain covered with fields of vegetables, corn and
apple trees. The river Dives cut the plateau in two. On its
course were three villages "where nothing ever happened"
and where something was now about to happen—the death of
an army. These villages were off the main roads surrounding
them—the Granville-Paris road to the
Argentan road to the west; the Falaise-Laigle to the east—
villages now filled with refugees convinced that they had
found a region which would be left unscarred by the war.
Inside the bowl-which historians were later to call "the
cauldron" —were a few local roads, tank tracks and paths
which showed up chalky white against the green fields, giving
the air forces ready-made strafing lines. All the roads available
The Pocket
converged on Tournai-sur-Dives, some of them leading to the
A second shell fell in the village "blowing off tiles and break-
ing windows," recalls Abbé Launay.
"Our war has begun," sighed the man who 48 hours later
would obtain the surrender of the last encircled Germans. "We
must take cover!"
their shelters everyone felt the tension as they listened help-
lessly to the artillery duel. For every seven Allied salvoes one
German reply. The Americans fired from the south,
Canadians from the north. From the west the British fired as
approached N 158, coming down from Falaise
advancing through the Bocage.
There the 59th British Infantry Division reached the village
of Ri, the last stage before the Falaise-Argentan line. In the
village, "the Germans hurriedly took the wounded down to
the cellars and spent the night with us, while
continued to burst on the château, the farms and the lawns,"
notes Count Vigneral. "At midnight and at three in the morn-
ing the dressing station was moved and driven to Cuy four
kilometres farther east.
At daybreak we were once more
invaded by weary troops asking for a drink and a place to sleep.
One of them confessed to me: 'Tommies here tonight'."
General Dempsey in fact steam-rollered the western fringe
of the encirclement so as to fold the pocket back on itself. The
British XII Corps after occupying Thury-Harcourt on the even-
ing of the 17th, approached Nécy on the evening of the 18th.
It was twelve kilometres south of Falaise, where three days
earlier von Kluge had looked for Eberbach. Nécy was defended
desperately that night by two Tigers from which, when they
were destroyed at about 0200 hours, emerged Obersturmführer
Meitzel, the victor of Hill 40, who was taken prisoner.
This western fringe was the N 158, a dead straight road
running between heath and woods. It had been chosen by the
Seventh Army as the dyke to be held at all costs so that the rest
of the army could withdraw to the east.
