The Battle of the Falaise Gap
the road from Flers, an ambulance arrived with seriously
wounded men. Not content with occupying buildings, two
great tents were erected amongst the cattle taken by the
Germans and driven before them in their retreat. Men were
operated on in the tents and in dining-rooms, others died in
drawing-rooms. About midday the gunfire grew louder, from
the Leclerc Division towards Rânes and Ecouché, from the
north-west towards Falaise and Potigny, from the east towards
"We were a little in the dark, but we had the
impression that from the lith August we were encircled,"
said Comte de Vigneral. On N 24 bis, now practically unusable,
Xavier Rousseau sets the first scene of the retreat on the morn-
ing of Saturday the 12th: "Opposite the Beaugé inn a Melde-
kopf was functioning to direct the convoys. Beneath the pines
a noticeboard indicated units and directions. Cars of Germans
with head wounds passed." 8 At Bourg Saint-Léonard, an eye-
witness observed an extraordinary sight in the afternoon: Ger-
man vehicles of all kinds, tanks, small and large trucks, motor
bicycles and carts fleeing en route for Chambois. This time it
was a débâcle. Some of the cars had lost their windows, others
had no doors left. We saw one carrying officers with no front
tyres and another which had only three wheels."
"Infantrymen without weapons, civilians employed by the
Wehrmacht carrying suitcases, workers from the Atlantic
Wall, chaps from a security company which inspected the
factories requisitioned by the Germans, grandfathers, clinging
to their relations, who had been given a good time in France,
newsreel operators, buyers from various ministries, treasurers
with batmen and rucksacks—all of them," relates Karl Ludwig
Opitz, one of the few German witnesses who consented to
describe the German retreat from Normandy?
The N 24 bis, the main channel for the withdrawal
authorized by von Kluge, received the roads leading from Flers
to Condé, towns upon which the Americans and the British
were converging.
On that evening of the 12th, VII U.S. Corps approached Sour-
deval, crossing the Borenton-Domfront line. The British VIII
Corps had cut the important artery of the N 812, 3 kilometres
The Encirclement
115
east of Vire. To the north before Falaise, Barbery and Moulines
were captured by the Canadians; to the south Argentan and its
suburbs were reached at 1830 hours by General Oliver's Com-
bat Command A. Along the N 24 bis, Bourg-Saint-Leonard, Pin-
au-Haras, Nonant-le-Pin, and Coulmer fell during the afternoon
to Combat Command R.
The corridor through which the Seventh Army could still
"pull its chestnuts out of the fire" was now no more than 35
kilometres wide.
It was conference time on the estate of the Dukes of La
Rochefoucauld, 1900 hours. A real summit conference to
which Blumentritt had
once more travelled from Saint-
Germain-en-Laye, taking care to use only the roads on the right
banks of the river. In the huge high-ceilinged room, two chairs
faced the Feldmarschall, sitting at the desk at which Louvois
Von Kluge put forward a mad proposition: the encirclement
Speidel shook his head. General Speidel was without doubt
the most resolute spirit on the German side." Around him
the countryside had neither
ammunition, since the
Seventh Army of its vital supply routes.
"General Haislip's divisions,"
explained von Kluge,
engaged in a corridor. Now we hold the walls of this corridor.
We therefore have the possibility of cutting Haislip off from
the main forces of the Third Army."
