The Battle of the Falaise Gap
enter it; the 9oth U.S. Infantry Division, which relieved them,
would be unable to take the city, stopped by a chain of artillery
batteries on the heights dominating the Touque Valley. Pinned
down at the road junction of Boulaie and Castelle, the
Americans would not pass Coulmer church until a week after
Before the town, Americans and Germans fired at each other
on sight. Enemy motor
were shot by American
machine-guns. "A seriously wounded officer entered a house in
according to Abbé Lemancel, "lay down on the bed
and killed himself with his revolver. The owner of the house
buried the officer with the aid of two neighbours, but on
returning home he was mowed down by machine-gun bullets
coming from no one knew where." 22
Then the strange war, officially desired by the High Com-
General Haislip has given his personal account in the Report
after Combat of XV Corps.
"On 13th August the Commanding-General Third Army
directed XV Corps to push on slowly in the direction of Falaise
and make contact with Allied forces advancing from the north.
This action was being initiated when orders were received
rescinding these instructions and directing the Corps to halt
on the Orne."
From Argentan to Gacé the N 24 bis—D 4 line, became a
taut rope which for nine days separated the adversaries.
General Haislip's XV Corps, with arms at the ready, was in
control of all the frontier villages from the afternoon of Sun-
day the i3th and would not attack various points until the
18th, such as Bourg Saint-Leonard, or Crennes on the 19th.
Each of these hamlets, all situated south of the road (the north
of it was uninhabited since it comprised the dense Gouffern
forest) was to experience its own little war, changing hands
several times a day every day for a whole indecisive week,
until the clashes of patrols gave place to the final rush on the
19/20th August.
The bombers no longer intervened. "When once the area had
become reduced," declared Sir Francis de Guingand,
was a great danger of the Tactical Air Forces supporting each
Army group becoming mixed-up." 2
28. General Maclean whose
goth
fantry Division took Chambois aur
Bourg St.-Léonard.
30. General Gerow, commanding
V U.S. Corps, closed the Gao
the south.
Omar Bradley. With Eisen-
he conceived the idea of an
lement.
31. Colonel Pierre Sévigny.
