The Battle of the Falaise Gap
of Saint-Jean-de-la-Haize-also below the Avranches height but
on the other bank of the Sée-had been caught in an air attack
on a German convoy fleeing the coast. The road set into the
hillside leading towards Mortain was now blocked with the
debris of a hundred burnt vehicles which conscripted civilians
had been forced to push into the ditches, and lined with
decapitated trees, their branches still adorned with strips of
German uniforms.
Although full that morning, the church in the afternoon was
less well attended. At the end of the mass at midday, a warning
appeared out of the sky. Just as the little girls in their white
veils emerged from the vaulted porch, dazzled by the bright
sunlight, a Spitfire appeared, dived on the crowd, skimmed the
farms, banked to regain height and disappeared in the direction
of the sea. What
machine-gunner had spared
Norman communicants?
"Never had such a mass of aircraft been seen in the sky."!
Fighter-bomber patrols-always in formations of 12— scoured
the roads; close formations of Flying Fortresses were reported
to the "Jerries" by urgent blasts of a whistle warning them to
take cover under the apple trees. The peasants remained
completely indifferent.
Those parents who had preferred to remain at home heard
the drone coming from the north, from the direction of the
Granville road. According to one refugee: "It was like a huge
clockwork mechanism set in motion." & The Americans were
known to be on the other side of the river. They were reported
to be at Butte-ès-Gros, at Lolif, and at Bois-de-Marcey. The
villagers were gripped with fear at the approaching battle, and
waited in trembling anticipation.
M. le Curé was unafraid. Reading the suppressed fear in the
faces of the children, he kept repeating: "Nothing will happen
to us. God is with us." Mme Ponty sat down at the harmonium
and her husband, close to the stained glass window, took up
At the first gunfire the curé pretended to have heard nothing.
When the second salvo sounded, Mme Ponty thought that the
glass from the window was going to fall on her husband. Soon
the interval between the salvoes indicated to the adults that the
tragedy of Avranches was by no means over; since June 7th the
centre of the town had been a mass of rubble; whole streets
had been obliterated; nearly 1500 houses had been razed or
rendered uninhabitable. That evening, shells from the Granville
road area began to splatter the hill which, although fortified
with an anti-tank trench and concrete shelters, seemed clear of
all German troops. But the tanks of the VIII American Corps
under General Middleton supported by motorized artillery
were advancing on the Sée, knowing that they would have to
give battle in order finally to quit Normandy.
The church shook to its foundations; this time the shells fell
on the college square, plumb in the middle of Val-Saint-Père.
The curé looked round and said: "The danger is over," but his
words were drowned by a deafening explosion which made
parents and children alike turn pale. M. Ponty launched into
Stradella's Church Air, hoping to dispel anxiety with his music.
Above him the window which his wife had been watching as
her fingers ran over the keys of the harmonium vibrated. "The
hymns helped us to bear everything and what struck me," a
member of the congregation recalled, "was the calm of all
these children as the plaster rained down on their heads." 3
The uproar increased and at the moment of the Elevation a
heavy rumble drowned the noise of the gunfire: "Planes!"
everyone thought. They hedge-hopped over the tower, slowly,
as though they would never pass. There was a
moment of anguished tension, then the throbbing roar faded
away in the direction of Pontaubault.
"The bombardment now grew so intense that the ceremony
was cut short by our brave curé," related the father of one of
the communicants.' It was decided that the procession should
be inside the church: it shook constantly as though the
gunners were determined not to stop until the foundations had
collapsed. The children's hands were trembling so badly—
relates Mme Ponty-"that I had my bonnet singed by the
Rénouf child's candle as she passed." Abbé Duguépeyroux
mounted the pulpit; he advised everyone to return home with
all speed and told them to avoid grouping together. Relieved,
the congregation rose; passing under the porch (the vaulting
had never before given such a sense of protection) and
hesitant to go out into the sunlight, they left the church. Two
American reconnaissance planes circling above the hill seemed,
