2n0
92
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"Go to hell and now get to blazes off this hill unless you want
me to shoot you," cried Lieutenant Rohmiller.
It was 1820 hours, the precise moment von Kluge was pre-
paring to attack once more at Mortain.
On Hill 314, Lieutenant Rohmiller and Sergeant Wingate
gave the brush-off to an S.S. officer who, accompanied by a
soldier carrying a white flag, had appeared at Ermitage farm,
before E Company's position.
"I have been charged to offer you honourable terms for
surrender. Your battalion is surrounded."
It was true. For four days-since the first hour of von
Funck's counter-offensive—900
Americans, spurred on by
Captain Reynold C. Ericson, had been clinging to a rocky
promontory above Mortain covered with bracken, from where
a spectacular view was to be had of the
Harcouet, Barenton and Vire roads—the exits to Brittany,
Maine and Normandy.
"The countryside, one of the most beautiful in Normandy,
that day was a distressing mixture of gentleness and desolation.
On the horizon to the west, towering above the Bocage, Mont-
Saint-Michel, lit by the sun, emerged from the glittering waters
of the bay. To the south the Bourberouge Forest raised its
rocky escarpments above the bracken heaths as far as the eye
could see. But, close by, at the foot of the hill, the setting
changed. War revealed its tragic horrors, and the fires from
conflagrations covered the valley with a thick cloud, pierced
from time to time by reddish gleams." 2
"Your commander, Lieutenant-Colonel Hardaway, is our
prisoner," the S.S. officer continued in excellent French.
It was true. Completely cut off from his troops, the com-
mander of the i2oth U.S. Infantry Regiment, guarding Mortain,
had tried in vain to tele-command his units who were dispersed
on the heights by means of a battery wireless. After a series of
chaotic battles in the town itself, he had fallen into the hands
of an S.S. patrol.
Reich Division.
"Your position is desperate," insisted the officer of the Das
It was true. On the flanks of the peak the S.S. of the company
The Encirclement
which had recently left Oradour, had tried in vain to dislodge
the parched and hungry 2nd battalion, on the summit. Wire-
less batteries, and medical material had run out, the M.O. had
just been killed. The fighting was at such close quarters that
the men of the "Lost Battalion", as it later came to be known,
could hear the Germans giving orders to their rear.
E Company on the south slope of the crest had lost 19
of its 21 vehicles and its anti-tank gun. G Company on the cliffs
of Montjoie and the neighbouring heath, had lost 112 men. K
Company between the crest and the Ger road had been
The night before, the G.I.s, who had exhausted their reserve
of iron rations, had demanded food, ammunition, medical
supplies, and above all, drinking water. The only well on the
hill was under fire from snipers and patrols who attacked
repeatedly. The remaining iron rations were reserved for the
wounded and shared out parsimoniously. Admittedly a potato
field and a nearby kitchen garden with cabbages were of some
"This was the first time in my life that I'd eaten raw
vegetables without getting a stomach ache," grumbled Private
Joseph Perry good-humouredly.
"I feel as if I've got a lot of
razor blades in my belly," swore Lieutenant Kerley, who had
eaten nothing but raw potatoes for 96 hours.
"God blast those
bloody snipers," said another who, seeing a wounded man
dying of thirst beside him, decided to go to the well all the
same; he pumped some water under a hail of bullets and
returned without a scratch. Elsewhere a soldier had managed
to save two bottles of brandy with which they were able to
light a fire to make potato soup for the seriously wounded.
Peas and radishes were welcomed like manna from heaven. A
burning sun scorched the heath.
The S.S. officer, wearing the Iron Cross, grew more per-
suasive. "You'll be well treated."
But the wounded men in their deep foxholes at the centre
of the position, their morale still high as they watched the
negotiations, said, "No! No surrender!"
The previous night another Nazi spokesman had proposed a
truce to evacuate the wounded. According to the testimony of
Earl Mazo, chief editor of Stars and Stripes, one of them with a
gangrenous leg shouted: "I want no truce with those bastards!"
