142
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"It's a bloomer," roared Patton. "I could have closed the
"Regrettable," said Eisenhower.
Admittedly the Supreme Commander had covered Bradley's
decision to halt XV Corps on the N 24 bis line, in default of
which a catastrophic
battle between Allies
resulted, but
condition that Montgomery fulfilled his
engagement: to link up at Argentan.
Monty did not link up at Argentan. He withdrew half the
forces attacking Falaise. Monty, 6 kilometres from Falaise,
turned aside and 29 kilometres from Argentan turned aside
The twenty-nine kilometres that still divided the two pincer
arms were to mark "probably the single bitterest episode in
Anglo-American relations on the field of battle in the entire
war." * British and Americans, irritated and defiant, kept an
account of their respective efforts.
"Do you realize that in thirteen days we covered the ground
from Avranches to Argentan via Le Mans and Alençon, three
parts of a circle which enclosed the Seventh Army, in other
words 240 kilometres. You British have not yet managed to
cover the 34 kilometres which separate Caen from Falaise for
forty days. And we are still waiting for you at Argentan, 23
kilometres to the south."
"I am the first to agree," said Sir Francis de Guingand,
Monty's Chief of Staff, "that our Allies' leadership at this time
was bold and resourceful ... 2ist Army Group's progress
looked rather meagre in comparison with the Americans."
Not only did their progress look meagre, but their weakness
jeopardized the plans: it no longer justified the halting of XV
Corps' operations which "certainly would not have succeeded
in closing the pocket, although the stakes were so high that we
should have tried,"
Colonel Stacey, director of the
Historical Section of the Canadian Army, for whom the
situation south of Falaise represents one of the great un-
exploited opportunities of the war.'
Von Kluge at Fontaine-l'Abbé château, near Bernay, was
asleep. He had come from Saint-Germain-en-Laye where he
The Encirclement
had attended an exhausting conference, regarding
order of the day which barely concealed plans for the evacua-
Von Kluge was totally unaware of the discord existing
between the Allies. The Feldmarschall was on his way to the
fringes of the pocket to meet his two army commanders,
whom he could only believe to be encircled, and with Hausser
and Eberbach intended to take the necessary measures to dis-
engage the Seventh Army from the stranglehold. He hardly
expected that he would be granted a six days reprieve caused
by the vacillations of the Allied camp.
At the château of Fontaine-l'Abbé, a delicious Louis XIII rose
brick and black flint "folie", literally snatched from Countess
Helion de Beaumont by Sepp Dietrich the previous evening for
his Fifth Armoured HQ-there would be neither bombing nor
machine-gunning that night. The population, evicted from
their houses by the arrival of about thirty officers
requisitioned even the humblest dwellings,
machine-gunning Lightnings and by the pillage of the Huns,
had gone to ground in the hillside caves. The front was still far
mand in the West. Nor did he know that 1,000 kilometres
away this dawn would also break on the French and American
armadas landing on the shores of Provence.
