210
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"Here they fought with the British tank, but soon retired to
their original position. A chance British shot severed at its root
the gun barrel of a tank hidden beneath a walnut tree. The
crew set fire to their vehicle. After this action, a tumultuous
herd of S.S.-1,500-2,000
or more-passed through Com-
meaux; they asked the way to Saint-Lambert, so Troune and I
pointed in the direction of Brévaux and Pommainville. They
said that they had come from the woods of Ri. They were black
with dust and sweat and emptied the well to quench their
thirst."
Lower down, the main road D 15 from Putanges was taken
that morning by 29th Brigade of lith British Armoured
Division coming from Pont-Ecrepon. A few kilometres before
Montgaroult, these units left the D 15 and made for Sentilly
and Occagnes.
"A British half-track coming from Sentilly
reached
Commeaux on the
the 19th, soon
followed by a second; catching sight of the Wehrmacht soldiers
who were still there they turned tail."
In this highly fluid situation many of the orders worked out
by Meindl and Hausser that morning did not reach the units
before evening or even late that night.
"On the evening of I9th August,"
relates General von Lutt-
witz, whose 2nd Panzer was in the west corner of Gouffern
Forest—a great number of our troops were herded into a
narrow strip between Fourches, Trun, Chambois and Monta-
bard, a 25-kilometre square."
Thus, when Hausser returned to Villedieu-les-Bailleul to
harangue unit commanders and officers of the 3rd Parachute
Division, the area of the pocket itself had shrunk considerably.
To the west the British on N 158 were approaching Argentan:
only Feuillet Wood sheltered the 84th and z6zrd German
Infantry Divisions. To the south the part of the Gouffern Forest
limited by D 113 and N 24 bis had fallen to the Americans. To
the east where the breakout was envisaged, the Canadians at
the approaches to Saint-Lambert covered the hills as far as Hor-
douseaux; the Poles occupied the hills from Ecorches, taken
that morning, to Coudehard; General Maczek had sent two
armoured regiments and three battalions of infantry to the
The Pocket
2II
northern slopes of Mont-Ormel, Meindl's objective.
Such then was the situation which Hausser probably com-
municated to Meindl's men at the end of the day; the latter had
had a few hours' sleep, had eaten, and lived in hope. The
C.-in-C. Seventh Army concluded his talk by announcing that
he would lead the right column himself while Meindl was to
lead the left hand column. Zero hour: 2230 hours.
Three hours later the pocket was closed in Chambois.
