176
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
at 1445 hours.
"General Maczek must overrun Trun in the
direction of Chambois at all costs, and as quickly as possible." s
Far from dawdling, the Polish units pressed on boldly to the
east, perhaps a little too much so. This was the case with the
Armoured Regiment-carrying
Infantry Battalion on its tanks—which, as the result of an
accumulation of unforeseen or unforeseeable events, found
itself engaged in a bloody battle some kilometres from the
objective. It was forced to abandon all thought of occupying
the heights commanding the Vimoutiers road.
On the evening of the 17th General Maczek's orders, to move
immediately on
Chambois, were received.
Lieut.-Colonel
Koszutski promptly led his battle group to Champeaux also
18 kilometres behind the German lines but further to the north
than Chambois. It is true that inaccurate maps and the
similarity of the names of these Norman villages, given out in
Polish orders transmitted by the Canadian wireless, may have
contributed to the confusion. But these where only con-
tributory factors.
"We had been promised supplies by midnight," Cadet-
Officer Stanislaw Gunther of the 2nd Armoured Regiment told
us later, "as we had used a lot of our fuel and ammunition
during the day's fighting and our orders were to advance at
0200 hours. The supplies did not arrive. In spite of this
Lieutenant-Colonel Koszutski, who had just fuel enough for
the twenty-five kilometres to Chambois but only 50 per cent of
his complement of ammunition, justifiably decided to set out.
Half an hour after we moved off, the French guide who had
been leading our column disappeared. Complete radio silence
had been imposed, and the terrain was very difficult for tanks.
We knew that at a road junction we had to take the wider of
two tracks, but in the darkness it was easy to be deceived: the
turning we took looked wider, but soon narrowed to such an
extent that to turn about some sixty tanks and twenty various
vehicles would have been courting disaster. We had to press
forward.
"At a crossroads farther on, there was an almost comical
incident: a German traffic-controller actually held up two
priority.
German columns, massed on each side of us, giving our tanks
The darkness and fear were his excuse
.. I am convinced
that he soon realized his mistake, but horrified by the danger,
he saved his own life by allowing us to proceed. After this
incident Lieutenant-Colonel Koszutski gave an order to switch
the headlights on and progress became more rapid."
At dawn, while the 2nd Armoured Regiment was engaging
a mixed column of Panzers and Panzer-Grenadiers blocking
their advance, American Thunderbolts to make matters worse,
and unaware that allied armour were so far behind German
lines "made an all out effort to destroy our tanks and infantry
we carried," recalls Cadet-Officer Z. Mieczkowski. "They did
not succeed but they killed and wounded a great number of
Polish as well as German infantry who for a while under the
terrible strafing made treuga dei and sought shelter together
under our Shermans, only to begin fighting again after the
In the centre, the roth P.S.K. passing Norrey-en-Auge, scaled
Hills 159 and 359 from where the whole battlefield was visible.
To its right the 24th Polish Lancers crossed Louvières-en-Auge;
the Poles could have descended on Trun which they could see
as if from a balcony, three kilometres lower down the slope.
The sky lit up about midnight over liberated Falaise. 100
Mont Royal Fusiliers supported by tanks and mortars were
attacking the Ecole Supérieure held by 60 Hitlerjugend massed
around two Tigers. The battle lasted three hours at point-blank
range around trenches abandoned by the refugees, beneath the
marker flares and bombs of a few German planes which had
interfered in this maelstrom of besiegers and besieged. The
building had been set on fire by the anti-tank guns. The S.S.,
dislodged from the windows, entrenched themselves in the
ruins and the neighbouring grassland. All except six-four
wounded men taken prisoner and two survivors according to
Kurt Meyer "having been sent by their comrades to give us a
last message and a last farewell"-died in the rubble, while
"the remains of the 12th S.S., discouraged, fell back between
the Dives and Nécy." At o5oo hours, according to the log book
of the 6th Brigade, "there were piles of dead Germans round
the building and corpses were burning."
M
