20
Breakout
"I presume that the lid is on," was
Meindl's sarcastic
welcome to Hausser in his headquarters at the heart of the
pocket near Villedieu-les-Bailleul. For the commander of II
Parachute Korps, the arrival of the C.-in-C. Seventh Army at
7 o'clock in the morning that August 19th, could only signify
a most weighty decision.
... And if I understand the reason for your visit, we're
going to try and break out."
"To be accurate, the cauldron isn't yet covered," replied
Hausser. "In the south von Funck has not relinquished Cham-
bois; to the north Kurt Meyer is holding Magny. We have only
to cross the Dives between these two points."
A gap three kilometres wide, with a river and two bridges.
One at Saint-Lambert and the other at Chambois. The left bank
of the Dives was held by the Germans, the right by the
Canadians. Beyond, the hills were held by the Poles.
The hills above the plateau towards the Seine fell in fact one
after the other to General Maczek, who had just cut the Trun-
Vimoutiers road. The two German commanders could see these
hills; they promised freedom to all the troops teeming in the
plain, a goal visible to the naked eye. There was no need for
maps, roadsigns or compasses.
Two of these heights
were vital: those between
which
the road from Chambois to the Vimoutiers plateau snaked up-
wards in tortuous curves. To the left was Hill 262, still called
the Coudehard Height, a characteristic sugar-loaf with a chapel
from which it is said one has a view of 17 church steeples. To
the right erupted the forest-covered tooth of Mont Ormel from
which several small roads lead to the River Vie.
Hausser suggested two spearheads. To the left Meindl's para-
troops would cross the Dives at Saint-Lambert; to the right von
Funck's troops would cross the river at Chambois. The crossing
The Pocket
205
accomplished, the former would use the paths to the hills, the
latter would take the Vimoutiers road. From Vimoutiers they
would descend simultaneously
armour of Obergruppenführer S.S. Bittrich. Zero hour 2230
"What do you think?" asked the C.-in-C. Seventh Army.
"Well, where could we break out except between Trun and
Chambois?" replied Meindl. "Actually we should widen the
gap to the right to ensure Mont Ormel, an exit and an observa-
tion post from where we could literally summon all the units
still in the plain."
Hausser recognized the wisdom of this and approved his
subordinate's plan.
"I suggest that Schimpf with the 3rd Parachute Division
should cross the Dives south of Magny, then bear left for the
northern slopes of Mont Ormel. On his right, Mahlmann with
the 353rd Infantry will cross between Saint-Lambert and
Chambois to take the southern slopes of Mont Ormel."
Meindl outlined in brief the details of the operation.
"Move off from Londe at 2230 hours. No shot to be fired
before dawn. Maximum exploitation of the darkness. Advance
in Indian file. No heavy guns with us. In any case there's no
fuel. The artillery will destroy its guns; if possible a few anti-
tanks and a few 88s will accompany the infantry."
The briefing had hardly finished when "a torrent of shells
and a deafening thunder of guns, which drowned the rattle of
the nearby machine-guns" swept over the plain. Two hundred
1055, 155s and 220s in position at Saint-Loyer, Marcey, Boissey
and Medavi, bombarded the two banks of the Dives and did not
stop for 57 hours.
All that remained was to reach and warn the Korps head-
quarters: to the south in the Gouffern Forest, XLVII Panzer
Korps, to the north LXXXIV Korps, and to the west on the
N 158, LXXIV Korps.
To the south, von Funck would not quit the Gouffern Forest
until midnight when the success of the breakout had been
assured. His 2nd Panzer in the south-west end of the pocket
would leave Argentan followed by the ist S.S. Panzer which
