292
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
had been the desire to escape.
More sober in tenor was the daily report from HQ First
Canadian Army which on 2ist August and for the first time
since June 5th, 1944 confined itself to the three words: "Noth-
ing to report."
The same morning the Texans of the American division
entered the park of Aubry chateau and saw the abandoned
wounded lying there in their death throes and the dead. They
hurriedly organized the
first
evacuations. Major Friedrich
Hayn, the last survivor of LXXXIV Korps Staff approached
the American sentries and was surprised to hear music coming
from a bush. It was an old German song played on a mouth
organ by a G.I. He may have been an emigrant. It was "Ach
du lieber Augustin, alles ist hin." Friedrich Hayn that last day
of the Normandy Battle, wondered whether he should say to
the American that nothing was ever finished as long as the
dead piled up accusingly.
A small German car filled with prisoners entered the court-
yard of Bourgogne farm. It was driven by a lone Canadian.
Weapons and ammunition were stacked under the prisoners'
"Watch out," the civilians shouted to the unruffled driver.
"What did you say?"
"They're armed. They've got guns!"
"What did you say? What did you say?"
"Your prisoners are armed, behind your back."
But the Canadian did not understand the excitement of these
French civilians.
A German who understood tapped the Canadian on the
shoulder and explained in English.
The Canadian thanked the man with a smile and put on
speed; the armed prisoners were obviously tired of firing.
That same morning of the 2 Ist August, Lieut. Colonel Edwin
M. van Bibber of the famous 313th American Infantry Regi-
The Surrender
ment, in the van from Cherbourg, was patrolling at the head
of a motorized infantry company and a platoon of medium
tanks along the right bank of the Seine, from Vétheuil.
Civilians and patrols foresaw a German counter-attack to
Roche-Guyon chateau. It was at this moment at the exit of
the village which Ernst Junger described as "more opulent than
ever, with its wisteria, jasmine, clematis, lilac, laburnum and
roses," that heavy mortar fire burst out lasting for three hours.
From the excavated cliffs which run alongside and dominate
the river'° an enemy barred the Americans from the site of
the GHQ of the forces defeated in the Falaise pocket. Colonel
van Bibber was to lose many men before capturing the keep.
Had the enemy been really determined they could have held
this position against a vastly superior force.
Speidel who had installed his study under the Norman ram-
parts, was destroyed.
There was no one left: neither von Rundstedt, Rommel, von
Kluge nor Model. The G.I.s carefully explored the great hall
where so many conferences had taken place, the drawing
rooms and the cellars. "For the first time since our arrival in
France we entered a building where the lights and the fans
worked. We found none of the information we were looking
for. The Germans had
destroyed all their documents
interest: the rooms were strewn only with the usual junk and
At the moment the last Germans under its orders had sur-
rendered, the GHQ of the forces in Flanders, Normandy and
Brittany, disappeared from the map of France.
