The Battle of the Falaise Gap
southern slopes, thinly defended by the Poles, who were now
attacked in the rear.
Meindl launched his men against the Coudehard ridge at
163o hours. Chaotic but furious attacks were led by everything
Meindl could collect—tank crews, riflemen, mortar crews, who
after exhausting their ammunition picked up and fired dropped
rifles or fought with knives, climbing and finally breaking into
the ravine between Hills 239 and 262. Immediately a few light
vehicles took the Champosoult road.
Both Meindl and Mahlmann had succeeded.
Kurt Meyer was very near to success himself.
rocket-propelled, we rushed through the astonished infantry in
a few seconds and in a silence broken only by the bursting
of a few shells." Kurt Meyer was through.
It was 1900 hours. Meindl improvised a column of vehicles
laden with wounded flying the Red Cross flag. To prove his
sincerity to the Allies, he stopped all traffic for a quarter of
an hour. The vehicles set out under the very eyes of the Polish
gunners at Boisjos and on Mont Ormel. The firing ceased. The
column got through. "Not a shot was fired on my column,"
Meindl wrote after the war,
"and I can only express my grati-
tude to the chivalry of the enemy."
Half an hour later the
battle recommenced.
But the news of their leader's breakout had spurred on the
troops wandering on the plain. They now flowed onto the road
opened by the commander of Il Parachute Korps.
Many months after the battle scores of skeletons
found in the bushes which cover the rock face on which the
Coudehard chapel is built.
Kurt Meyer, still "a perfect product of Nazi fanaticism .:
he knew only what Hitler had told him, and believed it all"?
Obersturmführer
Koln and Michel crossed the ridge. They
looked back, surveying the plain and the awful massacre, and
"we cursed the men who had stupidly sacrificed two German
armies for nothing" 8
23
Argentan in the hands of General
MacBride
remain in the city throughout the whole Normandy battle."
"The seven batteries supporting the 8oth Infantry Division
fired five salvoes which set fire to the city," is the terse record
in General MacBride's divisional log book. "After the heavy
artillery barrage and the retreat of a large number of the
enemy forces, the 8oth U.S. Infantry Division was once more
able to advance."
After vain attempts to reach the suburbs east and south of
the town, General MacBride reformed his units round Urou
and waited for night to fall, when the Germans would retire
whilst the Saint-Lambert bridge was still open.
To the left of MacBride's division and at right angles to the
American lines, General Dempsey harried the advanced guards
of Seventh Army, crossed N 158, followed the ridge and
descended towards the Trun-Argentan road, ready to give a
helping hand to the Canadians holding the eastern perimeter
of the 'cauldron'.
Along the Falaise-Argentan road the villagers hardly had
time to count the last Germans who passed before other uni-
forms appeared: those of the Allies. A few yards sometimes
separated the pursuers from the pursued.
At Commeaux, Germaine Guillon and Albert Guillaumet
heard "British machine-gun fire at Sentilly throughout the
night of the 19/20. That night most of the Germans were on
the run. At about 2000 hours, an armoured truck appeared on
the Sentilly road shadowed by a plane: half an hour later
