56
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Army HQ. Several ammunition dumps of nearly 1,000 tons,
burned for three days under the very eyes of "Blood and Guts."
"The heaviest air bombardment we received," muttered
Patton, who no longer knew what or whom to believe.®
"It's only bluff. They want to cover their retreat."
New units were hastened through the Pontaubault bottle-
neck: Leclerc and the 2nd French Armoured Division, who had
taken up positions in the wood of Saint-James and Juilley,
managed to get through; so did the future XX Corps, going in
the direction of Nantes, Angers, La Flèche, in other words to-
wards the gap left between VIII Corps, now in Brittany, and
XV Corps now at the gates of Le Mans.
"All the same ... wait a little. Halt the movement of the
8oth and the 35th. Hm! and keep an eye on that old devil
Leclerc. Let him stay put at Saint-James and let everyone re-
group on Saint-Hilaire-du-Harcouet .... in case something
should happen." 9
Something, in fact, had just happened.
5
Two German Armies force their way
between two Allied Armies
The schoolmistresses of the Mortain Sacré-Coeur School,
together with two young girls and a child entrusted to their
care, spent the night of Sunday the 6th/7th in the fields. As a
result of the German bombing of the preceding night, Mortain
was empty that Sunday morning. Deserted, on fire and then
machine-gunned by low-flying aircraft of the Luftwaffe, Mor-
tain left its fate in the hands of the battalions of the zoth U.S.
Infantry Division. The last survivors of the division could be
seen that Sunday evening hastily organizing their positions on
Hill 314, digging foxholes on the flank of the hill, turned to
gold by the setting sun.'
At dawn, M. l'abbé Berthelot, curé of Saint-Jean-du-Corail,
4 kilometres south of Mortain, came out of his trench: the
night had been shaken with the continuous noise of iron-
mongery'? Saint-Jean-du-Corail had been liberated three days
earlier by the ist U.S. Infantry Division, later relieved by the
30th U.S. Infantry Division. Admittedly, the night before, the
progress of the G.I.s seemed more like a stroll than a march up
to the line. The inhabitants that sunny Sunday crowded the
dusty roads and villages bathed with light, to fête the allied
soldiers whom they plied with flowers and strong drink.?
Saint-Jean-du-Corail, luckier than Mortain, was not quite in the
front line: were not the Americans approaching
Imagine then the amazement of M. le Curé when on walking
through the Presbytery garden he discovered a car bearing the
insignia of the S.S. in the main drive: "Good news for us," cried
an NCO as he climbed up to the loft, fieldglasses in hand, to
observe the Americans.
"Good news for us and bad news for
you. Our troops have occupied Avranches." 4
