The Battle of the Falaise Gap
bach. "The enemy air forces would halt us at our point of
departure, if they didn't wipe us out."
"I promise you massive air support," insisted Warlimont.
"Our infantry forces available today are far too weak."
"Men and armour will reach you very quickly."
"Even if our breakthrough is successful, our forces will be
inadequate to hold the new front against an attack supported
by heavy resources. Moreover, the supplying of four armoured
divisions in a narrow corridor during the few hours of night
available is impossible."
"I must say, General Eberbach, you take a very gloomy view
of the situation."
However, as though agreeing with the G.O.C. of the Fifth
Panzer, Lieutenant-General Warlimont added with a weary
sigh:
"I can see no other solution apart from this counter-
Eberbach seized the opportunity: "We must withdraw
immediately to the Seine-Yonne line!"
"Politically unthinkable and tactically impracticable,"
replied the Führer's envoy.
Impassive, Major-General Gause, Chief of Staff, and the Chief
of the 3ra Bureau of operations were present at the duel be-
tween these two officers. Eberbach refused to budge.
"The enemy is fully mechanized. That gives him over-
whelming superiority over our units, which have only horse-
drawn vehicles. Allow me to point out that a retreat now,
while we can still be covered by intact armoured divisions is
perfectly feasible, with no risk of catastrophe."
"Warlimont stuck to his guns." General Eberbach related
after the war. We shall meet him now on every page of this
"It was raining at Mortain. The streets were deserted; no
soldiers or civilians to be seen." relates Dr. Buisson of that
August 3rd. Canon Blouet found this odd because the Germans
had left but the Americans had not yet arrived.'
In tact Canon Blouet had not noticed that the German
vehicles which had advanced towards the main street turned
about one after the other.
Throughout the night red flares stained the sky above the
hills to the west, heralding the American advance. In the
southern suburbs a German tank was on fire. A second tank
laden with soldiers in steel helmets adorned with foliage
limped off eastwards. In the streets German soldiers could be
heard saying: "Guerre finie
... Allemagne Kaputt. Tommies
here tomorrow." A motorbike and sidecar weaved to and fro
as though trying to find the way or perhaps on the look-out for
an enemy, sten gun in hand. American shells straddled the
town to strafe the Montjoie promontory, from where the
Germans could observe the hills in front of them held by the
Dr. Legendre had just finished his breakfast when, in his
own words: "I heard a strange noise in the street." Three
soldiers with Tommy guns in a Jeep were the first Americans
to enter Mortain. Two German prisoners cried "Kamerad",
relates Dr. Legendre. A third had just been shot, and his arms
were raised in surrender even in death.
Warlimont, the envoy of hope, finally visited Sepp Dietrich,
commander of the I SS Panzer Korps whose lines ran from the
fringe of the Falaise plateau, along the mined cornfields and
flax fields from where the sentries watched the Caen depression
through which the Canadians might appear.
"Your divisions are not in the right place here," remarked
the G.S.O. High Command, forced to find some excuse before
coming out into the open. "They are playing a static role. They
must be placed at the focal point of the enemy effort."
Sepp Dietrich, "short and squat, with a broad dark face
dominated by a large wide nose he resembled a rather battered
bartender in appearance"' looked for support from Eberbach
who accompanied Warlimont. Eberbach hovered from one to
the other trying to still the fears of the G.O.C. I SS Panzer
Korps.
"The Infantry Divisions ordered to relieve you will be trans-
ferred here as soon as possible, but the SS Divisions must be
held in readiness in the rear to reinforce the front."
