124
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
fluttered at the windows. The whole of that fine August after-
noon Bourg was en fête. We are liberated. The Americans are
They had spoken too soon. The square was still in no man's
land. At 1500 hours a tragi-comic incident gave an inkling as
to what it would be like for another six days. A German
cycling along the Chambois road, stopped a hundred yards
from the square and cried "Any Tommies here?" Then in a
panic he turned about while the Americans prepared to snipe
at him. A funeral procession passed on its way to the church.
The soldiers did not dare to fire, and waited for the hearse to
pass. It was too late. The German had turned off and the bullets
only ricocheted against the wall.
Every day until the afternoon of Friday the 18th, the square
was disputed for. Its inhabitants were evacuated, and it
remained in the front line.
All along N 24 bis, from Ecouché to Bourg Saint-Leonard,
Shermans appeared, were fêted, disappeared, returned and for
no apparent reason, particularly in the direction of the village
of Tercé where five roads radiating in a circle facilitated tank
manoeuvres. For another six days, the hazards of patrols at
nightfall and dawn and local reconnaissances directing these
comings and goings would disconcert the terrified villagers in
their trenches. They were forced to report the movements of
the Americans to the Germans and vice versa.
"About 1500 hours four tanks took up their positions at Sai
on the Eure bridge. We did not fail to go and welcome them
enthusiastically," says Xavier Rousseau. But they did not stop
there. "Two trucks appeared in the village itself," notes a
refugee. "The news spread
quickly
and the population
assembled on the square to acclaim the liberators. Most of the
houses had put out their tricolors. The visit was of short
duration. The trucks put about." 1 A few hours later a convoy
passed through the village square. "We shall be in Paris in
eleven days,"
proclaimed a G.I. who was being offered refresh-
ment by the villagers. "The convoy returned to its quarters,"
noted this eye-witness, who added anxiously: "Won't the Ger-
mans entrenched in Gouffern Forest return?" They did return
The Encirclement
125
in fact but failed to advance farther than the hamlet of Bor-
deaux, patrolling behind the River Eure, which constituted the
demarcation line between the opposing forces.'
For a whole week this was the strange scene on N 24 bis,
the southern jaw of the pincer now tightening on the troops
flung back into the cauldron of the Dives.
"It was an impressive awakening that Sunday of the 13th,"
recalls Major Quatrecoup. Argentan was in view of the
gunners of the 5th Armoured Division, posted at the junction
of N 158 and the Vrigny road, in the park of Mauvaisville
Château. Thousands of 105mms thundered in chorus. Their
target was the munition dumps at La Saponite and Goulet.
"Stripped to the waist, chewing their gum, the American
gunners, cool-headed suntanned athletes, carried out the orders
carried out his movements."
"After a very calm night," relates Maurice Hommey,
town was literally plastered with shells. The bombardment,
to do so, and he would attempt it.
He was entitled to, since by the beginning of the afternoon,
all the objectives
allocated to the 2nd French
Minjonnet, on D 250, joined up with Dio in Carrouges itself.
On the extreme right Massu was at Chahains. In short, the
