The Battle of the Falaise Gap
agreed. The enemy must be taken by surprise. Fortunately
they, too, were preoccupied by the sound of the tanks!
"Forward at the whistle blast! We advanced at speed.
Nothing could resist the fury of the Polish attack, despite the
branches, the holes and the S.S. A Polish lieutenant led the
way. I saw him fall with a bullet in the head. At the same
moment a soldier hiding behind a tree aimed his rifle at me.
I leaped aside; a click; the gun misfired but he already had a
bayonet in his body. A bullet grazed my left shoulder; it was
nothing. We came out below the hill to see 6 Shermans firing
at us. They finally recognized us and shortly afterwards we
reclimbed this famous Hill 262 in company with the main
body of our forces."
The forces, according to several eye-witnesses,
at midday. A platoon of the 2nd Polish Armoured Regiment
met up with the Canadians three kilometres north-west of
Maczuga, precisely between Hills 239 and 240. To achieve
this contact, 2nd Lieutenant Niewinowski made his three tank
crews set out on a suicidal mission: he had first to get through
the Germans' lines, and then, be recognized by the Canadians,
who shot first and asked questions later!
The testimony of the rescuers confirms that of the Poles.
The official War Diary of the 22nd Canadian Armoured Regi-
ment, describes the link-up: "The scene on Hill 262 was the
most savage the regiment had ever encountered. The Poles had
received no supplies for three days; they had several hundred
wounded whom they had been unable to evacuate; they held
800 prisoners, carelessly unguarded in a field. The road was
jammed with burned out vehicles, ours and the enemy's. There
were corpses everywhere, unburied and dismembered."
The Poles had lost 14 tanks and over 650 men.
"We laughed and cried
and embraced,"
says Captain
emotion. The soldiers told
"The Polish commander received us shaking with
long stories in Polish to the
Canadians, who did not understand a word but roared with
laughter all the same."
A Canadian eye witness: "The Poles shouted for joy when
we arrived and if one can believe what they said that day 1
do not think they will ever forget the help we brought them."
The Surrender
Below, six kilometres away, dawn broke over Chambois.
The night had been silent apart from the thunder of guns
"somewhere to the north and east," the log book of the 359th
Regiment records without a trace of
seemed unaware of the tragedy being played out on the heights
apart from the constant circling of a C 47 reconnaissance air-
asked the pilot to notify the artillery. In his cockpit Lieut.
hit the target he had indicated.
subtracting, and give them hell!" he
bellowed into his mouthpiece.
Enemy vehicles telescoped, became entangled and burned
out on the Trun road, which they blocked bumper to bumper.
A Texan rushed to Company HQ, crowded with German
prisoners, and shouted "No more ammo. No more ammo for
our machine-guns!"
"The officers stared anxiously at the Germans," notes the
Company's log book,
"then gave a sigh of relief. Obviously
the prisoners had not realized our desperate plight."
The first full-scale surrenders took place that afternoon. In
the town, led by German doctors carrying white flags and huge
Red Cross banners on their chests and over their shoulders,
several hundred voluntary prisoners reported. One group was
led by 40 American prisoners captured by the Germans at
Argentan; one of them who spoke German had persuaded his
gaolers to surrender by promising them good treatment. He
himself was wounded and crippled by forced marches.
"Our enemies were surly and arrogant," Captain S. Lienhart
who won his D.S.C. at Chambois notes in his diary. "The men
of the S.S. and Panzer units were unhappy at finding them-
selves in this situation. They covered the uniforms of
they were so proud with raincoats and blankets. Among the
prisoners were Mongolians, Russians, Poles, Czechs and even
Frenchmen. Faces of old men and children...
Heidelberg types, officers who asked for water to wash them-
