The Battle of the Falaise Gap
The men fell flat, reconnoitred and made a short dash. A
further burst. Flat again, then another sprint, only to be halted
once more by the firing.
From the distance the platoon watched the drama, prepared
to hurry to the rescue, waited for a favourable moment, joined
the battle and finally extricated the patrol.
"Retire!" shouted the subaltern standing up and giving his
No one saw him fall. The patrol, however, as it retired found
their leader wounded. The men bent down in time to catch his
last hardly audible words: "Are all four of you there?"
"Yes, sir, all of us."
2nd Lieut. Pietrawski was dead. He was buried on the road
itself at the entrance to Vicquette.
General Maczek who had received orders to take Chambois
at all costs despatched the roth P.S.K. Regiment via Louvagny
and Barou to Trun, Major Stefanokski's ist Polish Armoured
Regiment to Hill 262, Lieut.-Colonel Koszutski's 2nd Polish
Armoured Regiment fifteen kilometres north-east of Trun-
peaks, woods and flat hills-having triumphed over anti-tanks
and massed armour which were trying to prevent his crossing
at Morteaux-Couliboeuf.
"Ahead of you,"
said General Simonds, "you will find a
single road unsuitable for tanks and an enemy which will fight
with the savagery of despair."
"The value of the victories won by my division will depend
upon the difficulty of the operations you entrust to it,"
former C.O. of the "Black Brigade" replied without batting an
eyelid; five years ago as a colonel he had defended Lvow in
Poland and slowed down the Germans at Lagarde in France in
1940. The Poles had shown that they could be relied upon.
The commander of the ist Polish Armoured Division pointed
out on the map the quadrant of a circle which would enclose
the Seventh Army and, thinking perhaps of the sombre days of
September 1939, concluded with a calm smile: "For the first
time in five years the black shoulder straps are going to
The Encirclement
IбI
At the time of this conversation von Kluge received the
written authorization from Hitler to withdraw on the Dives. It
was 1615 hours.
"What!" cried the Feldmarschall, rereading the message.
"What does this mean?"
"Falaise, the corner stone, will be held at all costs," was
Hitler's order. And that was not all. The order to retire was an
order for an offensive: the Argentan breach was to be widened
by an attack launched by Eberbach's Panzer Group towards the
south-east.
Von Kluge, overwhelmed, put down the message: the Führer
was obviously out of his mind.
It was time to set out for La Roche-Guyon.
Between Jort and
Louvagny,
Cadet-Officer
Stanislaw
Gunther's Sherman tank received a direct hit from one of those
accursed 88s, the nightmare of the Polish Armour.
"My driver was killed instantly," the young officer of the
2nd Polish Armoured Regiment told us,
same moment of two Focke Wulfs overhead, about to dive on
the group in the road.
"To say I leapt for the ditch," he remarked, "is inaccurate.
Greatly concerned about my brandy, I was slower than the
to end when I felt a hand seeking mine from below and jogging
my half-empty glass." At the same time a voice rose from the
bottom of the ditch. In the best Polish Cavalry tradition it said:
"Allow me to introduce myself. Lieutenant X, of the 9th
Lancers."
Surprised,
but with equal formality, S. Gunther
replied with his rank, full name and unit, while the two planes
The voice in the darkness said:
"Stanislaw
Schwarzburg-
Gunther? Really? Just three weeks ago I was sitting in one of
your family dining-room chairs in Rio"
