10)
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
entered Avranches in comfort," remarked the C.-in-C. 12th U.S.
Army Group.
"We must destroy the enemy rather than win territory,"
remarked Eisenhower. "Now and not tomorrow. We mustn't
disperse in Brittany; leave the minimum of troops there and
don't waste any forces which can be used to encircle the
Seventh Army."
Bradley consulted the maps which, lit by strip lighting,
covered the side panels of the truck from one end to the other.
"The Nazi attack on Mortain has been virtually held back.
The risk of being encircled to south and north has thus
increased for von Kluge. But ... suppose Patton is cut off in
Brittany …. I mean to say temporarily cut off."
"I'll guarantee you an airlift of 2,000 tons a day."
"That changes everything. In that case let's have a go! I'll
keep nothing in front of Mortain except VII Corps and I'll push
Haislip's four divisions on the Panzer's flank."
Bradley asked Eisenhower's permission to inform Mont-
gomery by telephone in his presence. The two leaders retired
to the back of the truck where a desk and benches had been
arranged beneath the rounded mahogany panels, and tele-
phoned Creullet.
"Hitler's staking his life on the Panzer attack. If we can only
drive in force to the east while the enemy is attacking at Mor-
tain, we could turn north later."
Bradley then used as his excuse the latest news from Mont-
"You have just launched an attack on Falaise. We at this
moment are entering Le Mans. Instead of pressing on to the
Loire we'll veer left. We've been given an exceptional
opportunity of closing our pincers behind von Kluge." 10
Montgomery argued, as a matter of principle. Perhaps be-
cause he was not the author of the idea; possibly because in
his mind his offensive on Falaise had only a limited objective.
This he defined as follows: "to gain territory in the direction of
Falaise so that the offensive will make an enemy withdrawal
towards the east difficult if not impossible."
Before Bradley's telephone call to Montgomery they were
still using the plan which had been adopted in London long
before D-Day: a frontal drive on the Seine, towards Lisieux
The Decision
and Rouen via Falaise by the Canadians, towards Nantes via
Argentan and Laigle by the British.
But the blow delivered by the C.-in-C. 12th U.S. Army Group
questioned the whole strategy of the French Campaign. Mont-
gomery had to push farther south; direct to Falaise, direct to
"I agree that this idea is full of promise," Montgomery
finally admitted. "I give you complete freedom of action." "
Bradley replaced the receiver in its leather holder. The C.-
in-C. 12th U.S. Army Group had one final precaution to take:
could he count on the fighters of the gth Tactical Air Force? A
call was put through to General Quesada. The reply was: "All
the fighters you want. Fine weather is forecast for some days."
Bradley turned to Lev Allen, his Chief of Staff:
"The hinge will hold. The Air Force is with us. Let's shoot
the works, Lev, and rush east with everything we've got. Get
me George."
Patton could not be found. He was on tour. At Dol, he said,
he searched for what was supposed to be the largest phallic
symbol in the world, but was not able to find it.?
Contact having been made, the dialogue between these two
great leaders was brief. There was no question of reproaching
Patton for having poured too many troops into Brittany.
"George, I propose a fabulous game of poker. Haislip is
rambling about Fougères. Two alternatives: either I take him
from you and make him return to the bottleneck to teach you
to obey me and he gives Hodges a hand...
... Or, Brad, we take the risk of seeing the enemy break-
through at Mortain and we fling XV Corps on Hausser's flank.
Wonderful! There's no question, my dear Brad. We'll have the
whole Seventh Army in the bag. We'll catch Hausser by the
nose with our fire and kick his arse by our manoeuvre."
"Here are my orders. Middleton is in Brittany. Let him stay
there; he's doing a good job, he'll squeeze Farmbacher with his
XXV Korps, which might cause us a spot of bother while we
put the wind up von Kluge.
Walkers is to
Loire and strike out for the Seine-Orléans gap. Eddy with XII
Corps will keep a weather eye on Saint-Nazaire and another
on Nantes, but his main force on Chateaudun-Sens-Troyes. As
for XV Corps . ..."
