280
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
selves and who refused to be parked in the same spot as their
men."
Night fell. From a barn came the strange sweet music of a
violin. The battle was over. A German prisoner was playing.
According to E Company's log book, "He must have been a
Nazi Nero consoling himself with music."
General Maczek arrived in Chambois the following day,
August 22nd, and saw the battlefield in all its stark horror.
"It was literally carpeted with human corpses blackened by the
smoke of battle," writes the historian of the Polish division.
"The roads and clearings were blocked with countless dead
horses, vehicles of all types and a large number of Tiger and
Panther tanks. Hideously mutilated wounded men lay scat-
tered here and there. The acrid stench from this morass
sickened our stomachs. It was an Apocalyptic vision. In the
town six wrecked Panzers bore witness to the bitter street
fighting."
The trumpets of the loth Dragoons sounded the Polish
Army march in the presence of American, Polish and British
war correspondents. The telegram from General Sosenkowski,
the Supreme Commander in London, was read out:
battles will enter history, and your sacrifice seal unable the
rights of Poland to be established on an indestructible founda-
tion." The telegram from General Crerar, C.-in-C. Canadian
Forces, was read out: "First Canadian Army is proud to number
in its ranks Ist Polish Armoured Division." Then the general
stamped underfoot the Nazi flag. A private soldier stepped
forward: in a Norman village he produced an Iron Cross taken
from a German prisoner who had won it five years before
against the former Colonel Maczek on the Polish battlefields.
On shaking hands with Colonel de Langlade as he embarked
for France, General Maczek had said these sad yet prophetic
words:
"You are a lucky man, Colonel. If you are killed in
France you will die on your own liberated soil. We shall
die on friendly soil, but even so, foreign soil, and we shall
never see Poland again."
The Surrender
281
A few days later after mopping up the woods and outlying
farms, the Canadians erected a placard on Hill 262, which in
future was to be called the Maczuga. It bore the English words:
"A Polish Battlefield."
