OROUET
46
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
called." It was regrouped north of the attacking front in the
village of Periers-en-Beauficel, its objective being the sea.
The 2nd Panzer Division of General von Luttwitz was also
called, and regrouped in front of and behind Sourdeval, its
objective being to break through in two columns at Mesnil-
Adelée and Saint Barthélemy, respectively."
The Ist S.S. Panzer Division of General Wilch, the division
which Sepp Dietrich had handed over with such bad grace,
was also brought in. It was regrouped round the villages of
Saint-Clément and de la Tournerie, to exploit the break-
through achieved by the 2nd Panzer Division towards Saint-
Barthélemy and then towards Juvigny-le-Tertre."
The 2nd S.S. Panzer (the Das Reich Division) commanded by
General Lammerding, was recalled from Toulouse via Tulle
and Oradour. Its starting base was east of Hill 314, and it was
to form a three column frontal attack on Hill 285 via Abbaye
Blanche on Mortain itself and eventually on Romagny!3
The infantry units arrived from the north. The gth Panzer
Division marched up from the south: on August 5th it would
be in action before Ernée to try and stop the gap on the
Mayenne.
A new army was born consisting of armour collected from
two Armies; it was called the Fifth Panzer Army and placed at
the disposal of the Seventh Army.
"I have done everything in my power to carry out your
order," von Kluge wrote to Hitler in a letter delivered after his
death. "I can afirm, mein Führer, that I have engaged all my
forces to restore the position."
Thus, from August 3rd, around the Mortain roads were
registered the numbers of the divisions which would figure 18
days later in the great list of prisoners from the Argentan-
Falaise pocket.
Von Kluge was not in favour.
Eberbach was not in favour.
Sepp Dietrich was not in favour.
"Nowhere was there any confidence in success?" Warli-
mont admitted after hearing with his own ears the C.-in-C.
The Decision
West transmit the orders. Without having to pick up the ear-
phones, he heard the generals' indignant reactions at the other
And what about the main interested party, Hausser? What
Hausser dictated his order of the day. "The Führer has
ordered a breakthrough to the coast in order to create a base
for a decisive operation against the Allied invasion front."
Hausser on August 2nd could still see the sea. Not very far
from the trees of la Magendière park (Tac HQ of the Seventh
Army) rose Hill 314 which dominated the town of Mortain.
There Hausser could watch his prey: in the distance the glitter-
ing Channel, the Tombelaine rock, Mont-Saint-Michel, the
Avranches road and on this road 12 American divisions
advancing on the Loire and the Seine.
"The road down the coast was a sight to see, sixty miles of
traffic bumper to bumper. It rolled south night and day. By day
it passed under a net of protecting fighters; by night it was lit
by the flares the Luftwaffe came to drop." 15
Hausser took up his pen: "New troops are on the way to
reinforce the army."
It was high time: on the roads of the Mortainais, not far from
his HQ, deserters retreated amongst an interminable jam
of trucks, tanks and horse-drawn vehicles. They consisted of
small groups of soldiers, often without leaders and arms, among
whom were countless Alsatians, Luxembourgers, Poles and
Austrians; in short all the conscripts who had managed to hide
in remote farms, to make themselves agreeable to the peasants
and to obtain civilian clothes.!6
Three days previously, in the main street of Mortain, the
appearance of a column of American prisoners led by two air
force officers did not presage well for the future; the Americans
whistled the Marseillaise as they marched in quick time, while
their unhappy guards, despirited and weary, were out of breath
trying to keep up with them."
Whilst deciding what to say, Hausser could see from his
observation post herds of cows crossing the town, led by
Mongols with long moustaches riding on ponies.
The sea was now not a distance of 3 but 33 kilometres away.
Worse still, Hodges in the Cotentin and Patton in the Maine
