304
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
escaped from the Falaise pocket."
Let us consider the German sources.
First, the opinion of B Army Group Chief of Staff, Speidel:
"From 6 armoured divisions only about 100 tanks returned."
Here is the report of Feldmarschall Model to O.K.W., dated
August 29th, 1944. "Five decimated divisions returned to Ger-
many. The remains of Il Infantry Divisions allowed us to
regroup 4 units each with a handful of field guns and other
minor equipment. All that remained of in armoured divisions
when replenished with personnel and material amounted to
II regiments each with 5 or 6 tanks and a few artillery bat-
The following is the opinion of a German military author,
Paul Carrel, who estimates at 50,000 the number of Germans
who managed to escape from
the pocket, the number of
prisoners at 40,000 and the number of killed at 10,000.'
And finally Eberbach's estimates: "The number of Germans
who escaped the encirclement after its closure, can be put at
20,000 and the numbers killed during the battle from August
10 to 22 at 30,000.'
Victory or setback?
Here is the mitigating reply of the great British military
critic, Chester Wilmot:
"In the Mortain-Falaise pocket the Wehrmacht suffered its
greatest disaster since Stalingrad," although a third of the
Seventh Army escaped. Even if Montgomery can be reproached
for his lack of speed and push, even if the Canadians can be
reproached for having lacked drive and boldness when the
opportunity arose; even if Operations Totalize and Tractable
on the Falaise road can be considered as setbacks, even if the
Canadian 4th Armoured Division on August 20th was unable
to consolidate the barrier it had erected on the Dives; even
if one cannot speak as at Stalingrad of the capitulation of a
whole army in the field, and even if various German generals
escaped to be caught later in the Ardennes, Chester Wilmot
considers that the Allied advance on the Seine, made easier
by the prolonged struggle
against the encirclement, com-
pensated for the delay in closing the pocket a week earlier. "So
The Surrender
far as material losses were concerned, the delay was of small
consequence, for most of the units which escaped from the
pocket in the last few days, lost nearly all their tanks, trans-
port, guns and other heavy weapons... From the point of view
of morale, however, the consequences of this defeat were not
as great as they might have been." ?
It is always easy
Falaise pocket and so shortened the war?
"Had our troops been more experienced," writes Colonel
Stacey, "the Germans would hardly have been able to escape
a worse disaster. They were specially fortunate in that the two
armoured divisions available to the First Canadian A Polish
crises of the war. Less raw formations would probably have
obtained larger and earlier results."
Colonel de Langlade wrote to us that "had he known he
would have been capable of closing the pocket with his 80
Shermans by scaling the heights and joining up with the Poles.
But he was preoccupied with the political repercussions of
the imminent liberation of Paris, and had received orders from
memoirs (1964) admits that he observed an attitude of passive
resistance towards General MacLean to whom he was attached.
main road before Argentan had never been in action before.
The goth U.S. Division alone was a more experienced unit.
This division, after giving Bradley a great deal of trouble in
the Cotentin marsh (so much so that he had toyed with the
idea of disbanding it in the middle of the battle) became one
of the most remarkable divisions in the European campaign
under the leadership of the brilliant Raymond MacLean and,
adds Bradley, "one of the best combat divisions on the Allied
