28
A Stalingrad in Normandy
The Sixth German Army died on the Volga. The Seventh
Army died on the Dives.
The Fifth Armoured Army died at
Chambois. The Fourth Armoured Army died at Stalingrad. In
both campaigns defeat was the result of the same obstinacy.
"The outcome of the
Battle of France was decided in the
orchards and hedgerows of this part of Lower Normandy,"
said General Eisenhower, who classes the Battle of Falaise as
the second decisive factor after the battle of the beaches which
ensured our victory in the West.
"The Battle of the Falaise Gap resulted in a very great
victory," Sir Francis de Guingand, Chief of Staff of Twenty-
First Army Group wrote after the war. "It was the consum-
mation of Montgomery's original plan for using Caen as the
hinge upon which the armies would swing." 1
"The failure to close the Falaise gap was the loss of the
greatest single opportunity of the war," in the opinion of many
senior officers quoted by Ralph Ingersoll, historian on toth US.
Army Group.
"The news would have come hard on the heels
of the attempted assassination of Hitler-and would have been
accompanied by news of the liberation of Paris. But as long as
any of the German army escaped," this opinion continues,
"Hitler had a chance to cover up the extent of the disaster and
to lay the foundations for the comeback which he was to stage
the following December " 2
Success or setback?
Twenty years after, the question still remains unanswered.
Let us recapitulate: The Allies had been set up on three
occasions to achieve the encirclement of Seventh Army.
The first attempt: the encirclement on the Falaise-Argentan
axis or small pocket. We know its fate. On August 14 Mont-
gomery without consulting Bradley, despatched II Canadian
Corps to Trun instead of advancing due South to N 158 to meet
Haislip's XV Corps as originally planned. The same day Bradley
without consulting Montgomery robbed the N 24 bis front of
The Surrender
two divisions which he sent to Mantes.
That day a great opportunity had perhaps been missed.
night haunted by a decision I had already made," the Com-
mander of 12th U.S. Army Group admitted after the war.
Possibly one alone of the two plans, either Montgomery's
decisions came at the same time. Either the Canadians were
diverted to Chambois to enlarge the area of the trap and on
their part the Americans sent the whole XV U.S. Corps to
meet Montgomery, or the whole II Canadian Corps blocked
the retreat of Seventh Army along N 158 while U.S. XV Corps
could afford to shed its 5th Armoured and 79th Infantry Divi-
sion to force the Seine 50 kilometres from Paris.
"But at the time of my conversation with Patton, I did not
know of Montgomery's decision to push south-east to Cham-
bois," Bradley admits.
"I still had doubts about my own deci-
sion. For had we not pushed on to the Seine we could have
closed the trap from Falaise to Chambois and improved our
harvest of prisoners in the pocket." 3
British and Americans mutually reject the responsibility for
their shillyshallying.
The American viewpoint. "An order was suddenly received
from GHQ to halt the attack of Provisional Corps," complains
General Brenton G. Wallace, assistant chief of staff of Third
Army. "A halt line was set north of our positions beyond
which we were forbidden to move."
The British claim: "It is just possible that the gap
have been closed a little earlier,"
writes Sir Francis de Guin-
gand, Montgomery's 'interpreter', "if no restrictions had been
imposed upon the 12th Army Group Commander as to the
limit of his northward movement."
The American riposte:
"The true reason for the setback,"
maintains Colonel Robert S. Allen,
"stems from the insistence
of Montgomery. He thought that he could close the pocket on
He requested and obtained that Patton should be
halted in his thrust. Montgomery was unable to reach Falaise.
And the breach which XV Corps could have closed in a few
hours on August 15th, was not closed until the i9th."
A personal protest by General Bradley, twenty years after
