The Battle of the Falaise Gap
" 'Komm, Kommandant', Michel repeated tirelessly, looking
after me like a child," relates Meyer.
The march had begun in the middle of the night. At the
same time the marches of Meindl, of Blauensteiner, chief of
staff of LXXXIV Korps and of Mahlmann, G.O.C. 353rd Divi-
sion also began. The fearful night of 19/2oth August would
allow the Seventh Army to break out "at the double", from
the trap which was about to close. No story of the attempt
to organize the assault lines would ever be able to include the
thousand individual acts in this charge by totally disbanded
units, charging like bulls at the defensive positions of the Polish
Kurt Meyer, for his part, had split up his escort into inde-
pendent commandoes and despatched two columns: the motor-
ized to Chambois, and the infantry to Saint-Lambert. Guns
ditched, the march had begun by cutting diagonally across
hopelessly blocked roads and paths. The fires turned the dark-
ness to day. Everywhere ammunition exploded. There was
continual bombardment described by Kurt Meyer as "register-
ing bulls-eyes every time. The Canadian and Polish guns found
our range and could not miss."
Kurt Meyer knew nothing of Meindl's fate. He was perhaps
a few hundred yards to Meyer's left, also crouching in a shell-
hole on this slope. The commander of Il Parachute Korps after
regrouping the remains of the 3rd Parachute Division, the 12th
S.S. Panzer and the staff of Seventh Army, had set out from
near the hamlet of Londe at about 22.3o hours. With twenty
parachutists, no more, it was his job to blaze the trail.
The twenty desperadoes slipped through a small wood,
crawled through the corn as far as the Trun-Argentan road,
fire of a Canadian tank. In their search for
the river which cut the burning plain in two from west to
east, they reached the Dives.
They were fired on by the
Canadians' advanced post and discovered a crossing where the
water only came up to their chests. They slipped through the
grey, stagnant water which hid them from the Allied sentries,
climbed from bush to bush and, in the pale light of dawn,
spotted three tanks. Were they Polish or Canadian? They
The Surrender
opposite slopes, provoking further firing from another tank
furrows.
units on Chambois.
In the middle of the night, Mahlmann had got stuck in
Tournai "beneath the steeple of the old church, whose pale
silhouette stood out among the flames." 2 "The village was
ablaze," relates Mahlmann.
"Its streets were impassable.
Clearing them cost us several hours. Major Kaufmann was
"these German motorized troops which had lost their way in
our congested roads, looking in vain for an exit under the
shellfire which broke out every five minutes," a belonged
to General Mahlmann, one of whose columns was trying to
cross the Dives at Moissy ford. It was a ridiculously small
crossing for the might of a powerful army—a ford for washer-
women who crossed by laying a plank from one bank to the
other. By pouring tanks and vehicles into it, Seventh Army
would fill the deep bed, and soldiers would kill each other
fighting to cross the bridge.
On the other side of this ford, towards the ridges they had
to reach, a bushy country lane after a long stretch up the
slopes, near Cours du Bosq, joined the road which leads to
Vimoutiers. On this narrow path, almost a track, they jostled
and swore. The Allied artillery and air forces pounded this
semi-paralysed mass unceasingly and the men on foot took to
the grass to avoid being crushed.
"This virtually unknown
lane," relates Abbé lamet. the curé of Chambois who had taken
"had been used since Saturday morning
by Canadian
half-tracks and parties of German soldiers.
rough, narrow path originally employed for tactical purposes
now became more than a main road."
This grassy way, together with a parallel trench formed by
