262
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
It was, as the reader will remember, at the actual moment
when Meindl and Kurt Meyer had begun to climb towards the
Polish ramparts.
The commander of the group installed himself in the manor,
posting his anti-tank guns round the hill trained in four direc-
tions— south on the road junction already strafed when the
German columns coming from Chambois and Mont Ormel met;
to the south-west and west on the two forks of the Coudehard-
Cour-du-Boscq road, in other words on the slope saturated with
enemy infantry and, finally, to the north on the Vigant road
from which the counter-attack by II S.S. Panzer Korps was
"Night fell. The men were calm. They did not know the
gravity of the situation. About midnight firing broke out near
the road junction, which had already been shelled. Once more
I ordered a 'salvo of five shells'. We heard the explosions and
cries of the wounded, but the small arms fire began again both
to left and right."
The perfect concordance of this Canadian recollection with
those of the Germans fighting that night at the breakout is
Throughout the night there was fighting at the
foot of Coudehard Hill. "We fought with sub-machine-guns,
rifles and machine-guns at close quarters," says J. Jamet. His
testimony is confirmed by that of Captain Sévigny who speaks
of "bloody hand-to-hand fighting". In the bushes on the rock
face they fought with knives.
"We lost a lot of men," says
Captain Sévigny, "and all we had was a little iodine and strips
of our shirts to serve as bandages."
Bittrich did not attack that night. He still had not received
his fuel. The Poles remained on their own. The Canadians were
fighting on their own account. The Americans in Chambois,
defending the crossroads, were to experience the most agoniz-
ing hours of the war that night of the 19/20. At dawn on the
20th they were counter-attacked by a battalion of Panzer
grenadiers and a dozen tanks.
Dawn broke at Boisjos, still in Polish hands. The darkness
The Surrender
had been filled with the roar of German traffic climbing to
Vimoutiers. All the roads round the hill teemed with the
enemy. What did it matter? "Our dominant position made any
surprise attack impossible," relates Captain Sévigny.
non-stop until our machine-guns and rifles were red hot." In
front of them, the Poles controlled the plain, filled with Ger-
man columns climbing north towards Mont Ormel.
A race began between the opponents.
Bittrich received his fuel. "We lost a few hours distributing
after the war. "At 1000 hours the two divisions were ready,
pleased that the bad weather hampered the enemy air forces."
Where were the Canadians?
They continued their march on Vimoutiers to the left of
the Poles. This task had been entrusted to the 2ist Armoured
Regiment which the previous evening was aligned along the
Trun-Hordouseaux-Champeaux road.
But on the morning of
the 20th, II Canadian Corps realized the desperate plight of
the Poles. General Simonds suddenly ordered the Governor
General's Footguards to abandon the advance on Vimoutiers,
to descend to Camembert and with all speed to engage the II
S.S. Panzer Korps bearing down on Boisjos. To be on the safe
side, General Simonds ordered the 22nd Armoured Regiment,
then on Hill 259, to cross the Trun-Champeaux road, make
for Hill 240 south of Ligneries and to give a hand to the Poles
"But," admits the log book of the 4th Canadian Armoured
"the efforts to join the Poles were offset by the un-
certainty of the positions they occupied."
On the evening of 2ist August,
General Foster replaced
Commander of the 4th Canadian
The last chance lay with the Americans 4 kilometres away -
in the valley. Could they help the Poles?
Round Chambois the Americans had other fish to fry than
going to rescue the Poles. Their objective was the same as that
of the Canadians: to reach Saint-Lambert and close the gap on
the D 13. For the moment their lines were cut north and south
