The Battle of the Falaise Gap
a dry river bed had, since the 17th, become a well-defined
track covered on either side by two lines of defence. Owing to
its uncertain viability, the natives called this sunken road "the
Watercourse".
. The Germans would call it the "Corridor of
Death", the name by which it would be known in future.
If one ventures today along this "lover's lane" which is
no longer frequented one's progress is barred by the vegetation
and brush overgrowing it. It seems impossible that tanks,
motorized and horsedrawn artillery, trucks
could have plunged into this Corridor of Death.
To the very rear of the pocket, where the British had pressed
the Wehrmacht, the 15 tanks of 2nd Panzer, assembled around
Bailleul, were the last to set out. At 0400 hours, not according
to plan, because as von Luttwitz relates, "the whole terrain
was under enemy bombardment and our losses increased from
hour to hour. On the road to Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives, a vast
number of dead horses and vehicles, mingled with corpses,
piled up higher and higher. I had expected this road to be
sprayed by such a devastating barrage that it would hardly
have been possible to extricate anything from the pocket. But
for some reason the enemy fire stopped on the evening of the
I9th and did not begin again until the following morning. It
was during this pause that we began to move off in the early
morning mist of August 2oth.'
This testimony is corroborated by a local eye-witness from
Allied artillery hardly shelled the
relates Maurice Dormois.' "This does not mean to say, how-
ever, that all was quiet from the valley to the plain. There
were explosions on all sides. About four o'clock in the morn-
ing, taking advantage of a lull, we left our trenches. From every
quarter of the territory huge flames rose from burning trucks
and exploding ammunition. A few groups of cars still trickled
in. On being challenged they stopped; the soldiers got out, were
given the latest information and, having deliberately chosen
between captivity and death, started numerous fires. Every
hamlet, every farm, every house was the scene of a tragedy.
Vauvert saw its copses fired by phosphorous bombs. Montabard
was shelled. Merri was already threatened by British armour
whose tracer bullets lit up the night. Its inhabitants passed a
night of terror beneath the shells which rained ceaselessly
TRUN.
20 Aug.
St. LAMBERT,/
Moissy
/ CHAMBOIS
VILLEDIEU
• TOURNAI
le Bailleul <
Kilometres
11th Armd. Div.
German forces breaking through the pocket on 2oth August
