OU≥
82
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
down in the comfortable leather armchair which Montgomery
offered him. At Montgomery's Tac. headquarters Eisenhower
was also taking a risk.
On August 8th Monty still combined the duties of C.-in-C.
2Ist British Army Group with those of Commander of Allied
Land Forces, a post he had held since Overlord.
In this capacity, Montgomery issued his orders to the two
American Armies, and that evening accepted the plan Bradley
had suggested in the morning.®
In fact, events had gone faster than the plan. The 313th U.S.
Infantry of XV Corps had entered Le Mans that morning, open-
ing the way to the deployment of four divisions, which would
pivot that night round the capital of Maine.
The meddlesome Bradley had already issued his order of the
day to his own army commanders. "12th U.S. Army Group will
attack forthwith in the direction of Argentan, with a view to
isolating and annihilating the German forces now on our
Eisenhower sponsored the new plan to the full and covered
himself next day to General Marshall, author of the Overlord
plan, which had now been abandoned.
"On my urgent directives," he wrote to the Chief of Staff of
the American
Army,
"all the available troops have been
directed towards the destruction of the enemy forces. Patton,
Bradley and Montgomery are convinced of the need to seize
this opportunity. Patton, on the wing, will pivot north-east
after Le Mans towards Alençon and Falaise. The resistance of
the enemy, his counter-attacks between Mortain and Caen,
make evident our chance of encircling and destroying a large
part of his forces."
Montgomery would only date his order on the following
day, and would later order "the 12th U.S. Army Group to press,
on vigorously to the north with its right wing on Alençon."
The First Canadian Army was ordered to capture Falaise and
then advance on Argentan -the reader is advised to memorize
each word of this order and he will soon see why —the Second
British Army was given orders to advance west and south. He
would order all the Allied forces to prepare to carry out a vast
encircling movement as far as the Seine, to prevent the enemy
escaping the trap which was to close around him at Falaise.
83
The Decision
"The prospect of inflicting a decisive defeat on the Seventh
Army and Panzer Group West found such favour with me, that
I had no hesitation in adopting it," Eisenhower concluded, as
though the idea had originated from him.
The signal once given, they were in high spirits.
This euphoria could be read on the faces of the soldiers as
they passed, conquerors and liberators, through regions still
golden with corn. Three divisions sped on towards Le Mans on
either side of N 157 between a double row of flag-decked
It infected the staffs; flinging caution to the winds, they
hurled their forces at the central core of the enemy armies,
which they no longer bothered to locate. They were "fighting
in Indian country,"
and finding like General Brenton Wallace,
Patton's liaison officer, that "It was indeed exciting." 1
The spirits of Leclerc's 2nd French Armoured Division, now
attached to XV U.S. Corps and let loose on the French roads,
were also soaring. Four thousand vehicles in two columns
covered 200 kilometres
non-stop-Rennes, Laval, Antrain,
Vitré-heading for Le Mans.
"The roads opened out like a fan, miraculously clear. It was
on these roads, uncovered piece by piece in the night, in small
stretches barely
visible in the dimmed lights and the dust
which made the drivers' eyes smart, that we found our bear-
ings straight away; we were home and free."
The feeling of exhilaration spread on the night of the 8/9th
to the villages of Maine: "People were woken by the racket and
threw open their creaking shutters. As we passed, the first
triumphant greetings were exchanged, everybody ignoring the
pile-up of traffic to wave, ask questions and stare, with feelings
too deep for words, only to be brutally interrupted by the re-
starting of the engines." &
Le Mans, the first of the
provincial capitals to appear intact, its gaiety unsullied by
battle-scars, the first to welcome the Allies in a way Normandy
had been unable to do, the first to let them glimpse what their
welcome would be like in Paris.
The morning of the 9th August Bradley had been obliged to
