Bibliography, eye-witness accounts and
acknowledgements
I. Official American sources,
Our thanks are due to the magnificent American organiza-
tion: National Archives and Records Service World War II, and
to the courtesy of its directors Sherrod East and Philip Brower,
who were kind enough to place at the author's disposal the
following documents from the Office of the Chief of Military
The Log of the XV U.S. Corps, kept by General Haislip.
The Log of the goth U.S. Infantry Division, kept by
General MacLean.
The Log of the 8oth Infantry Division, kept by General
The memorandum dictated by the G.O.C. German Armour,
The interview with Lieutenant Hollis C. Alpert on the
closing of the Falaise pocket at Chambois.
Two volumes of the impressive series: The European
Theater of Operations, published by the Office of the
Chief of Military History of the U.S. Army, have pro-
vided the historical framework of this book.
The Supreme Command by Forrest C. Pogue (1954).
Breakout and Pursuit by Martin Blumenson (1961).
Dr. Stetson Conn, chief historian of the Office of the Chief
of Military History, was kind enough to allow us to
American military
And finally, the Report, dated 13th July 1945, presented
to the Allied Chiefs of Staff by Dwight D. Eisenhower,
C.-in-C. Allied Expeditionary Force, has provided the
viewpoint of the supreme command.
Notes
331
Il. Official Canadian sources
The Official History of the Canadian Army in Europe, entitled
The Victory Campaign by Colonel C. P. Stacey, head of the
Historical Service of the Canadian Army (Queen's Printer,
Ottawa) reports in great detail the places and incidents regard-
ing the movements of the Canadian and Polish units. Colonel
Stacey has permitted us to make use of this work.
Additional material has been found in Canada's Battle in
Normandy by the same author, published with the authority
of the Canadian Ministry of National Defence.
The recollections of Peter Simonds in Maple Leaf Up (Island
Press) were of great value.
Our thanks are also due to Colonel B. J. Guimond, Military
Attaché at the Canadian Embassy in Paris for his approaches
to the Historical Section of the General Staff of the Canadian
Army and for the photos he was able to procure from the
Canadian Ministry of Defence. Thanks also to the director of
the Historical Section of the Canadian Army for loaning us the
Log of the South Alberta Regiment and the account of the
battle for Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives which appeared in The
Major D. V. Currie was kind enough to write an account of
the operations before Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives especially for
this book.
III. Polish sources
We have studied the facts apertaining to the Polish units in
the Canadian documents and also in the account written by
Captain the Reverend Al Stopa for Le Pays d'Argentan and in
the following works:
Association France-Pologne: L'Armeé Polonaise 1939-1945•
General
Marian
Kukiel:
Six
Ans
de Guerre pour
l'Independence (Bibliothéque polonaise).
Zygmunt Nagorski: The Falaise Gap has been closed
(Tinting and Co., London).
K. Jamar: With the tanks of the Ist Polish Armoured
Division (Smit, Hengelo, 1947).
We have had translated extracts from the following works
