The Battle of the Falaise Gap
The capital of the Orne was defended by a pack of Panzers
massed round the last road pivot before the Sarthe bridges. The
village of Champfleur was filled with soldiers
scrounging, asking for drinks, washing, looking for bicycles in
the devastating heat." * It was also packed with tanks hidden
in the hedges, kept informed by
"spotters who, from the
Calvary mound, observed with their fieldglasses and range-
finders' the advance of Noël's Squadron."
Louis Martin, on the back of "Brive-la-Gaillarde", was un-
able to follow the walkie-talkie dialogue between the Sher-
mans: it referred to a remarkably
strange battle. General
Leclerc on a chair under the limes on the square had ordered
an immediate attack on Champfleur, "in an atmosphere of wild
excitement, bottles of cider offered to the soldiers, children
carrying flowers."
"Brive-la-Gaillarde", on its drive to Champfleur chose to veer
to the left followed by four tanks. It went via the village of
Cherisay, I½ kilometres to the north-west.
"Hullo, Noël, Krebs here. I'm at Cherisay. Nothing except
the locals rejoicing. Three Panthers left twenty minutes ago in
the direction of Champfleur."
The rest of the squadron, on the contrary, led by Captain
Noël had chosen the direct route, along the railway line.
"Hullo, Krebs. Noël here. Pressing on to Groutel. Squadron
is following."
"The vast cloud of dust thrown up by the tanks prevented
my seeing anything behind me," Lieutenant Krebs told us.
"On my arrival at Groutel I did not bother to check whether
the squadron was following me. I was already engaged-since
our task was to push on to Alençon-when I received a radio
message to go to Champfleur."
The terrain so far behind had been very enclosed and full of
hedges which reduced visibility to about zoo yards. It suddenly
opened out and the visibility increased to 1½ miles: Alençon
lay ahead beneath a line of wooded heights which XV Corps
had to cross in order to control the Argentan plateau.
The dialogue crackled across the valleys, separating the two
advancing columns, both to the left of the Le Mans-Alençon
"Hullo, Desforges? Noël here. Cart track leaving wood
The Encirclement
103
direction south-east, north-east. Over."
"Hullo, Desforges here. Roger."
"Hullo, Desforges? Noël here. Take that road and approach
Champfleur from the west. Over."
"Hullo, Noël. Message understood. Over and out. Forward!
Badgers behind me." 1
This was the start of Lieutenant Krebs's four-tank attack on
Champfleur; two for the attack and two in support.
"It was a question of not losing a moment if I wanted to
surprise the enemy. I knew that my crews were a bit de-
moralized by the sight of our tanks destroyed that morning
in the bitter fighting by the 2nd and 4th squadrons for the
villages of La Hutte and Roueseé-le-Fontaine. For most of them,
if not all, it was their first battle, whereas I had seen action in
1940. Taking the lead, I thought I would concentrate the
greatest danger on myself and above all gain time to fall upon
an enemy not yet fully in position."
"Hullo, Noël, Desforges here. In action. Three A.M.s and a
truck of footsloggers."
A Panzer sprayed the road from which the French had come,
"Blois" and then "Brantôme"
could be seen were the flames and the red flags, like the pen-
he sped for the bridge that crossed the railway line,
centre of the village, "sowing terror and destruction" with his
machine-guns and
from the open turret.'
He pulled up outside the church, sniped at a few Germans of
an MG crew then ...
my guardian angel? I looked back and saw to my horror, about
150 yards away, a Panzer near the bridge I had just crossed
with its turret turned towards me." 9
"Traverse right!"
