306
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
The British units to the west of the pocket, particularly the
Ith Armoured Division, coming from exhausting fighting in
the Bocage, played a secondary role in this affair, for which
numerous Canadian and American veterans reproach them
A further question: Could the Air Forces alone have defeated
the encircled German army in the Dives plain? "Yes", says
Patton's biographer.®
Important air operations had been envisaged.
Operation Transfigure: Paratroops to be dropped to control
important key road junctions between Orléans and the Seine;
a variation, airborne troops to be dropped at the crossings on
the upper and lower Seine to block all attempts at an enemy
crossing from August 16 to 27. Both plans rejected by Bradley.
An even more spectacular operation: On August 13th Gen-
eral Bradley discussed the possibility of cutting off the enemy
retreat by dropping troops on the roads north-east of Falaise
and Argentan. The plan was rejected by General Brereton who
"did not consider that his forces should be used in harassing
operations such as Montgomery might demand."
Another spectacular operation, if we are to credit Ralph
Ingersoll: According to 12th U.S. Army Group historian, two
airborne divisions, outside the battle, were being trained in
England; these
dropped immediately
German lines could have infiltrated the enemy and demolished
one after the other the 88s which held up the Allied advance.
This suggestion put forward by a New York lawyer attached
to Bradley's G2 section made such an impression on him that
he sent one of his colonels to Montgomery's HQ to explain
it to him. Both General Richardson, Operational Chief of
Army Group and Sir
Francis de Guingand, Mont-
gomery's Chief of Staff, were keen on this idea. The plan was
rejected by Montgomery.
Operation Supplies: General Eisenhower notified of Opera-
tion Transfigure decided to reroute the planes designed to
carry fuel to the land forces which on August Ifth were fight-
ing north of Le Mans. The plan was rejected by Patton who
was already occupying the terrain which these airborne
The Surrender
307
supplies were to help him conquer.
Operation Whiteley: the forces earmarked for the preceding
operations were to be dropped on ... Boulogne and Calais, so
as to speed up the Allied Armies' crossing of the Seine. The
plan was rejected by common consent of Bradley and Mont-
gomery.
A final question: what was the value of the famous envelop-
ment of the Seine, the third of the encirclement plans pro-
Speidel, Army Group B Chief of Staff, has answered this
"The Americans did not know how to exploit the encircle-
ment they had achieved between Vernon and Mantes. A drive
along the north bank of the Seine would certainly have given
the American High Command an opportunity of isolating and
destroying the main forces of Army Group B. It was due to
this default that the German forces owed their salvation. Fifth
of the heavy equipment and embarcation craft fell into the
hands of the enemy, this river crossing, in face of an enemy
which attacked concentrically and under land and air bom-
bardment, must be considered as a great military achieve-
Questionable on the military plane, the conclusion gains
conviction if, as Montgomery did, we look at things from a
psychological viewpoint.
"The repercussions of this victory, which marked the end
Army Group.
The battle of the Falaise pocket was the last battle waged
by the Wehrmacht before its withdrawal to the Vosges.
