ChOueT
60
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
pushed on to the village of Mesnil-Adelée, which it reached at
O6oo hours. A patrol was then despatched to the Brecey-
Refuveille crossroads.
Advance: 14 kilometres.
Avranches: 19 kilometres.
Avranches meant the coveted capture of twelve American
divisions sweeping west of the country between the Loire and
the Seine, in other words forcing Eisenhower to supply his
troops by air to the south and east of the corridor, thus
reducing their possibilities for manoeuvre.
"Prepare to retire," whispered ist Lieutenant Halbrook.
Kenneth C. Parker, his eyes heavy with sleep, buckled his
belt, grabbed his rifle, shouldered the two boxes of ammunition
he was guarding and crept out of his foxhole on the outskirts
of Pilon farm, west of Mortain. It was pitch black and the fog
hid the green valley which yesterday had been bathed in sun-
light. Kenneth C. Parker tried to recall the position of the statue
of the Virgin on the rock above Abbaye Blanche, kept his ear
open for the quarter strike by the collegiate church clock and
heard the sound of tank tracks. American or German? They
were about 20 yards away. A hail of tracer bullets came as an
answer to his question, followed immediately by a salvo of
shells. The first battalion of the 120th U.S. Infantry Regiment
guarding Hill 285 was the target.
Kenneth Parker then heard the voice of a German officer
shouting something which appeared to be an order.
"What did he say?"
comrade.
"He told them to advance on us, boy," whispered his
Dropping their arms and equipment, the machine-gunners of
B Company left the hedge which was now sprayed by bullets
and threatened by a tank, for a broad dirt track defended by a
mortar section and took up their positions "in a rocky copse,
with undergrowth and shrubs which later saved our lives. Our
foxholes were hidden beneath a vault of greenery. We had
retired a good 400 yards and this yielding of ground was the
only thing we were to deplore," said Kenneth Parker. " At the
same moment the Germans advanced on the section HQ,
The Decision
threatening the mortar group. The men fought with their
revolvers and rifles and, by halting the enemy advance, played
a capital role."
Dawn broke. The mist limited visibility to 20 yards. Behind
the milky wreaths of mist which hid the sunken roads, the
American foot soldiers guessed that the armour had come from
Saint-Barthélemy.
"We realized that the battle would hot up
as soon as the weather cleared."
At ten o'clock the valley was clear. Kenneth Parker stopped
enlarging his foxhole for a moment—"Hell, the hole should
have been made for a dwarf,"—to risk a glance through the
branches. Two hundred
yards away the tanks advanced
steadily. A rattle of bullets, then another. Kenneth Parker
immediately saw two Panzers "burning like torches". "B"
Company's anti-tank gun-one of the hundred anti-tank guns
which would halt the onslaught of the German armour-had
played its part in halting the Nazi offensive in this section. A
thousand yards to the south, the armour of the Das Reich
Division were also halted at the Point du Jour crossroads. The
Pilon Hill which barred the way to Avranches remained in the
hands of the Americans.
Marc Landry, actuary of the Mutelle générale française at
le Mans noted the actual time: 1150 hours. Marc Lardry had a
feeling that he was witnessing the end of an army. Two
armoured cars had just pulled up at the pavement of the Rue de
Chanzy, beneath the windows of the small sitting-room which
served as a temporary office, in a building partially occupied
by the Staff of the Seventh German Army. He noticed, opposite
the concrete shelter of the girls' Lycée, a formidable pillbox
with six-foot-thick walls behind which since July 1942 all the
commands of the Seventh German Army in Normandy had
sheltered. The reinforced door opened and out came an orderly
officer, followed by General Hausser. Both were wearing caps
and grey-blue overcoats and they walked to the armoured cars.
The street was absolutely deserted and the slow, very slow gait
of an army commander, absolutely alone without an escort
and without troops, was lugubrious. "I though of Victor Hugo's
work, "Chatiments," said Marc Lardry. "On reaching the cars
