106
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
As night fell, alone and on foot, he retraced the four kilo-
metres he had covered on the outward journey on the top of a
tank along the road and across the fields. He passed the hulks
of burned-out tanks, and was surprised by a new column of
tanks with their turrets pointing sideways, scouring suspicious
hedges and undergrowth." He avoided the burning thatch on
the sawn-off roofs and returned to his bakery. He lay down
shivering, and was just able to murmur to his wife: "I feel as
if my flesh had left my bones." 15
While Leclerc was studying the map of Alençon, von Kluge
twice took up his pen.
The first time to write a report; the second time to sign an
order. The report was addressed to Hitler, the order to the
generals of the Normandy front.
"The Seventh Army
abandon the Mortain salient
tonight," C.-in-C. West announced to the head of the Third
Reich. "LXVII and LXXXI Panzer Korps will regroup in the
Carrouges area, with Ist S.S.
and the 2nd and 116th Panzers.
An attack on Alençon will be prepared for August I4th at
0500 hours."
Having salved his conscience, the Feldmarschall ordered the
Fifth Panzer, still heavily engaged in the east on the Sourdeval-
Mortain front, to "retire in echelon behind the Orne, and then
behind Touques. The Seventh Army will cover the flank on the
Domfront-Alençon line in an easterly direction."
This was an order to retreat, but von Kluge christened it the
Alencon Plan.
It was now east, not west. It was Touques and no longer
Mont-Saint-Michel bay.
It was the hour when the Americans returned at dusk to
the gates of Mortain: the front had been restored to what it
was at the time of the rush for Avranches, seven days earlier.
The 1I6th Panzer pulled out during the night. The Ist S.S.
Panzer turned about. It was all over.
"The orders are to get as much kip in as possible," announced
Captain Gaudet, O.C. 4th Squadron of the 12th Cuirassiers.
The Encirclement
107
"You must regain your strength. Guards and sentries are to be
reduced to the minimum-just enough to prevent being sur-
prised, but," he repeated to his platoon commanders-"kip,
kip, we're on the job tomorrow. Move off at dawn."
Captain Gaudet had not slept for four days and nights. Nor
had his men. Neither during the lightning night crossing of the
Mayenne, nor during the last 24 hours of the long trek across
the valleys of the plateau, nor during that triumphant day of
the liberation of Doucelles, Coudray and Coulombiers, marked
by the bloody duel for Roueseé-Fontaine.
To reach Alençon more rapidly No. 4 Squadron had passed
Champfleur, still distinguishable by the smoke from the tank
burning on the railway line. Eleven tanks with headlights
extinguished crossed the open plain. "In line of battle",
Captain Gaudet had decided, although this formation was con-
sidered ill-advised by Leclerc owing to the nature of the terrain,
and the unusual hour—nearly 2200 hours. "There is nothing
more unpleasant than to advance thus across country in the
dark and without lights," said the No. 4 Squadron commander, 16
who soon saw from the turret of "Verdun III", a few farms
clustering round a forked road. This was Saint-Gilles, a village
due south of Alençon, crammed to overflowing that night with
I50 refugees from the town. "I decided to halt," said Captain
"because I knew that there was nothing ahead of me.
And also because we couldn't see a thing. I posted my troops
as best I could. Defence to the north, both flanks protected ...
We were 'flat out' ... utterly exhausted!"
And because Captain Gaudet was exhausted, he com-
mandeered a hovel and found a bed-his first bed for two
years—lay down in his uniform and slept like a corpse. Before-
hand he had tried in vain to contact Major Noiret, at first by
field telephone and then by a despatch rider "to let them know
that there was no danger" 17
and with the hope of being
joined, if not by the rest of the group, at least by ... the fuel.
But the Major commanding the sub-group was asleep, about
4 kilometres away to the south; General Leclerc
asleep, as if on safari, actually in a meadow outside Champfleur
where the vehicles of the staff of the 12th Cuirassiers had
formed a square with the vehicles of the 2nd Armoured
Division advanced HQ.
