326
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
(3) Ibid.
(4) In Le Pays d'Argentan.
(5) Log of the South Alberta Regiment.
(6) According to Peter Simonds and Chester Wilmot, Kurt
Meyer was saved by a French farmer who guided him
through the lines. When, for the sake
of historical
accuracy, we tried to get in touch with Meyer-as was
our normal practice with the actors in these events—we
learned that he had been condemned to death by a
Canadian tribunal for having been responsible for the
murder of 45 Canadian prisoners on June 8th at Authie
—a sentence later commuted to life imprisonment, then
to be released in September 1954. He died of thrombosis
on his 5ist birthday, December 23rd, 1961.
(7) Reported by Shulman: op.cit.
(8) Kurt Meyer: op.cit.
CHAPTER 23
(I) Le Pays d'Argentan (passim).
(2)
Abbé Launay: op.cit., after an exchange of correspon-
dance with Abbé Doffagne, today curé of Nonancourt.
(I) Shulman: General von Luttwitz was the man who five
months later at Bastogne tried to obtain the surrender of
General MacAuliffe, who sent the famous reply "Nuts".
(2) In 1961 an elderly gentleman called on the owner of
Saint-Lambert mill, M. Longuet-Guyon of Diguères and
said to him: "I've come to see the spot where my son was
killed." He was the father of the brave Canadian.
(3) Saint-Lambert-Coudehard road. No other available road
climbs to the Auge heights between the boundaries
(4) The Diary of Army Group B records: "The Army lost all
its radio equipment in the breakthrough and was in-
capable of exercising its command."
Account published in The Legionary, January 1964.
(6) Alan Moorehead: Eclipse (Hamish Hamilton, 1945).
Notes
CHAPTER 25
work by allowing us to quote from Face a l'ennemi was
in 1962 Deputy Speaker of the Canadian House
of
Commons and was in 1958 Canadian Associate Minister
of Defence.
(2)
Letter from Lieutenant-Colonel Zgorzelski to the author.
(3) Hayn: Die Invasion (Vowinckel; Heidelberg).
CHAPTER 26
(I) Reported by Abbé Launay.
(2) Quoted by Col. Stacey: op.cit.
(3) Reported by Abbé Launay.
(4) R. Boudet and Cauquelin: op.cit.
(5) Ibid.
(6) In 1960 M. l'Abbé Launay issued an appeal to Canada to
discover the name of this historical character whose wax
The presence of this man in the zone of action of the
359th Infantry Regiment is inexplicable.
"I have never
been able to discover the name of this Canadian," Abbé
Launay wrote in 1964. "It would be a great joy to meet
him. May these lines constitute an appeal to the Canadian
veterans of the Dives Valley."
(7) Major Currie personally wrote us the lines we have re-
produced here.
"One has little to be grateful for to a war,
but I am grateful to the Battle of Saint-Lambert. I know
that there is much to fear in a war,
but for me,
the
greatest eventuality would have been to have failed in
what was asked of me. Saint-Lambert proved to me that
I could measure up to myself, left me with the conviction
that the war with Germany was entering its final stage
and that we could assume the task which had been asked
of us-the final defeat of Germany." A few years later
his direct adversary Kurt Meyer paid homage to Major
Currie in these terms: "Major Currie war am 19 August
bis Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives vorgestoben und hatte so die
erste Ausfallstrasse aus dem
Kessel wirksam gesperrt.
