The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"The Allied forces from north and south have joined up and
achieved a rather loose encirclement of the Seventh Army and
the Eberbach Armoured Group," was the entry that night in
the Log Book of the German Fifth Armoured Army.
In fact the encirclement remained fairly loose for some
hours, but already what History would
battering at the door" had begun.
19
The British advance on Chambois from
the west
The Mont Royal Fusiliers patrolling in Falaise on the morn-
ing of the 18th, lifted their heads and gaped in amazement;
they thought they must be dreaming. On the balcony of the
only house in Val d'Ante, by some miracle still intact, a woman
was singing "J'aime à revoir ma Normandie." Mme Lepainteux,
an opera singer, came down, cut some roses from the bushes
and offered the blossoms to the Canadians.
"The destruction in Falaise was appalling," writes Colonel
Stacey. "In some parts of the town it was difficult to say where
the streets had been, and our bulldozers had a hard job to open
the roads."
John d'Arcy Dawson, the Sunday Times war correspondent,
felt completely lost in the ruins of Falaise. From time to time
the deathly silence was broken
by shots from the patrols or
the sound of tank engines often preceded by the grunting of
the bulldozers. Smoking his pipe, d'Arcy Dawson made his way
to the steps of Saint-Gervais church and looked through a hole
in the unhinged oak door. He knocked out his pipe and replaced
it in the pocket of his battle dress. He was spellbound at the
sight of the naked altar under the gaping vault.
"The wood-
work was still blazing,
" he wrote,
"and the altar was ringed
with flames. Through the smoke the ivory figure of Christ on
the blackened cross displayed for a moment the harrowed
features of Our Lord contemplating the ruins of His Church." 1
self
"That one wasn't far off," Abbé Launay said aloud to him-
The first American shell had burst on Tournai-sur-Dives at
2200 hours.
"Now we really
are in the battlefield," added the curé,
