206
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
had succeeded in holding the infantry of the 8oth U.S. Infantry
Division all day. The 116th Panzer would act as rearguard. It
would prevent General MacLean from leaving Gouffern Forest.
This plan heralded the end of the martyrdom of Argentan
which, during this movement had lived through "a night of
terror"
, as Maurice Hommey recalls. "The artillery was nearer
to us that the preceding night and fired non-stop. Roofs flew all
round us, including the roof of my house; great pieces of
masonry crashed down and shells exploded on the pavements."
This long night the Jeanne d'Arc Institute,
the rue Saint-
Germain and the rue de l'Hotel de Ville were burned. The
blazing buildings could be seen from the west by the 159th
brigade of the iIth British Armoured Division, and from the
south by the regiment launched on Argentan by General Mac-
Bride, now a few hours away from entering the unfortunate
city.
To the north, Kurt Meyer and his Hitlerjugend, "completely
exhausted by the inhuman tragedy of the cauldron" i faced
the Canadians from Brieux to Magny.
All the roads leading to the river go through Tournai-sur-
Dives, the focal point of the general panic. Its inhabitants
hoped to find in the meadows the safety they had lost under
the shadow of its steeples. "Hunted together with the Germans,
the civilians looked for some cellar or safe shelter, or ran out
of the village and saw, in their hopeless flight, horses dis-
embowelled beneath their carts, soldiers lying prostrate on the
footpath and vehicles smashed." Some sought safety in the
grassland, others left the same grassland because it was not
safe. Abbé Launay left his presbytery which was being shelled,
took refuge near the church and discovered some Germans in
a kitchen. A smell of acrid smoke pervaded the house. The
priest picked up a chair and tried to escape through the
window, but a soldier grabbed him by the hem of his habit,
brandishing a revolver.
with these savages."
"Useless leaving, you'd better remain
their hands, thinking he was an
A fireman arrived. The Germans put up
American. Abbé Launay
escaped. It was It o'clock when the first civilians died in the
trenches where they had sought to save their lives.
Civilians and Germans all ran in the same direction-to
Saint-Lambert Mill. There the banks were close enough for
anyone to jump across the tiny stream. A path from Tournai
across the meadows reached the Dives in front of the mill, and
continued across a light wooden bridge into the hills. But Saint-
Lambert Mill was full of refugees who had fled from Trun,
Tournai and Chambois. Unfortunately it was also on the line
of march of the roth Canadian Infantry Brigade advancing on
Saint-Lambert. The clash of Canadians, Germans and civilians
was inevitable.
On arriving at the Mill, the Canadians took 70 prisoners. The
refugees acclaimed their liberators. Their joy was short-lived.
On the far bank, where a Canadian patrol was on the look-out,
some Germans arrived from Tournai in half-tracks. The battle
began across the river to the accompaniment of cries from the
"The Germans tried to fight their way across in the
teeth of Canadian fire." So more of the people who had fled
from Tournai-sur-Dives "where the shells rained so heavily"
"The soldiers lay flat, covering their faces with their spades
to shield them from the bullets. The machine-guns spattered,
the guns roared, the shells burst. Some of the soldiers were hit
and their lifeless bodies lay beside those of their comrades." The
civilians kept calm, encouraged by the proximity of the
Canadians; they parleyed with the Germans inviting them to
cease fire and volunteered a spokesman. M. Planche, a refugee
from Argentan, approached the bank, hailed the Canadians,
told them that the Germans wished to surrender and then
made for no man's land. It was no use. Ahead soldiers were cut
The spokesman turned about,
"determined to make these 'gentlemen' capitulate ..." and set
out for the river, carrying a white flag. He was escorted by two
Germans, one carrying a white pennant, the other a Red Cross
flag stitched to his chest. The balance sheet—75 prisoners
Corporal Johann Bornert of the Wehrmacht entered the
cauldron, he tells us, "after crossing an incalculable number of
fields and meadows. We soldiers were completely ignorant of
our whereabouts. Our gas masks and spades were all we had
kept. Everything that could clatter had been abandoned. The
whole night of the 18/19th, the storm, the bombs and the
