CROUeT
62
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
the two men paused for a moment, retraced their steps to the
nearby shelter, picked up a third officer and returned to their
cars. At 1205 hours, three yards away from me beneath my
window, General Hausser climbed into an armoured car with-
out a standard or distinguishing mark, leaving Le Mans as a
defeated man without a guard of honour, without an officer to
salute him." 9
The headquarters of the Seventh German Army was defunct.
This was the precise moment the fog lifted on Mortain Hill,
the fog Hausser so much needed for success in the last offensive
of his career. At the same time that the Colonel-General was
fleeing from Le Mans, Wing-Commander Charles Green of the
R.A.F. leading a squadron of Typhoons, noticed a concentration
of enemy armour. The rocket-firing
"Tiffies" had perfect
visibility and the enemy formations were in the open. The
target could not have been better. Ten squadrons of R.A.F.
Typhoons and Thunderbolts of the 2nd Tactical Air Force were
alerted by radio. And now they were speeding in to the kill in
close formation, supported by excellent ground-to-air liaison?
They dived on the armoured column and with their rockets,
according to Eisenhower's report, damaged and destroyed
many assault tanks, not to mention a considerable number of
more vulnerable vehicles—an intervention
of unparalled
violence which almost paralysed the entire German force."
Where then were the 300 German fighters promised by
Luftwaffe General Bulowins? They had been destroyed in
aerial combat on their airfields and over the fields of the Paris
region. "We can do nothing against the fighter-bombers,"
reported von Luttwitz. "They descend in their hundreds firing
their rockets on concentrations of tanks
and vehicles." At
I500 hours it was von Funck's turn to complain: "The activities
of the tihter-bombers are almost mostintolerable." Report from the
Ist S.S. Panzer: "The air attacks are of an intensity hitherto
unknown. The advance of the Ist S.S. Panzer has been brought
to a halt." Higher up the line the 116th Panzer had not even
left its starting base. "Nor have the other units." telegraphed
von Funck that evening, whilst at the same time reports were
being classified at General Quesada's American Air Force HQ.
The Decision
"They revealed that 162 tanks had been destroyed or disabled,
81 had been totally destroyed, 54 damaged and 26 left
smoking." 1 "For the first time in history," a German observer
admitted some years later, "a powerful land offensive was
completely halted by
air action alone." 13 "This vigorous
reaction on the part of our air forces," Eisenhower concluded
in his official report, "halted the attack and transformed a
threat into a great victory."
At La Gagnerie, the property at Saint-Germain-en-Laye on
the south flank of the hill, which with its 60 bunkers was the
headquarters of the Oberbefehlshaber West, von Kluge was
under no illusion. His last chance had vanished in the sunken
roads under the assault of the Typhoons.
Reports flowed in during the afternoon, all of them disturb-
ing, all of them seeking permission to withdraw. The 116th
Panzer was marking time west of Gathemo; the 2nd Panzer had
lost Mesnil-Adelée, the village which had marked the extreme
point of the breakthrough, once more; the ist S.S. Panzer had
been halted 4 kilometres east of Juvigny-le-Tertre. The Das
Reich Division had clung on to the flanks of Hill 314; and there
was fighting in Mortain. To the south an American battalion
had entered Barenton.
But there was worse to come, for there was trouble in the
north-north-west.
At midnight-the hour when the Panzers attacked Avranches
—Montgomery had crossed the Orne. The 43rd British Division
had crossed the river below Grimbosq, establishing a bridge-
head—admittedly a narrow one—but already 3 kilometres
And yet still worse to come: even more trouble to the north-
Despite new threats from the British sector, Hitler had
demanded in the late afternoon that the oth and loth S.S.
Panzers be withdrawn from the Potigny-Vire sector and flung
into the counter-offensive at Avranches." This was to leave
the way free for General Dempsey and his Irth Armoured
Division.
And again, trouble in the south.
