194
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
ordinary sight—below them the whole plain of the Dives, the
battle arena, which was teeming with columns on the move.
What were those columns? Germans or Americans? For
General MacLean, commander of 9oth U.S. Infantry Division,
they could only be the enemy. For the Canadian liaison officer,
attached to his Staff, on the contrary, they were his brothers
in arms-the loth Canadian Infantry Brigade which had just
captured Trun. He therefore dissuaded the Americans from
firing.
"No fire line on Saint-Lambert and Chambois," confirmed a
message from the Canadians opposite.
But General MacLean radioed back: "Authorization re-
quested to bombard those two localities."
The Commander
of goth Infantry Division referred to
General Gerow. "From the crests of this forest we can see the
fighting in progress on the Trun-Chambois road. This is proof
that there are none of our troops in or near Chambois. Give us
permission to fire."
The G.O.C. V Corps supported MacLean's decisions.
The
artillery opened fire with eleven batteries. "Amazing results,"
commented General MacLean.
"Huge columns of German vehicles and stragglers moving
north-east out of Chambois," Colonel Robert L. Bacon reported
at 0900 hours. He was now in his observation post on the hill
above Bourg Saint-Léonard observing the corridor leading to
Chambois.
His regiment, the 359th Infantry, was supported by I5
batteries to break the enemy resistance at Fougy-Rabotte-
Bergerie. On the night of the 17th, the Americans had re-
captured Bourg Saint-Léonard. That morning they tried to force
a passage outside the town to keep their rendezvous with the
Canadians who were only seven kilometres away.
mans,"
"The Ger-
said Colonel Bacon,
"were fighting
with savage
desperation to keep open the shoulders of the breach through
which the Seventh Army was retreating." 3
"The Germans were so frantic," recalls the C.O. of 359th
Infantry Regiment,
"and we had such a grip on the situation
that the co-ordinates for the artillery remained unchanged. The
The Pocket
195
firing on concentrations 305 and 306 was so regular that it
seemed like the order of the day." These positions, 305 and
306, covered the Vimoutiers road, which was fired on until
the afternoon, and also bombed. "The Germans kept blunder-
ing along the same routes; they began to disperse into the fields
as we had hoped and the artillery and air forces began to pour
it into them with deadly effect. The boys of the ist Battalion
who were able to observe the damage just cheered and cheered
as horses, cart trucks, German Volkswagens, soldiers, tanks,
and weapons of all description went flying into the air, or dis-
integrated in flashes of smoke, generally," Colonel Bacon adds,
"taking the hell road."
The scene has been called a gunner's dream.
At the same hour-1500 hours-as the
359th Infantry
Regiment approached Bourg Saint-Léonard, the de Langlade
Tactical Group on its right, coming down from Exmes, entered
Croisilles and made for the La Boulaie road junction. It received
an ovation from the refugees. The group promised to attack
Gacé which had waited seven days to be liberated, but returned
less than half an hour later to Exmes, recalled to Bourg Saint-
Léonard where General MacLean
had met with strong
resistance.
The Germans in fact were keeping the two jaws from closing
On the terrain which they still occupied that 18th August
"the congestion was fantastic," relates Abbé Launay. "No wide
boulevards here; they had to pass in turn and everyone wanted
priority. There were many disputes at the Mesnil-Liard road
junction. And as dusk approached the confusion grew worse."
For the first time since June 6th 1944, the two jaws of the
Allied pincers had visibly materialized on either side of the sole
remaining strategic road. From the keep of Chambois castle
the German observers could count the hits without having to
use field glasses. Two kilometres to the north the
Canadians
were trying to overrun the village of Magny. Five kilometres to
the south the Americans were leaving Bourg Saint-Léonard.
Two kilometres to the east the Poles were descending the hill
from Boisios. Fifteen kilometres to the west the British had
crossed N 158.
