276
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
ing along the two roads surrounding the neighbouring peak,
"A hellish night," according to the war diary of the 2nd
Polish Armoured Regiment.
"The exhausted crews had been
fighting for many hours on end. The ammunition position was
precarious. The help announced had not arrived. The evacua-
tion of the wounded was impossible, since we were encircled.
No chance of any supplies arriving.
At Boisjos the Polish C.O., lying on a pallet, summoned his
officers: four out of sixty had survived. "Gentlemen, all is lost.
I do not think that the Canadians can come to our rescue. We
have only about 100 able-bodied men left. No food and very
little ammunition. Five shells per gun and 50 bullets per man.
That's very little, but fight all the same. There is no question of
surrender, as you know. I thank you. You have fought well.
Good luck,
gentlemen. Tonight we shall die for Poland and
for civilization!"
The major then turned to Captain Sévigny to whom he
handed over command: "Continue the same tactics. Then each
tank will fight independently and eventually each man for
They returned to their posts. There was a deathly silence. The
German flood had now abated. In his tank Captain Sévigny
turned the knobs of his radio. The enemy communiqué re-
ported: "the encirclement of an entire Polish division in the
region of Falaise." The captain angrily tuned in visione Allied
transmissions: Strauss waltzes played by a London orchestra.
"I could hear the voices and laughter of the dancers. Over
there everyone was enjoying life. In every city in Canada the
theatres were full. I could imagine my parents who had been
so anxious since I had been in Europe, feelings shared with
thousands of families throughout the world,
whose prayers
had the same object: asking God to protect their sons in the hell
of war. Now it was all over; for forty-eight hours thousands
of men had been killed before my eyes. My turn would soon
Captain Sévigny's turn depended upon the progress of the
Canadian Grenadier Guards towards Boisjos. Their ist squadron
The Surrender
which had already lost four tanks on their way to the besieged,
continued to fight from Hill 239 to Hill 262 along the Camem-
bert-Cour-du-Boscq road. The twin guns of the 22nd Armoured
Regiment's tanks fired almost continually, and
"the results
were devastating. All the Germans in our sector were either
killed or put to flight, and the way to Hill 262 was soon open."
It was 0530 hours on Monday, August 2ist. The Polish posts
guarding the manor had suffered two new attacks, which cost
"On the morning of the 2ist, it was still misty," recalls
Jan Marowski.
"100 feet overhead we could hear a Dakota
looking for us."
Ammunition would arrive-or should arrive from the air.
"They'll never be able to spot the forked roads."
And yet they managed to do just this.
But unfortunately it was an identical forked road 8 kilo-
Thus the dropping of ammunition by parachute failed—
ammunition destined to save the encircled. It fell in the lines
of a Canadian brigade which was very surprised to receive
this consignment in a completely quiet sector.
His signaller shook him.
yards away. Only a small wood separated them
... but this small wood was stuffed with Germans.
There was a risk that the Shermans of the 22nd Armoured
Regiment would have to turn back. "No holding back!" relates
Captain Sévigny.
"We had to attack and join up with our
saviours at all costs. I immediately fell in the men. They all
