21
Joining up in Chambois
marked three bold arrows on his map, all
radiating from the same road junction.
"If they come this way, they'll be killed," he said, "and if
they come that way they'll be killed. Whichever way they try,
they'll be killed."
The colonel rubbed his hands happily as he commented on
the posting of his batteries facing in every direction.'
It was the evening of August 19th, 1944. This was the
conclusion of the extraordinary four-cornered game which
began on a morning described by Major D. V. Currie as "clear
and warm after a rainy night". From the four points of the
compass each one was determined to arrive first at the cross-
roads which was Chambois.
Canadians, Poles, French, Americans and British-clockwise
from left to right—were no more than a few hundred yards
apart; the first along the river; the second on the hills to the
east, the de Langlade Tactical Group to the south-east in the
valley; the Americans to the south aligned on the outskirts of
Gouffern Forest facing the plain and the British on the
Mézidon-Argentan railway.
The road junction destined for the meeting was not allocated
exclusively to one of the six divisions converging upon it, but
to all six at once: the glory of capturing the city would be
given to the patrols which were the first to steal into it.
So fluid were the positions of the units that a no-fire line had
been drawn. Without this the Allies would have fired at each
other, but even so, the line caused friction between the
Canadian and American leaders and would be abused by
General MacLean, commander of goth U.S. Infantry Division.
Throughout the day everyone complained of being fired on
by his neighbours and, as we shall see, a tragedy soon occurred
among the units. In the thick dust of the battle and the blinding
sun, they could no longer distinguish the almost similar
uniforms worn by the enemy operating in the same fields.
Captain L. E. Waters—"a very tall (6ft. 5) and lanky man"—
was in command of G Company of the 2nd Battalion 359th
U.S. Infantry Regiment. Colonel Bacon's regiment had received
orders the night before to take Chambois, flanked on either side
by battalions of the 358th, some
emerging from Gouffern
Forest, others ordered to seize the ridges dominating the road
junction to the south-east.
For a while General MacLean had hoped to take the village
by artillery fire alone; but finally he had made up his mind
to move in and occupy Chambois.
Captain Waters and his battalion left Bourg Saint-Léonard
and advanced that morning to Fougy; after occupying it with-
out resistance he made for the south of the village, crossing the
positions of the 3rd Battalion.
The 3rd Battalion, marching on the important Hill 129 which
overlooks Chambois, halted: Allied artillery were shelling the
hill. "No-fire line on Hill 129," General MacLean requested by
radio. The firing ceased. The 3rd Battalion continued on its way
"destroying a number of tanks and capturing a number of
German stragglers, who were still convinced that the escape
Captain Waters like everyone else was shelled by his own
side. His company, left to itself by the tanks which should have
supported it but had encountered difficulties crossing a wooded
ravine, arrived at the Fel fork roads, avoided Chambois and
crossed the Dives. It took up position along the Avenell road
and halted at the first houses of Chambois which were being
shelled by the Poles.
2nd Lieutenant Jan Karcz' served with the roth
Dragoons Regiment. His regiment had occupied Hill 137 during
the night, thus controlling the whole of the Dives valley from
the ridge. At the moment that Captain Waters' battalion was
crossing the plain from the south,
2nd Lieutenant Karcz's
platoon of Sten gunners from Cour-du-Boscq, descended the
Chambois-Vimoutiers road and approached the road junction
which, from behind a clump of pines, he could observe 1,200
yards below.
