CROUET
The Decision
33
that flanks have to be protected. None of that here. Let the
enemy worry about the flanks. Not us.
"And please, I don't want to receive any messages: positions
held. We don't want to hold them. Leave that job to the Jerries.
We're going to advance and advance without bothering to
know whether we are in front of or in the enemy lines."
This tactic had been summed-up in the formula: "Wither
on the vine", in other words, advance in spite of knots of
resistance, cut lines of communication, contain zones of
opposition, despatch the main tank forces to new objectives,
overrun new pockets of resistance, surround enemy formations
left behind, continue to advance with all the tanks available
and, when the time comes, demand the surrender of all the
enemy forces thus cut off or leave them to the French
Resistance.
The 4th Armoured Division now reached the suburbs of
Rennes. Drunk with confidence, its commander Major-general
John S. Wood, a Free-Fighter from Arkansas, suddenly ordered
his columns to veer due east to Paris. "Out of order," trans-
mitted Patton. "Wolf, get busy and find Wood. God knows
where. Tell him to advance strictly south-west, straight for
Saint-Nazaire and nowhere else."
A German officer inspected his advanced posts, admonishing
his men for failing to salute him; "his" men raised their heads
and grabbed him; the advanced post was American. "THERE
IS NO FRONT LINE IN BRITTANY," wrote the Reuter corres-
pondent on August 4th. He knew what he was talking about:
war correspondents in their Jeeps roamed about in no man's
land, not without occasional dramatic losses but not without
spectacular coups.
Ernest
Hemingway,
notepad
in hand,
captured six prisoners. Ernie Pyle inadvertently captured the
Mont-Saint-Michel. And Stars and Stripes wrote ironically:
"The beer and ice-cream flow in Rennes gone mad", affirming
that for the first time in military history, wild rumours travel
slower than events. As for Patton, he learned, with
some
alarm, that he had travelled all day through a German division.
There was one American who did not subscribe to the
general euphoria. This was Middleton, the commander from
whom all these frantic divisions had escaped.
