274
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
of the manor.
"We can see the Germans trying to break out
through Bourdon and disperse in the fields," records the War
Diary of the ist Polish Armoured Regiment. "We can see the
enemy tanks trying to reach Hill 239, encroaching on us to the
point where our units have to change their defence positions
under the assault of the Tigers. The fury of the German crews
is such that they approach to within yards of our position.
Exploiting the cover of the woods they were only stopped a
few yards from us. They are attacking from all directions. It is
a fight to the death."
About 1700 hours, infantry supported by tanks broke
through in the north-east. The Poles replied with their in-
fantry, armour and mortar crews who fought with rifles after
having exhausted their shells.
Near the Chambois-Vimoutiers road, from which the column
escaping from the pocket was climbing, 2000 fugitives profited
by the chaos to break the encirclement. A deep German pene-
tration endangered two Polish battalions, as Meindl speeded
the motorized columns from Chambois. Twenty-five tanks
and 50 guns joined II S.S. Panzer Koros The coordination there.
fore was perfect between the counter-attack from the north
and the breakout in the south.
Faced with this reversal, the 4th Canadian Armoured Divi-
sion, reinforced by an armoured brigade and a brigade of in-
fantry, called for help from the 5th Anti-tank Regiment.
"Situation very confused," notes
the log book of the 4th
Armoured Division for the evening of the 2oth. "Germans now
attacking from east and west, the units are mingled and," adds
the military editor, "it is difficult to define the zone allotted
to the Brigade."
Boisjos had just experienced its eighth assault of the day.
"I can't believe my eyes," wrote Captain Sévigny. "The Boche
march towards us singing Deutschland über alles. We allow
them to advance to within fifty paces, then mow them down.
But other waves follow ... the fifth arrives. The Poles had no
more ammunition, and fought with bayonets."
"We had been on this Hill 262 since Saturday," relates 2nd
The Surrender
Lieutenant Krzyzaniak of the 8th Polish Infantry Battalion.
"This was the big show. I wasn't sure about anything. And
yet I knew they were in front of us, we were behind. And at
the same time they were behind and we in front... Then vice
versa. Explosions everywhere, blood everywhere,
blood, foreign blood, my blood."
By the end of the day "Maczuga" had a respite. It was, we
must not forget, almost the end of the German withdrawal,
itself directed by the efforts made in the valley to strangle it
on the Saint-Lambert-Moissy axis.
"The battlefield was a night-
mare. On the flanks of the hill thousands of corpses formed
a positive rampart. We had to fall back to the summit of Hill
262." A local eye-witness, J. Jamet, relates that "the hunting
lodge and its out-buildings were one vast hospital filled with
dreadfully and losing quantities
blood." M. Lebreton, who had taken refuge in a cellar in Bois-
jos, saw "a dressing-station full of wounded Germans and Poles
in the farm where civilians and soldiers had remained two days
without food during the successive enemy rushes to retake
ing graveyard
at the approaches to the plateau
assembly of 800 prisoners in the courtyard of the farm."
soldiers with haggard eyes,"
Hemon, came asking for drink as they fled along the hedges.
On their faces there was a determination to fight on and con-
each other into the kitchen. A convoy of German wounded
arrived. Bales of corn served as beds.
Trenches were dug along the wood below the manor
another night of siege was expected. The Canadian Grenadier
Guards, the 22nd Armoured Regiment, according to their 1og
book, had a difficult passage across hilly roads
poisoned the air with their putrefaction." The hills which still
separated the Canadians from the Poles resounded with the
echo of tanks trying to find their way. During the night at
Boisjos, hopes were raised by the noise of tank squadrons driv-
