The Battle of the Falaise Gap
Lambert it was a charming, very peaceful little French village
and now that we were leaving it, it had become fantastic chaos,
In the Corridor the scene was worthy of Dante: smashed
guns, vehicles of all kinds, broken and twisted weapons, the
debris of equipment, horses writhing in their harness ... tanks
that seemed paralysed, their sides holed from the impact of
the shells that had arrested their course. Some had their tracks
broken and the crews had fled rather than try to repair them
under the hail of shells and bullets. Others had got bogged
in the grass or on the river verges.'
On the Dives bridge, the key to the corridor, the Canadian
gunners let fly without respite. Although some motorized units
managed to pass, the horse-drawn transports were caught in
bombardments as they approached the bridge.
stampeded. Careering through hedges and fences the terrified
plunged down the steep river bank, dragging their
wagons and gun-carriages after them. Soon the ravine was
choked with wreckage and with the bodies of men and horses,
the dead and wounded lying together in ghastly heaps."
A Canadian asked Major Currie's permission to go down
to the stream where hundreds of horses were neighing in pain
and writhing in the ravine. He wanted to put the beasts out
of their misery. Currie gave his permission and reveals that
"this job used up hundreds of cartridges."
At nearby Moissy ford, the Germans had tried to use cater-
pillar trailers. In vain. They fell in the river.
caught fire. Horses were killed with revolvers. Along Moissy
several hundred yards
tanks, cars and
armoured trucks lay piled in heaps. "Cartridges, grenades and
shells formed a thick carpet. Near La Croute Farm, a touring
car was perched on an armoured truck which itself served as
plinth for a Panther while a second armoured truck formed
a base in the dried-up river bed." 5
At the exit of the bridge on the road leading to the hill
top— the Corridor of Death-two tanks were posted in Moissy
village. They fired until their guns were red hot and did not
cease firing until they received the order to surrender.
The Surrender
Abbé Launay would have liked to stop this bloodbath. The
negotiators who had left to see the Americans and the Can-
adians respectively did not know of each other's attempts.
Abbé Launay once more approached the Germans herded in
Morellec Farm. The German major wept as his torn flag
knotted to a scythe was carried up to the steeple.
But let Abbé Launay tell the story in his own words: "The
church was still smoking from the last shellburst. Had it not
been so tragic, the scene would have been comical. A German
sat in the confessional, another crouched between the wall and
the Altar of Our Lady, while a third more stoical or merely
downcast sat in the centre of the aisle. The tower was full of
soldiers: impossible to climb up. We tried to pass up the flag
but no one would take it.
"A row broke out between the Army and the S.S. under
the eaves of the besieged village steeple. The S.S. refused to
hang up the flag. The civilians appealed to the major. The
major said the S.S. would not obey his orders.
The officers parleyed. The discussion was long and
drawn out. In a rage another officer, revolver in hand, cleared
the steeple: the S.S. were lined up against the walls. The white
flag was hoisted on the tower. To make it more visible a white
surplice and a large cloth were added on the end of a broom-
stick. But it was of no avail. No Allied plane appeared in the
rainy sky, and the American artillery refused to be won over
by M. Damian's arguments. Who would spot the rather squat
steeple in the smoking battlefield?"
Abbé Launay was obstinate. An unusual incident favoured
An armoured German Red Cross car pulled up outside the
The orderlies got out. Their sergeant conferred with the
major. The latter beckoned to Abbé Launay
The sergeant stood to attention. An extraordinary dialogue
"Monsieur, are you the one who wants us to surrender?"
"Yes, mein Herr, in your own interests and in ours. You have
men here and I have civilians, and this evening we shall have
"Well, Monsieur, jump in."
