27
One of the greatest scenes of carnage
On the morning of Tuesday the 22nd August, the plain was
silent. Stunned and decimated, the living counted their dead,
discovering corpses in the meadows, the roads, the cellars and
the trenches. The stench was so appalling that Prince Jean
of Luxemburg in the cockpit of his Piper Cub flying over the
Trun-Chambois road was forced to gain height to avoid the
discomfort. "People emerged from shelters, exhausted, hag-
gard, filthy and half-bemused. No cattle in the meadows, no
leaves on the trees, the grass itself had disappeared beneath a
layer of dust, no birds to gladden the sky. There was no life
Sir Francis de Guingand, Montgomery's Chief of Staff, had
never seen such a "scene of desolation." Flying twice over
the battlefield he would never forget this sight, nor the odour
of corruption that pervaded the air.
"It seemed difficult to
imagine how any army could survive a defeat of this sort."
Ralph Ingersoll also saw a road' covered with such a thick layer
of German dead that a bulldozer was sent for to clear a
Eisenhower toured "one of the greatest scenes of carnage of
the war. One could go for literally hundreds of yards walking
over nothing but dead and putrefying flesh."
"Tuesday the 22nd," notes the mayor of Mont Ormel in
his diary kept by his secretary, "we returned to our homes just
as the first Polish and Canadian soldiers arrived at La Panthe-
lière; they were amazed to see civilians.
"At Croix-Tiret it was a horrible sight. The road was jammed
for more than 300 yards with burnt-out trucks and shattered
vehicles of all types; the houses were flat, the apple trees up-
rooted and German corpses were everywhere.
"At the corner of a field entered in the land registers as
The Surrender
295
'the battlefield') a damaged wayside Cross was still standing.
"There were about 200 dead Germans, all the farms were
damaged, the cattle killed or wounded, the trees smashed and
the fences broken down. There were 3000 shell holes."
the sunken roads, closely mingled with dead horses, damaged
cars and green, yellow and brown camouflaged trucks. Every
sunken road was a yawning grave."
Fallen walls, ruined houses, gutted roofs and dead horses.
Soldiers already being devoured by worms, lay scattered in
The cowherds went into the villages to rid the inhabitants of
the corpses they had found as they returned to their shelled
homes. Fifty-eight of the 66 houses in Tournai were destroyed;
the village of Sainte-Eugénie was wiped out; Bas-Aubry and
Aubry were devastated; two-thirds of Trun and Chambois were
of Saint-Lambert, "hundreds of dead lying so close to each
other that they almost touched." Many years after the war
cross and a helmet bearing the epitaph: "Unknown German
soldier." An eye witness in
December 1944 noted that "every
day in the ditches and bushes we found corpses or rather skele-
But the horses above all emitted a stench of pestilence: 2000
horses killed; 3000 more "taken prisoner". In the courtyard of
Morellec farm there were 38 horses in piles of 7 and 8. From
the Mesnil-Liard road junction to the Sainte-Eugénie road, 82
dead horses with their vehicles blocked the road for 2 kilo-
metres. Heaps of 70 to 80 beasts remained rotting in the hot
sun until November Ist. The Allied troops declared the Dives
plain an "unhealthy zone" for two months and received orders
to by-pass it, not without ensuring the population every day
for three months its ration of clean drinking water brought
At Saint-Lambert-sur-Dives, to avoid risk of an epidemic,
bulldozers were used to dig a mass grave 75 feet deep in which,
