272
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
ing there with raised arms.
"Well, you see, he too is a chaplain."
A great silence fell on the column while the two brothers in
Christ looked at each other with compassion, but without
shaking hands. The troop began to murmur. The Germans were
incensed at having been taken by a single man without having
fired a shot…. and a priest to boot. "Aber das ist wunderbar!"
a German spat in disgust.
"Form up in twos, hands behind your heads, and make it
snappy," ordered the Chaplain, still wondering how it would
The column set out followed by
the scout car. Corporal
Saron on the bonnet, his Sten gun poised, was just as nervous
as Stopa and the 72 prisoners.
These 72 Germans were part of the 1700 prisoners whom
the Poles handed over that evening to the Americans in ex-
change for ammunition of the right calibre.
"A real bargain,'
Alan Wood would say. Mont Vason farm where 20,000 meals
were served by M. and Mme Esnay to 400 refugees over three
months is still there. For the last twenty years it has been
known among the locals as Stopa Farm.
The Poles then could expect help from no one.
They would bear the full assault of II S.S. Panzer Korps.
Bittrich organized two spearheads both dires, onzere Trun-
Chambois line. The 9th S.S.
Panzer descended along
the
Neauphes-Trun road; 2nd S.S. Panzer took the Vimoutiers-
Chambois road. In all, 20 tanks and 3 battalions of infantry;
relates General Eberbach. "that my armour had to blaze a trail
"One of these roads was so obstructed by burning vehicles,
before we were able to pass."
The advance at the outset met with no opposition. Then
came the crest: Hill 258 south of Chambois, Hill 240 at
Ecorches and finally Hill 262, the northern crest still called
Boisjos.
For the Poles the danger came from Hill 239 which, if it
were occupied by Il S.S. Panzer Korps would threaten Boisjos
peak with enfilade fire.
The Poles hurriedly sent a detachment to this threatening
The Surrender
and threatened height, but in vain. The ensuing drama was to
be enacted round the old manor. The Polish commander was
against 16 Tigers. In three minutes' fighting, the Poles lost six
of their tanks, to one Tiger on the German side.
head. What were the gunners doing? The first tank was only 500
yards...400...300...250...200. It was all over. I dared not look
and yet I kept on looking. 150... 100 yards. I flung myself into
a foxhole and lay there face downwards. Death would come,
I was certain, in a second. Instinctively I muttered a prayer.
Suddenly a hurricane, a noise of thunder, and the earth shook.
Was it death? Was it life? Was it possible? It was the rein-
forcement. Our guns were firing. What I heard were the shells
bursting. And there in my foxhole I laughed and wept. I raised
my head for a moment. We were saved. As never before, with
was broken. The Germans retired, pursued by the Poles who
destroyed a further three tanks. I congratulated my men for
the magnificent job they had done."
These are the words of Captain Pierre Sévigny, today a
Lieutenant-Colonel and Minister
of Defence
Government, holder of the Silver Medal of the
Virtuti Militari Order, the highest Polish decoration, and the
French Croix de Guerre with palms.
occupied the line
artillery and mortar fire on Mont-Ormel, infantry
Boisjos perimeter. All the afternoon, uncoordinated but decisive
attacks continued round the northern and southern precincts
