The Battle of the Falaise Gap
was drunk to the meeting of the two armies, while once more
at the various headquarters the teleprinters crackled, reporting
the victories of individual units.
"The roth Polish Dragoons are
Chambois," General Maczek reported to General Simonds.
"Chambois is in our hands," reported General
Gerow, commander of V Corps.
1950 hours. "II Canadian Corps has been joined by the goth
U.S. Infantry Division," General Simonds telegraphed to
General Montgomery.
2015 hours. "Objective reached. Poles encountered." was the
terse report from the 359th Infantry Regiment.
2030 hours.
"Joined up with Canadians," was another
American message.
Notified by wireless, Major Zgorzelski, C.O. of the roth
Dragoons Regiment, ran up and saluted Major Dull, C.O. of the
2nd Battalion of the 359th Infantry Regiment.?
This second handshake sealed the meeting between Mont-
gomery and Bradley
excitement I felt. We were witnessing the meeting of the
armies of two great nations-two nations which in Eisen-
hower's words 'were waging a crusade'. Personally I felt this
moment of satisfaction as the realization of the reasons for
which we had been fighting."
That day alone, the 9oth U.S. Infantry Division-recruited
from Oklahoma and Texas-took 5000 prisoners and "killed
a considerable but undetermined number of Germans," reported
General MacLean. "It captured or destroyed hundreds of enemy
armoured vehicles and guns. It had joined up with the Poles
and given a helping hand to the Canadians."
Some 600 kilometres east of the Chambois crossroads, be-
tween Clermont-en-Argonne and Dombasle, Feldmarschall von
Kluge's aide was preparing to leave after the lunch break.
The Feldmarschall had left La Roche-Guyon at dawn with
a small escort, then had turned east through Vexin. He was
on his way back to Germany, having been summoned by Hitler.
The aide came to notify von Kluge, who had eaten his meal
The Pocket
on a blanket in a thicket, that it was time to set out again.
The Feldmarschall, rigid and tense, seemed to be having a
siesta. The aide approached and gave a cry which aroused the
whole escort. A broken ampoule of cyanide on the green grass
forces in the West had committed suicide a few hours before
their forces.
patrolled. Private Carmen Ambrose and his buddy, S. Ander-
of shots. Sergeant William A. Berry discovered 25
under a culvert. Elsewhere, 20 wounded Germans, abandoned
by their comrades, signalled their distress by hanging long
white sheets from paneless windows. The Americans who were
digging in for the night left their spades to search the fields for
groaning wounded Germans.
to transport the wounded, using lavatory doors as stretchers.
And it was not over yet.
"Our joy was short-lived," relates
whom I reinforced with a squadron of armour of the 24th
spotted an interminable column of Germans in retreat.
"With
bated breath, we observed them approaching nearer and nearer
as though on a route march. The American tanks, which had
escorted the infantry, and which I had ordered to guard our
flanks, opened fire.
Soon the whole line was in an uproar.
Taken by surprise, the Germans lost their heads. One by one
their heavily loaded vehicles
were set on fire,
some being
utterly destroyed by direct hits from our anti-tanks. In ten
minutes the show was over. Calm returned. Burning vehicles
and piles of corpses was all that remained of the German élite
troops."
The day drew to a close. The countryside was trembling
