308
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
pocket, Montgomery entered Antwerp. Twenty days after this
same last shot Bradley crossed the Siegfried Line before Trier.
Overlord had not anticipated such speed. For D-Day + 120,
i.e. October 6th, the plans had envisaged an anchorage on the
Somme estuary. From there the line was to join Chantilly, to
avoid Paris by the west, to advance on Montereau, to descend
to Gien and to follow the south bank of the Loire to its mouth.
Now on this date, from Antwerp to the Eifel and the Vosges,
from the Vosges to the Mediterranean three countries had been
liberated and Aix-la-Chapelle passed. But the pursuit was com-
ing to an end. The adversaries met once more, 540 kilometres
from the Dives.
But four months later to the day-December 19th—the
same German generals who had fought on Chambois ridge and
escaped the net were opposite Patton, Bradley and Montgomery
commanding the same units which had slipped through at
Vimoutiers: the Battle of the Ardennes began.
Leaving it to more qualified experts to give an authoritative
judgment, let us temporarily conclude.
The success of the Falaise-Argentan battle, therefore, speeded
up by some months the liberation of Western Europe. Its set-
back probably retarded the end of hostilities by some months.
We have taken pains in this story to let the actors and eye-
witnesses speak for themselves and have been careful to voice
no personal opinions. Perhaps the reader will now allow us
To us the lesson of the pocket is obvious. When one follows
from the telephonic communications between Rastenburg and
Saint-German-en-Laye,
the duel between the infantilism of
those who gave the orders and the resignation of those who
knew that they were being sacrificed in a holocaust, one is
dumbfounded. Where does childhood end and wisdom begin
in mankind? Von Kluge was opposed. Hausser, according to
some historians, was opposed. Warlimont was not in favour.
Eberbach was opposed. Speidel and Blumentritt were opposed.
"There was only one person to blame for this stupid, im-
possible operation. That madman Adolf Hitler." 10
The Surrender
this? Not a Canadian, not an American, not a Pole, not a
Frenchman nor a Britisher. It was a German. And what a Ger-
man! A one-hundred per cent Nazi: Sepp Dietrich. A pillar of
the early days of National Socialism; one of the
"trustees".
And in practice the Great Chief of the most fanatical S.S.
troops on the Normandy front.
"Avranches and Falaise became minor Stalingrads," Blumen-
tritt wrote to us,
"because Hitler was opposed to any retreat.
politice „Put. Since 1941 the Wehrmacht was the slave of
"It was all useless. What crass folly," Kurt Meyer admitted
in 1954 on his release from prison. He was the man to whom
Hitler had entrusted the élite of the Hitlerian generation.
Twenty-one years too late!
