270
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
drove towards the farm, which he discovered with some diffi-
culty behind a small wood. It was a former hunting lodge with
3 feet thick walls and narrow windows. Huge outbuildings sur-
rounded a large courtyard which ended in the inevitable duck-
pond.
"Now cover me until I reach the wall over there. Keep
firing but aim high, over my head. And stop when I reach the
door. Then it will be up to me," said the Chaplain.
The uniformed priest reached the wall, flattened himself
against it and advanced towards the door. He was surprised
when it was opened by two civilians. One of them, the father,
75 years old, wearing a peasant hat and cane, was scarlet with
anger.
"Halt!" cried Stopa, his revolver aimed at the peasant's chest.
"Who are you?"
"Just the blasted owner," replied the infuriated, panting
farmer. "My farm has been taken and retaken three times.
Alternately by the Poles and the Canadians. There are 300 of
us in the cellar. The whole of Coudehard and the whole of
Mont Ormel is down there. The baker, the butcher, the carp-
enter ... There is a whole village in my cellar."
"And no Germans?"
"Yes, over there in the stables, in the barn and in the pig
sty."
"How many?"
"Twenty or thirty, I don't know."
"Get out of here quick," the Chaplain said to the civilians,
"we're going to attack"
"We"
was a big word. But war is war!
As Stopa ran to the door of the barn he realized that the
lapels of his battledress bore the cross of Christ. He turned
them up as though it were cold weather, planted himself
against the door, opened it and waved his revolver.
"Raus! Raus! Hande hoch!"
"Raus mit Euch!"
One, then three, then two, then four Germans appeared,
shaking with fear. They threw away rifles and grenades, raised
their arms, stumbled and recovered while Saron covered them.
Another wave of the Chaplain's revolver.
"Raus und mach schnell!" roared the Chaplain, taking care
The Surrender
Five more Germans emerged from the stable.
"Raus! Raus!"
The barn disgorged six, then two, then seven more haggard,
ragged soldiers, more dead than alive.
"Good God!…. How many were there then?"
The Chaplain brandished his revolver once more through
the open door.
Ten Germans appeared this time.
Wiping his forehead, the Chaplain counted. What could he
do against forty prisoners?
"Raus, Raus und mach das schnell!"
So there were more of them. Another five, then ten, then
four, then seven, then six ...
It was over. Saron fired a burst into the stable. There was
The twenty had become seventy-two!
Stopa and the Corporal exchanged glances. At this moment
the lapels of the Chaplain fell into place and everyone could
see the crosses.
An Oberleutenant came over to the Chaplain, while Saron
searched the 71 other prisoners.
"Herr Hauptmann."
"Herr Hauptmann.
draw your attention..?
I don't know whether I ought to
"To what?" snapped the Chaplain, not feeling inclined to
"You're a priest."
"So what? Das geht dich nicht einen Dreck an!" replied
Stopa, who that day had had to speak in German.
"You are not entitled to carry a weapon."
Chaplain Stopa, today a priest at the Polish Mission in Paris,
told us personally that he was very embarrassed that they had
seen he was a chaplain.
"That's possible. But I neither fired nor killed."
The Oberleutenant wearily called to one of his men stand-
