The Battle of the Falaise Gap
terrible congestion. For the first time, in fact, the Germans
risked a retreat in full daylight under a sky favourable to the
Allied raids. The R.A.F. made 2,029 sorties that day alone. The
2nd Tactical
tanks destroyed, 12
damaged, 295 transport vehicles destroyed and 328 damaged.
"When the Spitfires arrived over the small triangle of Nor-
mandy, bounded by Falaise, Trun and Chambois," recalls
Johnnie Johnson,
"the Typhoons were already hard at work.
One of their favourite
against long
streams of
enemy vehicles was to seal off the front and rear of the column
by
accurately
dropping
few bombs.
This technique
imprisoned the desperate enemy on a narrow stretch of dusty
lane, and since the transports were sometimes jammed to-
gether four abreast, it made the subsequent rocket and cannon
attacks a comparatively easy business against the stationary
targets. Some attempted attempted to escape. across the fields and
wooded country, but these were soon spotted by the Typhoon
pilots and were accorded the same treatment as their comrades
on the highways and lanes." ?
A squadron of PIs captured 400 prisoners. The planes, after
having machine-gunned
a column of exhausted fugitives,
circled above the Germans. This proved so effective that, to
their amazement, the pilots saw white handkerchiefs being
waved below them. They radioed to some nearby tanks,
watched the column assembling below the circling aircraft,
and waited before returning to base until the tanks had got
hold of this astonishing harvest. An event unique in the history
of war, according to Colonel Robert S. Allen.
"The planes literally had to wait their turn," relates Patton's
G2. Eight Thunderbolts of the 2nd Tactical Air Force spotted
a column of Panzers; they prepared to drop their bombs but
saw their prey
wrested from them by nine Typhoons.
Thunderbolts had
to
delay their
attack. Elsewhere
an
exuberant pilot, his bombs gone and his cannon red-hot,
dropped his belly tank' on twelve vehicles: the explosion set
them on fire.'
"Up to August 17th there had been a slow trickle across open
country, but after that date," writes Eisenhower, "a vast wave
of excited men of all ranks broke loose, and the calm discipline
37. An American N
Germans as U.S
August.
ank passes over a bridge bombed three times by the
s forge ahead to Domfront, liberating the town on 15th
