26
The capitulation of Tournai-sur-Dives
Tournai-sur-Dives awoke on Monday, 2Ist August poised
Two ammunition trucks parked
against the church wall had been exploding throughout a night
punctuated by barrages of artillery from friend and foe alike,
so much so that Abbé Launay relates, "We just couldn't tell
when the Germans left off and the Allies began."
At 0700 hours a German tank in position near Morellec
Farm-where in a wine cellar 12 ft x 6 ft, 23
German wounded, their major and a hospital orderly were
herded together-had an artillery duel with a Canadian gun
whose shells actually fell in the courtyard of the farm. Mothers
in tears kissed their children for the last time and waited for
Abbé Launay prepared to negotiate a separate armistice with
the major who had come to visit the wounded.
"Mein Herr, at this rate our wounded and the civilians will
all be killed, and so will your men."
"Ah, Monsieur, that's war!" replied the major with tears in
the Chuave your men, you'd better run up a white flag on
"No, Monsieur, we cannot ..."
The German, however, was hesitant, changed his mind and
became more reasonable.
"Only the red one."
"The red one? Ah, you mean the Red Cross. In these condi-
tions it's not worth while. You will protect your men here and
our civilians. But in the village there are soldiers and five to
six hundred civilians."
The German turned a deaf ear, while the shells continued
to rain down. One of them hit the church smashing the roof
and bursting in the nave. Terrified and convinced, the major
sent for the priest.
The Surrender
283
"Hoist the white flag on the steeple, if you like."
This was the first attempted surrender by the Germans on
August 2ist, 1944, the last day of the fighting in the Falaise
pocket.
Fighting continued of course-resolute and decisive assaults
for possession of a mere track, the Corridor of Death. There
was fighting in the fields on either side of the corridor and
fighting on the roads leading to it. There was fighting on the
banks of the Dives from which the Corridor of Death led;
fighting at Magny, at Saint-Lambert, at Chambois and on the
Magny, on the German bank of the Dives, prevented the
Canadian advance towards Saint-Lambert, stemmed the flow
to the Corridor of Death and to the exits held by the Poles, who
were soon to be joined by the Canadians.
On the banks of the Dives the Stormont, Dundas and Glen-
garry Highlanders, supported by heavy artillery, faced a
desperate tank and infantry attack; starting at dawn the battle
continued until midday.
According to the testimony of an officer of the Cameron
"The German infantrymen were
held an advantageous position, they had no vestige of cover.
and Bren guns was in action.
Until o800 hours the gunners
fired at everything they could see. White flags appeared and
hundreds of the enemy crowded together to surrender. Many
ground behind them in
a half-track."? A sizeable catch:
allowed himself to be taken. On Monday 2Ist, on the banks
of the Dives, the second attempt at mass surrender took place.
In fact, all the Allied armies were hurrying to meet each
other, converging on Tournai. To the west,
53rd British
Division at 1300 hours was crossing Villedieu, less than one
