242
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
another and then two more, followed by infantry. At about
2130 hours they arrived at the chateau, took the wounded and
ambulance men prisoners and installed themselves in their
place. Our young folk took to them all the Germans they could
dislodge. The enemy left about fifty dead in Commeaux, three
armoured trucks, eight tanks, a self-propelled gun and a field
The 29th British Armoured Brigade which had now overrun
N 158 along its whole length, approached Argentan from the
west and entered Ri.
"On Sunday 20th about thirty Germans more or less crippled
and fully determined to fight no more lay around in the
according to Count de Vigneral.
"I was about to
assemble them in the town hall when an F.F.I. reported the
presence of the British near Huche Wood and suggested that
get together some help to take these men with the
other prisoners already assembled. I did as he requested. Half
an hour later the first tanks passed by the church."
On their left the 53rd British Division coming from Thury-
Harcourt passed Nécy and crossed the belt of woods that gave
access to the cauldron.
On their way to Vauvert at the Bailleul-Pierrfitte road junc-
tion a picturesque incident gives some idea of the general
confusion.
"At 1000 hours, two German officers entered M. Thouin's
farm; very politely in excellent French they asked if they could
order a meal. 'You will no doubt be pleased; we want to invite
a British major who has just been handed over to us.'
The meal was prepared and served; the Englishman appeared.
The conversation was animated and cordial.
'Our hours are numbered, said one of the Germans. 'It
would be a pity not to finish lunch.'
And he added pensively for the benefit of his British guest,
*What an odd situation. At the moment you are our prisoner
but within an hour we shall be yours. Coffee?'
The coffee called for cigars; one of the officers stood up,
delved into his case and solemnly offered cigars all round. The
meal continued with gay conversation and resounding toasts.
At liqueur time the Tommies appeared in Vauvert; 80 Germans
surrendered, and with them, our diners."
The Surrender
ventured onto the road, inspected the village and saw with
satisfaction that many of the houses still remained standing.
Finally two friendly Bren carriers appeared coming from Bas-
de Merri; they brought us freedom, then from Fourches and
Crocy, thrusting east, came strong British patrols escorted by
a number of tanks. Soon we were overjoyed to see about 5,000
prisoners being brought back by reconnaissance units."
That same morning of the 2oth, "the grimmest day in the
Battle of
Normandy,'
according to Colonel Stacey, four
American battalions were marching on Argentan.
Among the ruins the last witnesses of the city's agony took
stock. "In the morning when calm was restored, the Archpriest
inspected his church and the district. He went as far as the
Miséricorde and brought back a bale of clover for his rabbits.
He told us, alas, that the whole Jeanne d'Arc Institute was in
flames and also the adjacent houses in the Rue Saint-Ger-
main ... Continuing his tour along the Rue de l'Hôtel-de-Ville,
blocked by rubble,
the good priest heard a German shell
whistle over his head coming from the north. It was the last
shell, and it fell in the middle of the fairground."
At eight o'clock "a formidable barrage began, more terrify-
ing than any we had so far experienced. A second bombard-
ment followed." General MacBride's batteries were concentrat-
ing their fire on the Saint-Martin
district, the only one which
had so far been spared in the battle, but which the Allies now
believed to be held by the enemy.
Half an hour later the grd Battalion of Combat Team 317
advanced on N 24 bis in order to approach Argentan from the
