The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"That may not be necessary."
"Monsieur, be kind enough to take us to the enemy lines to
sue for peace."
"Very well."
The sergeant opened the ambulance doors. The two drivers,
the flagbearer, the sergeant, Abbé Launay and the German got
in. The car drove off through the corpses and wreckage. To
avoid the obstructed roads the car plunged across the fields
but, barred by the hedgerows, returned to the road.
"Are we going to Trun?"
"No, Monsieur," replied the sergeant, who wrongly believed
that the Poles were there.
"We mustn't. I don't want to."
"All right, we'll go to Saint-Lambert.
"That's it, show us the way."
Meanwhile the bullets whined overhead.
"Keep your head down, Monsieur!"
Thirty yards before the Canadian post on the Trun road,
the car turned off across the fields towards Saint-Lambert. The
flagbearer waved his white flag. The noise of gunfire and the
crackle of machine-guns drowned the sound of the engine.
For forty minutes Abbé Launay who knew his parish down to
the last blade of grass, picked his way through a landscape
rendered unrecognizable by wreckage and dead bodies. Finally
he decided to return to Tournai by the road which leads from
the Gouffern Forest to the village. M le curé had been inspired.
At the entrance to Tournai, soldiers in khaki were emerging
"Father, Father!"
"Are you English?"
"Americans?"
"No. We are de Gaulle's army," replied the prisoners of
2nd Armoured Brigade, who had been captured at Boucé and
held in Tournai.
One of the soldiers was invited to take his place in the car
and act as interpreter.
The car set out once more, this time
in the direction of Chambois. At Fel, they met Canadians
very enthusiastic to believe in this strange delegation com-
posed of Allies, civilians and the enemy?"
Canadian agreed to get into the car which drove back to
The Surrender
Tournai. It was 1400 hours.
dropped and helmets thrown on the ground. The sergeant re-
ported to a major who in turn reported to a superior officer.
A short discussion took place among soldiers. It was over. Led
assembled in the courtyard of the farm,
were disarmed,
rather nervous and even ordered Abbé Launay not to engage in
conversation with him and to keep his distance.
And still the Allied artillery continued to pound Tournai.
They had received orders to continue firing until the prisoners
had been transported to Chambois. The Canadians had decided
of attack was to resume firing at 2100 hours and not to let
up until Tuesday morning at 0700 hours.
Actually, M. Damian, who had left on Monday morning,
had brought his conversations with the Americans to a suc-
cessful conclusion. He was back by the end of the afternoon.
He did not return alone. On his way he collected another 725
prisoners. He also brought back an assurance from the Ameri-
cans that they would cease fire.
At 2030 hours American tanks skirted Tournai from the
west coming from Villedieu. Night fell. Would the artillery
start again? Silence. Not a shell. Tournai had its first calm
That evening Major Currie tried to get some rest.
He fell asleep at last.
Next morning he awoke with difficulty, not knowing where
he was. "All I could hear was the chirping of the birds and the
incredible silence." 7
Johann Bornert surrendered to the Canadians and "on the
way to Trun saw one dead man after the other lying there.
We had to be careful not to step on them. When I saw the
first Canadians I was stupefied. They were so well dressed!
