The Battle of the Falaise Gap
tanks posted from the 8oth Infantry Division to capture Argen-
tan to break through. It was Colonel MacHugh who had to call
"At 400 yards from our front a Panther-which the locals
themselves had spotted at Ramarets near Beaugé inn, i.e. on
the other side of N 24 bis—fired at us. I sent for some Bazookas
to destroy it. But the men opened fire from too great a range.
The tank moved off to another position. I walked up and down
the road about three times, finding crossings for my troops. We
advanced 100 yards across the road; then the Germans opened
fire on us with what seemed like all the bullets and artillery
in the world. I called up my tanks but could not locate my
tank-destroyers, as the T.D. liaison officer had disappeared
when I got close to the action. At last my tanks arrived."
It was 1000 hours.
tanks, "Helen Gloria", "Dare-Devils",
"Doris", "Ruth Mabel", and "Rose-Marie" tackled the Vaugon
ford; they drove into the backyard of a farm, passed through a
breach specially made in the wall of a barn, went through a
kind of tunnel and found themselves on the grassland in front
of N 24 bis, below the first undulations of the forest.
"How do we get to the road?" asked the commander of the
"There ... Over there.." replied the villagers, terrified by
the battle but pointing from their trenches to the pastures
separating the river from the road.
The column advanced with confidence. Beyond the grass-
land the leading tank took the small road to the school but,
as soon as it reached the main road, was hit by a shell in
the side; the second was hit by two shells, the latter widening
the hole made by the first; the third tank had just left the grass
and was hit in turn, the fourth, still in the grass, was caught by
two shells one piercing it from end to end. All were soon
blazing. They burned until nightfall. The fifth tank, well
hidden in the hedgerow had not been spotted. It turned about
but got bogged down in the marshes south of the Eure.
A few hours later "a German tank entered the courtyard
of Urou château, knocking down the wall, ripping off the
kitchen door before taking up its position in the park; its
The Pocket
193
commander, a 'tall devil', announced triumphantly in good
French: 'My Tiger has demolished five American tanks. I am
wounded but I have returned to the battle and hope to destroy
many more'."
This feat of arms-four tanks destroyed in eight shots—
upset Colonel MacHugh's plans.
"I was forced to change
tactics," in other words to call for support from sixteen
artillery batteries.
The sixteen artillery batteries opened fire and "literally
blasted a path through this difficult strip for me," admitted
Colonel MacHugh.
"We advanced a little towards a creek;
there we were attacked by tanks. The C.O. of my leading
battalion panicked and the battalion took fright from him. It
was necessary to replace his entire battalion to restore their
The 2nd battalion took over and threw a bridgehead over
the Eure under cover of darkness. They attempted a crossing
and directed their efforts in the direction of the Argentan-Trun
road. Below the slopes of the forest limit, they were halted by
Tigers, losing all the ground won. Leaving dead and prisoners,
they had to fall back south of N 24 bis.
More fortunate, the 3rd Battalion on the right captured Sai at
1530 hours, reaching the main road at 1700 hours before the
hamlet of Bordeaux, despite bridges blown up by the S.S. and
machine-gun posts in the stream at the edge of the forest.
In the château of Urou a German lieutenant declared that
evening to anyone prepared to listen: "We are finished, we are
surrounded on all sides."
The long columns of vehicles travelling north-east ahead of
the divisional lines through Saint-Lambert and Chambois were
the advance guards of 358th Regiment which, on the right of
Colonel MacHugh's regiment, had succeeded in crossing N 24
bis and entering Gouffern Forest. They had been hampered by
the density of the undergrowth, the steep country and the thick
smoke from trees burnt by the phosphorus bombs. From their
eventual
positions on the southern spur of the forest, the
gunners attached to the 35th Regiment came across an extra-
