II2
The Battle of the Falaise Gap
"When is H-hour?"
"For Billotte immediately; for Roumianzoff this evening; for
Dio tomorrow, Sunday."
The Billotte group moved off. Two columns, one led by
Warabiot along the D 31, the second led by Putz along the
N 138. They were to rendezvous in Sées.
But Sées was on the programme of the 5th U.S. Armoured
Division. Under strong air cover, Combat Command A, the left
pincer of General Oliver's division coming from Mesle, had
arrived at 1o1o hours. Two hours later the French armour
On the main square crowded with people in the blistering
heat, American and French officers mingling with civilians
among the tanks, argued vehemently as to the distribution of
the routes. Leclerc had to intervene in person.
"You have no right here,"
shouted the 5th Armoured
Division's Chief of Staff.
"We're only passing through," replied the French Com-
mander with a stiff upper lip. "We have decided to by-pass the
Forest of Ecouves."
"Argentan is our pigeon. Our tanks need the N 158," claimed
"And Ecouves is ours," replied Leclerc, his cold blue eyes
flashing steel; they were capable of terrifying even his most
devoted supporters. "Let Billotte cross the town and join the
N 808 and then the N 24 bis."
A gentleman's agreement being concluded, Warabiot left for
Mortrée and Saint-Christophe. Putz plunged into the tall woods
on the road to Tanville. Hardly had he entered the forest than
he clashed with the spearhead of the 116th Panzer, which had
just deployed on either side of the road. Harassed, dislodged
and cut to pieces in a battle lasting two hours, the Germans fled
into the forest, pursued by the French infantry?
While the battle was in progress, Major Gribius, Chief of
Divisional Intelligence, hurried from his HQ at Bourg-le-Roi
to the Alençon bridge in a panic.
"Mon général, the Americans have given us orders to
evacuate any troops we may have in the Ecouves forest. Their
bomber squadrons are taking off any moment to carpet-bomb
the remains of the 9th Panzer."
E2. General Maczek. His ist Polish
losed the gap from the east.
23. Chaplain Stopa of the
loth
Polish Dragoons captured 72
prisoners
without
firing
a
ingle shot.
24. Lieutenant Karcz of the roth Polish
Dragoons "physically"
closed the
pocket by outstripping Captain L.
Waters
Infantry Regiment.
359th
U.S.
