pg_0009.pdf:
240
25.
NOE TO DE TAKEN ON SHORE.
- 6 -
NOTE - Tasks 137,
139, 140 and It will have to be coordinated
with. 3 Canadian Infantry Division through Royal Artillery
channels.
(b) 107 A ti Bty.
On arrival final objective Self-propelled Iroop will. be disposed in
reserve battalion area - see Irace 3 - and will support EAST RIDING
YEOMANRY in its counter attack roles
disposed to proteot whole Brigade locality.
Battery will coordinate the siting of all infantry and Royal Artilleny
anti-tank guns and minefields within the brigade locality.
Platoon 253 Field Company®
(a) Tasks.
Clearance of Brigade forward routes.
(b) Marking of minefield areas.
Standard red and white gap signs will be used.
Cleared carriage-ways of roads will be marked by pairs of gap signs
every 200 yas.
Cleared verges will be marked by notice boards at 400 yds and gap signs
noved out fron carriage-way.
Verges will be cleared to 10 foat width only.
RIGHT verges will be cleared in priority to LEFT.
(o) The following assault ridging equipment is being landed by Royal
Engineers 3 British Infantry Division:
8 Class 5 Folding Bridge Equipment rafts
21+ Mark III Assavlt Boats.
Half this equipment will be available for 9 British Infantry
Brigade on call to 3 British Infantry Division®
(a) Platoon 253 Field Corpany will also be prepared to assist in:-
(1)
assault demlitions
(ii) rafting.
(e) One 22 set with Platoon HQ will be netted to Brigade 'A' Wave. In
addition,
units will give every facility to Royal, Engineers to pass
information on battalion nets.
Assembly and Movement.
(a) Vehicle parties landing on NAN Sector are being assembled, and as the
tactical situation pernits,
are being moved along the lateral TAIlLEVILIE
0082 - LA DELIVERANDE 0281 to a 3 British Infantry Division Traffic Post
for orward moves to units,
(b) A11 vehicle parties will be briefed with their probable routes and
destinations as laid down in 3 British Infantry Division Aarinistrative
(a)
Cormanders will impress on their subordinates the vital importance,
articularly during the initial stages,
of keeping the forword routes
clear.
f the advance is temporarily held up by enemy action
transport
must be dispersed into fields so as not to block the flow fron tho
beaches.
Tanks should proceed across country so as not to block routes.

