pg_0005.pdf:
3.
50
9.
10.
NOT, TO BE TAKIN ON SHORE.
- 2 -
Additional. Troops:
Sce Appendix 'A' attachea.
Royal, Navy.
A mixed force of battleships,
cruisers and destroyers is
bombarding eneny coastal batteries,
beach and inland defences on 3 British
Infantry Division front and flanks on D dajo
Royal Air Force®
(a) Heavy night bombers are bombira selected coastal battories night D-l/D doye
(b)
Heavy, median and fighter bombers on inlana batteries and defences D day.
(a) Medium day bombers on CAN H + 5 hours and heavy day bombers at H + 7 houre.
(a)
Neutralisation of eneny counter-attack forces as ordered.
(e) Tactical reconmissane infornation on requeste
demolition tasks on 3 British Infantry Division fronts
On conclusion these
tasks, C Squadron will withdraw displaying following recognition signals:-
Yellow celanese band round turret and if necessary reloasing
yellow snoke and with guns pointing to the rear.
For further information see para 32,
9 British Infantry Brigade Group
will land after 185 Infantry Brigade
Group on QUEEN WHITE and RED - see Landing Tables/Unit Sheets already issueds
Brigade Assembly Area - sce Trace 2 attachodo
Staff Captain and unit reconnaissance parties as shown in Unit sheets
will land with 185 Infantry Brigade and prepare unit assembly areas.
Six Provost 5 Section 3 British Infantry Division Provost Company under
Staff Captain will signpost all routes within the Brigade Assembly Arca.
Unit seconds-in-cormand and one officer will alear the beaches of unit
vehicles and feed forward groups of vehicles and personnel as collected to the
Brigade Assembly Area.
One officer representative will return to
the beaches and act
sinilarly for vehicles arriving on second and third tides.
Capture of Brigade Concentration Area - see Iraoe 2.
(a) 2 LINCOLNS with in support EAST RIDING YEOMANRY
Self-propelled Troop 101 Anti-Tank Battery,
Platoon (less two Sections) 253 Field Company,
under Command One Seation 9 Field Ambulance,
will destroy enemy defences in CRESSERONS 0480 and PLUMETOT 0479 prior to
advance of remainder of the Brigade Group.
(b) Route - via IION SUR MER.
(a) Timings - no nove forward, exoept by reconnaissance pataols, until
ordered by Bde HQ.
Div Cond may cut this out according
to the situation.
Advance to Concentration Area.
On capture of Brigade Concentration Area by 2 LINCOLNS Group, reminder
of Brigade will advance;-
- 2 -

