pg_0041.pdf:
- 8
NEP TUNE - BIGOT
TOP SECRET
NOT TO BE TAKEN ON SHORE
(e) Eny
case of serious interference that cannot be adjusted mutually
by the units concerned will be reported
TO T
the Bde Sig Offr.
13. CODE SIGNS
(a) Current Code Signs will be used.
Troops will embark holding 28 days
Code Signs in seven day extracts (up to
the end of Jun approx).
landing extracts showing code signs from D + 14 onwards will be
destroyed
by the most effective means available.
(b) No Code sign documents except the extracts detailed in para (a) above will
be taken ashore on D Day.
(c) Code signs will be changed at 0200 hours daily.
(a) A full Div extract will not be landed below Bae HQ.
Units will make
an extract from the Code Sign lists already issued,
showing only the
minimmportion of the order of battle outside the Bde Go.
code sign list will be destroyed as secret waste and a certificate
rendered to this HQ to that effect.
14• MAP RUMRINCE CODE
(a) MAPLAY and UNICODE will be used.
(b) MAPTAY keys for period Dainus 1 to D plus 10 ( already issued) will be
used initially. Any other current keys will be destroyed on D minus
1.
(o) Units will issue keys to cover period D minus 1 to D plus 10.
15. SLIDEX
Keys (Div and Unit) will be issued to cover period D minus 1 to
D plus 10.
On D minus 1 any other current SLIDEX keys held will be
destroyed.
16. USE OF SLIDEX UNIT CARDS
Where SLIDIX Unit cards are in use, it is the responsibility of the
originating unit to ensure that their key is in the hands of any supporting
arms who may be wonting on their net.
17. OTHER CODES
No codes, other than those in paras 14 and15 above will be used.
18, CIPHER
Current keys will be used. Ble and Bn HQs will operate normal cipher
afloat and ashoe.
19. AUTHENTICATION
(a) All wireless nets in Bde group - SLIDEX.
(b) Joint Jorce NI Broadcast - See Annexure 'B'.
(a) Whenever the recipient of a transmission has a doubt as to its
authenticity he should initiate a challenge.
This is particularly
necessary in the case of a message purporting to break, relax or
reimpose wireless silence.
........../20. Code Words.

