Book a visit - The National Archives <noreply@nationalarchives.gov
i October 2025 08:10
Duan - Standard visit - Thursday 09 October 2025
ert Duan
/ 09 October 2025
Document reading room
Comp use DA
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
() Each branch of the taft in the headquarters of a formation, subordinate command
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
in) fier / G. HQ. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept Nom the An the case of odinions and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
mportant phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops :
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
vi) Changes in establishment or streneth.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
ficers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viji) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
CuN, or me to notiould be ent dod up, not in the order )ven bi , it at he time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(1) A copy ore fit retion fee, us an enTo over) ty of cure rottine of
(úi) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
NoTE B.— See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
(See PAsA., Voll diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
ot oher person hend he made die hot the officer we tails to the entries is tve commander
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
the SPECT NOT The one ted should to time the infoem at one tearder tea
ORIGINAL
PUPLICATE +
MAY 1944
ME Form 160
SECRET
Fall instructions on the
mianies are
ed in Midle & re Training
Pamphlet No. 9 (Part XXII).
WAR DIARY
of
152 INE BE WORKSHOP REME
From
As ABOVe.
PARA. 3.—Omitted.
INDEX
Narrative (A.F. C2118)
Appendices:
Situation at Nightfall (M.E. Forms Nos. 161 or 162)
Signal Log
Messages connected with Log (in chronological order)
Operation Orders or Instructions issued
Operation
Formations
Orders and Instructions received from
Higher
Intelligence Summaries issued
Administrative Orders or Instructions issued
Administrative Orders or Instructions received
Strength States, Field Returns, etc.
Other Papers
* Fos.
* Fos.
Nos.
Nos.
Nos.
Most Secret Supplementary War Diary
• Each document to be numbered and details entered here
+ Cross out whichever is not applicable
respatched t
G.H.Q. M.E.F.
Date
Instructions for compiling the War Diary are given inside this cover
WO 171/677
14625542
Return by (20/11/2025 13:51
