APPENDIX "A"
ReF OR/30.
256 Aruy Dely Sqn R. A.C.
0 / Store Botion 1,02 95 5 or Bot 410.
0 1/ Controlled Stores 2Cd Ve Pay 512 CorpS Ora Tra Pke
Equipment a 1o11 dope dura fety the issue and receipt of a11 A Veh Tools and
Stores Secto Amy Dely Squipall be responsible for the issue of Tools and Equipment
to equip to scale all New Tanks and Repaired Tanks from ABW's and other W/Shops.
All reports concerning general deficiencies of kit on
new Tanks and Tanks received from W/Shops will continue to be rendered to this HQ
Stores Sect Corps Dely Son will be responsible for the issue of Tools and Equipt
to Battleworthy Soale, and complete scale if possible, to repaired Tanks
received
From w/shops into Corpa Del Sal also be responsible for issuing to End Del Son a11
one pa do then rob ta so lon to house to Battlemorthy Solo all ropaired
A representative stock of all Battleworthy Items for Tanks appropriate
to the Formation you servenwill be held.
These stores will be recorded on account cards which will be maintained
in Visidex Cabinets.
A stock
check of all items will be held irmediately and this figure will
be recorded on each
card.
Stores held will not be regarded as complete kits but as a forward
holding of Veh Tools and Equipt to replace deficiencies.
All issues and receipts will be recorded and
items demanded by Sgns
which are not available or for which you
of each item required to
Demands will be prepared in triplicate. Stores
on AFG 975 or 994,
Replenishment of stook mill be ode tilla toss ered in Stores Sextion
and addressed c/o A.D. O.S.
2 Arnd Replacement Gp.
seen from this that Tank Nos will
to into dot tony report i so denne with present protta that you contamue
indicate the w/chong from
You mi also entire that i have in git du thn vi 11 enha
to check any dásorepancies between the deficiency report from w/Shops and the
All demands received from Fwd Sans will be met as far as possible from
our stock. All items issued will be crossed off the indents which will then be passer
for issue of the outstanding
items. All stores available at this
and will be utilised to
equip the Tanks to scale when these are received in Sgns.
of kit which
surplus to your requirements
Designation.
Mare tables i
ji) Important matters
1 Nov 440
•..... 27 Arma"
.... Maion
Bde Ord Fd Pk.
WO 171/625
14628011
Return by (22/11/2025 11:16:21)
1682
