CHAPTER 7
PREPARATION AND PLANNING FOR THE INVASION OF
NORTH-WEST EUROPE
C.C.O. Visits the United States to explain British views on the re-entry into The Continent
During May, 1942, the Chiefs of Staff decided that, as the result of their study of the American
proposals for the re-entry into the Continent, it would be advisable for the C.C.O. to visit the United
States to explain to the American Naval and Military authorities the British
views regarding
this operation. Accordingly, during the first week in June the C.C.O. flew to Washington and
discussed the matter with the Combined Chiefs of Staff Committee.
At a meeting held with them on 4th June, the C.C.O. outlined the position in the U.K. with
regard to the planning and training for the invasion of the Continent.
His remarks as recorded in
the minutes of this meeting were as follows :-
"(a) Planning
The present organisation in London for planning consisted of a Committee composed of
General Paget, Comander-in-Chief, Home Forces; Air Marshal Sholto-Douglas, Commander-
in-Chief, Fighter Command; Vice-Admiral Ramsay lately Admiral Commanding at Dover ;
General Chaney as U.S. representative;
and himself.
These officers met once or twice
a week and their staff officers were in daily contact.
Two types of operations were envisaged for 1943. First in a condition of affairs where the
Russian campaign was still in progress ('Greenback'), in which case German air forces
in the West were weak and the plan was, after landing on a wide front in Northern France
and securing the port of Antwerp, to strike straight eastwards towards Berlin.
Second, in
a state of affairs in which relatively few forces were engaged in Russia and we should have
to expect stiff opposition both from the strong German air and ground forces (' Round-up').
In this latter case two different proposals were under examination.
One, favoured by the
Army and Air Force, was for our forces to strike to the eastward at once and the other,
favoured by the Naval Staff and the Combined Operations Staff, was first to secure the
Peninsular of Brittany and the French Atlantic Ports to enable the follow up and mainten-
ance to be put through them. An immediate decision on which of these two plans should be
adopted was not vital, as, in either case, embarkation arrangements along the whole of the
British south coast were necessary; all ports of this coast would have to be used and the
preparatory disposition for both troops and ships would be the same.
(b) Assault Technique
The technique of the initial assault was under constant examination.
Many exercises
had been carried out, and raiding operations had been and would continue to be undertaken
to test the various methods of assault which had been evolved.
Raids on a larger scale than
those already undertaken were planned, but it was important that these raids should not
assume the appearance of an invasion. Great store was set on the value of French patriots
in the final invasion, and it was important that these patriots should not rise prematurely.
Arrangements were being made for adequate leadership and arming of the French population.
It had been found that during a night approach not more than 30 small craft could be
relied on to move in one convoy without confusion.
The maximum number of men that
could be landed on any one beach from the Higgins Eureka type of craft was therefore 600.
British assault landing craft, which were armoured, had a somewhat larger lift, allowing 840
to he landed in one fight and the value of the armor had been proved in oberations. In either
case, however, the density which we could put ashore on any one beach was insufficient
particularly when vohinla landine craft for tanks. Bren carriers or guns had to be substituted
had been proposed.
tor personnel carrying craft. For this reason the Giant R cratt, capable of carrying 200 men,
of 4,000 men could be landed which greatly improved the prospects of success.
Even if only 20 of these craft proceeded in coant to a beach, a total
* Later L.C.P. (L).
52
When General Marshall visited C.O.H.Q. in April, 1942, he asked Admiral Mountbatten
for landing ships and landing craft and take over the new
The latter replied, Telegraph to-day to double every British order
orders yourself.
roduce 300 L.C.I. (L), 150 for you and 150 for me,' and he sketched out the design of the
L.C.I. (L) there and then on a piece of paper.
With regard to infantry assault ships, only ten were at present available though many
more of the cross-Channel type were being taken up and adapted. These would prove
invaluable in the event of a flank attack on the western seaboard being necessary, as they
could carry relays of assault landing craft.
The technical problem of getting tanks ashore at night had been solved and had beer
explained to certain U.S. Officers.
investigated.
The destruction of beach defences was now being
(c) Topographical Data
Accurate information
on the nature of the beaches was essential and coastal
reconnaissance was being undertaken by the R.A.F. who photographed the beaches at all
stages of the tides.
From these photographs, charts showing the beach gradients were being
prepared, and models of the whole coast and of small sections of it were being made.
(d) Supplies
In view of the unfavourable nature of the shallow beaches on the French coast and the
difficulties with surf, it was essential that adequate ports, through which the troops could be
supplied, should be captured at the earliest possible moment.
C.C.O. felt that both Calais
and Boulogne, having narrow shallow entrances, would be blocked and so denied to us.
It would be necessary to use such ports as Havre and Cherbourg and possibly certain of the
Atlantic coast ports.
One of the problems connected with supply was the provision of the
necessary gasoline.
The shortage of small tankers and the dangers which they ran from
fires caused by incendiaries, had proved a difficult problem, but it was now being solved
by the production of a form of Trans-Atlantic cable with a hollow core which could be laid
at a speed of about 4 knots and through which 100 tons of gasoline could be pumped each
day.
These cables were being made in 35-mile lengths which, for the wider parts of the
Channel, could be joined.*
(e) Communication
A Committee had been formed in London, consisting of communications officers of the
three British Services, together with communications officers of the U.S. Army and Navy,
to whom an officer of the U.S. Air Corps would shortly be added, who were evolving a
common technique for use in the assault.
Assault Headquarter Ships were being built which
would act as Divisional Headquarters and which could be run ashore if necessary to prevent
sinking by enemy action.
They contained plotting rooms and map rooms and had very
comprehensive wireless equipment.
Each of these Headquarters Ships would contain the
Commanders of the three Services responsible for a divisional front, and arrangements were
being made for cables to be run out to them from England as soon as they had been beached.
They would be protected by special A.A. vessels and smoke clouds.
A new technique had
been devised, known as ' Combined Support Control' by which support from warships'
guns
light or heavy support craft, bombers, fighters or smoke-laying aircraft could be given at the
request of Battalion Commanders.
(f) Manning of Landing Craft
The problem of the provision of personnel to man the landing craft had proved a formid.
able one.
*Some 20 to 30 thousand officers and men would be required, but few active Service
naval officers or petty officers were available.
It was therefore necessary to train men from
the very beginning, first in initial training centres where they would learn to handle their
craft, then in combined training centres where they would train with the Army.
(g) Training
The problem of training personnel of the three Services to be used for the assault was
one of the most important, and the U.S. staff officers now in London were helping with this
difficult problem.
Certain British officers had been sent over to the United States to gain
experience from U.S. Amphibious Forces, and these close contacts were proving invaluablie
(Cop This chen a cod on To inter Tetolen Varar
produced at a discussion between C.C.O., his D.X.S.R
WO 277/21
2
7
