These will comprise units and personnel of the three
operations
establishments
may be required.
A list of existing
services, and together will form such combined
Annexure III(e)* to this Directive.
establishments is shown at
The local administration of all such establishments will continue to be the responsibility of the
parent service concerned.
7. This directive is issued with the concurrence of the Supreme Allied Commander, South-East
Asia Command.
Signed, C. J. AUCHINLECK,
Commander-in-Chief.
12th December, 1944.
* Omitted.
APPENDIX 20
DIRECTIVE
TO THE DIRECTOR OF COMBINED OPERATIONS, INDIA AND
SOUTH-EAST ASIA-JUNE, 1945
Status
1. You are appointed Director of Combined Operations in India under the Commander-in-Chief in
India and in South-East Asia Command under the Supreme Allied Commander, South-East Asia.
carrying out your duties you will, as necessary,
have direct access to the Commander-in-Chief in India
and to the Supreme Allied Commander, South-East Asia, on all matters for which you are responsible
to them.
You will also hold yourself available to attend meetings of the Commander-in-Chief's (India) War
Committee and Chiefs of Staff Committee, and of the Supreme Allied Commander, South-East Asia,
when required.
You will work in closest touch with the Head of Combined Operations on the Staff of the Supreme
Allied Commander.
In addition, you will act as the representative in India and South-East Asia Command of the Chief
of Combined Operations, and will keep him directly informed on matters affecting combined operations.
Responsibility in General
2. Your responsibility in general will be :—
(a) To advise the Commander-in-Chief in India, the Supreme Allied Commander, South-East Asia,
and appropriate Commanders of all three services on the doctrine of combined operations,
as approved by the Chief of Combined Operations.
(b) To act in an advisory capacity as may be required by the Commander concerned during all
stages of the preparation for a combined operation.
(c) To study the tactical and technical problems of amphibious warfare.
(d) To provide advice and instructions in combined operations technique to such formations,
units and individuals as may from time to time be detailed to undergo amphibious training.
(e) To initiate and carry out trials and research for the modification to suit local conditions of
all forms of technical equipment including ships, craft and vehicles peculiar to amphibious
warfare.
(1) To coordinate the development, as affected by local conditions, of communication material
and inter-communication technique in amphibious warfare.
(The application of these general responsibilities is dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.)
Preparation for Combined Operations
3. At all stages of preparation for combined operations you will be prepared and available :-
a) To give specialist advice as may be required by the Commander-in-Chief concerned, or by the
Force Commanders appointed by him
(b) To advise Commanders, as may be required, on the special training of their forces.
murther, you will advise and assist as necessary in overcoming technical dificulties which may
become apparent during the preparatory stages of operations.
234
Training
4. Your responsibilities will be •_
(a) To co-ordinate and direct the basic training policy for amphibious warfare in respect of all
three services in South-East Asia Command as well as in India.
(3) To control all combined training establishments,
and to ensure
that the training imparted
there is in accordance with the doctrine and technique of amphibious warfare as approved
by the Chief of Combined Operations.
(c) To maintain at all times intimate liaison with the appropriate training authorities in India
and South-Hast Asia command.
5. In respect of the training in combined operations of formations or units your responsibility is
limited to the provision of advice, instruction, and the necessary training facilities.
The
completion of the training to the necessary standards remains the responsibility of the
Commanders concerned.
Control of Combined Operations Establishments
6. In order that you should fulfil adequately your functions certain units and personnel will be
placed under your control.
These will comprise units and personnel of the three services, and together will form such combined
operations
establishments as
mav
be
required.
A list of existing establishments is shown at
Appendix
"A
›* to this direcuive
The local administration of all such establishments will continue to be the responsibility of the
parent service concerned.
7. This directive is issued jointly by the Commander-in-Chief in India, and the Supreme Allied
Commander, South-East Asia.
LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN,
Supreme Allied Commander.
23rd June, 1945.
J. AUCHINLECK
-eM.eN aI
Commander-in-Chief,
23rd June, 1945.
* Omitted.
APPENDIX 21
COMBINED OPERATIONS ORGANISATION IN INDIA
ments are properly met.
2. The requirements may be summarised as follows :—
(a) Basic training, Army, Navy, Air.
(b) Formation training, Army, Navy, Air.
(c) Development in technique.
(d) Development in material.
(e) Provision of special equipment.
(f) Provision of special personnel.
(g) Promulgation of information.
3. The following
considerations are fundamental to any arguments that may arise on these
subjects :-
(a) Basic training is the concern of base establishments.
(b) Formation training is the concern of Commanders.
(c) Policy must come from South-East Asia Command (S.E.A.C.).
(a) Requirements which spring from planning must come from S.E.A.C.
(e) Administration must be the concern of the authority responsible for the supply of personnel
and material and movement in the area.
4. In considering the functions of the two staffs,
it is clear that D.C.O.(I.) is at present a "basic"
or home based staft, and H.C.O.R., as a member of S.E.A.C'3 Staff is on the level which decides policy,
and gives directions, but does not directly command.
Basic Training
5. All basic training in the three services is undertaken by base organisations.
The Navy
with hace ctaffs.
-whether R.N. or R.I.N., and the Air Force undertakes all their amphibious base training
The Admiralty
and Air Ministry issue
the directions,
the normal channels administer the establishments.
The Army does
the sade in toff, and wartage,
jungle warfare, or normal infantry, gunner, R.E., etc., training.
235
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
