The necessity for reliance on the 4-gallon tin may be partly attributable to
it not having been realized earlier how great would be the increase in petrol
consumption in the Middle East.
In less than a year,
20,000 to 630,000 gallons a day.
it had risen from
Considered in terms of returnable cans,
it was estimated that, to cope with the latter figure, and allowing for a 20 day
turn-round, over three million 4-gallon cans would be needed initially, and
wastage of 15,000 cans a day would occur.
Reliance on the non-returnable
tins was inevitable, but the consequent losses through leakage and damage to
tins are a measure of the reluctance with which this policy was accepted.
Aviation spirit was distributed partly in steel barrels made in the Suez
plant, but these were not satisfactory
Italians found in Eritrea.
containers for general use, as the
They depended on steel casks as their standard
containers in the early part of the
war,
but this led to difficulties in the
mountainous country, where parking spaces were rare, and barrels were too
heavy to manhandle easily over rough ground.
Nevertheless, we had a use
for their barrels, some thousands being shipped to Middle East.
Production of Packed Petrol
In addition to bulk shipments of petrol from the Persian Gulf and the
Dutch East Indies, large quantities of packed petrol were being shipped to
Middle East in non-returnable tins.
Ignorance of the correct methods of
handling cased petrol, and carelessness, caused very great losses in these
consignments.
P.O.L. specialists had long been advocating the provision of
specially equipped petrol carrier ships as a counter-measure, and they were
at length provided in 1941 (see also Chapter IV).
Two of these ships were used to build up a Middle East reserve of cased
M.T. spirit of 20,000 tons at Port Sudan, and of 5,000 tons each at Massava
and Aden.
This was part of a scheme to safeguard our supplies of petroleum
products in the event of Suez being put out of action or the Canal blocked,
or of Haifa being put out of action, or even of successful invasion from the
Western Desert.
The Port Sudan stock represented one month's requirement
at full operational rates for the existing force, and the others were a reserve
for East Africa.
In addition, 15,000 tons of aviation spirit were distributed
between the three places.
The whole operation coincided with an unforeseen
demand by Tenth Army in Iraq for maintenance and reserves.
The situation threw a heavy strain on the Abadan can factory, and in
July, 1941, it was apparent that the actual and foreseen demands on it woud
six months to complete, and that demand exceeded capacity.
decision was taken to give Iraq priority for M.T. spirit from Abadan, win)
absorbed the can output of that plant, and to meet the Middle East demand
from India and the
Dutch East Indies.
The Indian spirit proved to be of
poor stability, and only 5,000 tons of it could be accepted by Middle Bas.
Middle East to Iraq.
To relieve the strain at Abadan, two tin-making plants were transferred fron
Shipping shortages, and loss of materials and supplies by enemy action
were constant impediments to the production of cased petrol, and this wa
again complicated at the end of 194 by a serious shortage of tinplate.
demand due to the campaign in Libya was enormous, and shipments from
did not arrive.
The Ministry of supply rue, sed 20,00 tons b
170
alleviate the situation, but the shortage persisted, and was aggravated by
Japanese successes in the tin-producing areas of the Far East.
was therefore successfully introduced as a substitute
Terne-plate
Provision of Lubricants
The provision of lubricants required special arrangements, as they were
not available from Middle East or Far East sources of petroleum supply.
Until early in 1941, basic oils were shipped in bulk from U.S.A. to the United
Kingdom, where they were blended and packed.
The finished product was
then shipped to Middle East.
After that time, in order to save tanker space
and to minimize the risk of enemy
interference, lubricants were packed in
U.S.A., and shipped direct to the theatre of operations.
This proved a more
satisfactory system, even though during 1941 losses by enemy action averaged
5,000 tons monthly.
P.O.L. Units
By August, 1941, the strength of P.O.L. units in Middle East had been
built up to two
Bulk Petrol
Storage Companies, two Bulk Petrol Filling
Centres, three
Bulk
Petrol
Transport Companies,
nive Type "A"
five
Type "B", and four Type "C" Petrol Depots, all R.A.S.C., and one Petrol
Depot, R.I.A.S.C.
The Storage Companies proved among the most useful employed in the
theatre, mainly because, with their high ratio of officers to other ranks, they
provided an excellent training ground for officers, and also because they were
made up of small self-contained sections which could be employed on
detached duty.
Personnel from these companies were used, generally in
detachments of not less than one section, on the following duties: —
(a) Holding and issuing bulk stocks at main installations.
(b) Operating refuelling stations.
(c) Petrol depot operation.
(d) Filling containers, mainly at refuelling centres.
(e) Construction and maintenance of bulk outfits and refuelling stations.
(t) Operation of petrol D.I.Ds.
The Base Petrol Filling Centres were unsuitable for the conditions of the
Western Desert campaigns, and their technical equipment was too elaborate
and unwieldy.
None of them functioned as complete units until one went
to Tripoli in January, 1943; and the personnel were employed on a variety
of other duties in connection with P.O.L.
As the result of campaigning
experience, the formation of Mobile Petrol Filling Centres was proposed in
August, 1941, in the hope that supplies of returnable containers would
materialize.
The first units of this type arrived in Middle East a year later.
The Bulk Petrol Transport Companies were at first only equipped with
800-gallon tankers, Tran proved much too low and wasteful in machiner
as an upper limit, but
War Office could not supply 2,500-gallon vehicles.
The units were la but War Of with larger captured italian tankers from
The establishments of the Petrol Depots stood the test of time very
satisfactorily, except that thyPe " was found to be too small to operate
171
WO 277/21.
27
W0277/26
