Responsibility for Training Beach Groups in the United Kingdom
Early in 1942, the Army Council announced the formation of a permanent organisation
to undertake overseas operations, to be known
as the Expeditionary Force.
Headquarters
Expeditionary Force was located at Largs together with Headquarters Combined Trainings
the latter remaining under command of the Commodore Combined Operations.
Expeditionary
Force responsibilities,
which were laid down at the time, included assisting the Commodore
Combined Operations in the supervision of the training of Expeditionary Force units and formations
at C.T.C.s.
Although the ultimate responsibility for training Expeditionary Force units rested
with the Commander Expeditionary Force, it will be noted that considerable assistance in their
training was given by C.T.C.s.
between Headquarters Expeditionary Force and C.O.H.Q.
The gradual development of a beach organisation was worked out
New techniques, after inter-Services
agreement, were published under the direction of the Chief of Combined Operations, who became
the central authority around which development took place, and who was responsible for
co-ordinating the requirements of all three Services in these matters.
Beach Group Training in the United Kingdom
a meeting was held in C.O.H.Q. at which the Commodore Combined
Operations presided.
Vice-Admiral Combined Training,
Gis UP lies at attrat fois me Wing at we Chit was de Mobile Naval Base Defence ODirector
Director of Transportation and Director
(1) That beach training should be carried out at the Combined Training Centre, Dundonald.
A programme drawn up by the Commodore Combined Operations was agreed in
(2) That the Expeditionary Force Beach Training Centres should operate in conjunction
with the C.T.C., Dundonald.
(3) That personnel of the three Services should live together at Dundonald to foster the
team spirit required by the Beach Organisation.
(4) That R.M. and R.E. units to be employed in similar work should receive the same
training and work to the same standards.
(5) That beach parties trained in combined operations should be reserved for that purpose.
(6) That the R.A.F. should be invited to include in their Servicing Commandos a Beach
Liaison Officer to supervise the handling of R.A.F. stores and undergo training with
In April the same year, Headquarters Expeditionary Force started the training of Beach
Groups in conjunction with the Combined Training Organisation.
By this time a standardised
Army Beach Group had been evolved, which was designed to su tort the lading of ce Baitalion
Beach Groups were formed from detachments from
Each Beach Group carried out three weeks
followed by ten days at Dundonald. Beach Groups were numbered consecutively 1, 2, etc., on
On completion of training, personnel were returned to their parent units, but were
earmarked for return to the Beach Group, with which they had trained, when required.
of training was designed to complete the training of one Beach Group every ten days. These Beach
Movement Control Group
Officers Ratings/O.R.s
Det. Army Transportation Coy. R.E.
Det. Docks Operating Coy. R.E. ..
2 (N.C.O.s)
10(1
Offr.
Mechanical Equipment Sec.
3 dets)
Three secs. Pioneers ..
Total. Army Personnel
R.N. Beach Party sub-unit ..
112
R.A.F. Beach Party
Total :
The organisation was first tried out in Operation "Tronclad" in May, 1942, the assault on
Referring to the beach organisation, the G.O.C. Force 121 said in his report!: " Judging by
results, the administrative arrangements of Operation ' Ironclad' may be said to have worked in
the manner intended."
It must be noted, however, that on Operation " Ironclad," complete air
superiority allowed work to continue unhampered on the beach, beach conditions were perfect
and night work was made possible by a good moon.
organisation which worked had been produced.
Nevertheless, a start had been made and an
Combined Operations Pampblet No. 2, Beach Organisation and Maintenance
In the autumn of 1942, a pamphlet on Beach Organisation and Maintenance was issued under
the Direction of the C.C.O.
The term Beach Organisation was defined as including all arrangements
made by beach parties for the movement of personnel and vehicles across the beaches to assembly
areas and dumps respectively; and for their reception at those areas and dumps by the formation
and Services concerned.
for this purpose.
It also included the provision and operation of all necessary facilities
The respective naval and army responsibilities were laid down, together with the method of
development of the beach organisation in the order of landing of its various components from first
touch-down to the setting up of a ferry service and a beach maintenance area.
For the first time a standard beach party for one brigade at assault scales, known as a Brigade
Brick was laid down, the composition of which is shown at Appendix 23.
Naval Beach Commandos
In October, 1942, Admiral Mountbatten wrote to the Admiralty expressing concern at the
poor quality of officers and ratings selected for beach parties and requested that the matter should
The word " party"
gave the wrong impression, being sometimes regarded as a
working party, and in order to indicate that beach parties were in fact fighting units that go ashore
in khaki battledress with the soldiers, he had arranged for them to be known in future as Naval
The Inter-Services System of Command
was pubishi, 1948, a Ce divini Optrations am het dealing with duties of Na al Ci wan the
This pamphlet dealt in greater detail with the
composition, training and employment of Naval Beach Commandos.
An agreed naval/military
chain of Command was laid down as follows :-
Naval
Senior Naval Officer Landing-
Principal Beachmaster
Deputy Principal Beachmaster
(Brigade Commander
Principal Military Landing Officer
(in development stage only)
Beach Group Commander
Military Landing Officer
Beachmaster-
-Beach Company Commander
2 i/c Beach Company
Assistant Beachmaster-
Unit Landing Officer
He shared joint respon-
section of enemy coast allocated to the brigade.
The Senior Naval Officer Landing was responsible for the organisation and control of the anchorage
and waters in his section of the coast.
He exercised control over the beaches through the Principal
Beachmaster.
The disembarkation of R.A.F. personnel and stores was the Army's responsibility.
When necessary, R.A.F. Liaison Officers were appointed to assist in the landing and clearance of
R.A.F. personnel and material.
Development in the Middle East
Owing to the circumstances surrounding the development of the beach organisation, in
particular the availability of personnel and material, the majority of training had been carried out
initially in the U.K., the development of new technique being centralised in C.O.H.Q.
' Extract from Appendix "E" to G.O.C. Force 121 Report, dated 15th June, 1942.
WO 277/21
27
3ф
