A reorganisation of the Directorate of Combined Training was carried out as advised and
this staff separated from the staff of C.O.H.Q.
In conclusion, General Laycock required a temporary staff to carry out his responsibilities,
under the Supreme Allied Commander, for the planning and preparation of small scale raids until
"Overlord"
was mounted, and requested the Chiefs of Staff approval to his plans.
The Chiefs of Staff considered this report at a meeting' at which Major-General Laycock
was present.
Broadly, they were in complete agreement with General Laycock's remarks and the way
which he had carried out the recommendations of the Bottomley Report.
They invited the C.C.O.
to investigate the possibility of amalgamating the Combined Operations Joint Planning Staff with
the Plans Combined Operations Advice and to report in due course; they agreed to the review by
an Inter-Services Establishment Committee after a three-month trial.
The full reorganisation of
C.O.H.Q. on a functional basis took shape during the Spring of 1944.
With the Admiralty assuming control of the naval side of the Command, C.O.H.Q. took over
the responsibilities designated to it in the Bottomley Report and concentrated on these for the
furtherance of Operation " Overlord".
Activities of C.M.S.F.
C.M.S.F., Major-General Wernher became a member of the C.O.S.S.A.C. Staff as he was
mainly concerned in the provision of the artificial harbours decided upon at the Quebec Conference
and the planning of " Overlord" was now in the hands of C.O.S.S.A.C. Staff.
Before leaving for Quebec, C.M.S.F, had arranged with the Minister of Supply, Sir Andrew
Duncan, for certain personnel employed by large firms to be available for the production of the
concrete caissons and other material required for the " spud piers."
Prominent among these
were Mr. John Gibson and Mr. R. A. Davis.
represent the American interests.
Brigadier-General H. B. Vaughan was nominated to
This officer had great experience in large constructional schemes
and therefore possessed considerable knowledge of the problems that confronted those responsible
the designs for which were presented to the contractors by the War Office in October, 1943.
The question of the labour and supplies for this large constructional job, also fell largely on
C.M.S.F. and here many difficulties were encountered but, in the end, surmounted.
Some idea of the vast nature of the task can be gathered from the fact that the labour force
finally numbered between 43,000 and 47,000.
Material used included 105,000 tons of steel,
850,000 tons of ballast and sand and 144,000 tons of concrete. For the steel, all specially long railway
wagons in various parts of the country were in use.
in every respect for
Feng ly it is only necesary to say that the whole project was completed on time and ready
1 C.O.S. (44) 26th meeting (O)
72
STAEDTLER
CHAPTER 9
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE PLAN FOR THE INVASION
OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE, OPERATION " OVERLORD."
The Need for Reconnaissance and Deception
Although many changes had taken place, C.O.H.Q. was still left with the responsibility of
undertaking raids.
strategic concept for " Overlord."
Raiding activity now more than ever had to be co-ordinated with the overall
In the autumn of 1943, C.O.S.S.A.C. asked C.O.H.Q. to undertake certain small scale recon-
naissance raids on their behalf, in the
Channel Islands.
Havre-Ostend area, the Cherbourg peninsula and the
The aim was not only reconnaissance but also deception, in accordance with the cover plan.
Raid and Reconnaissance Committee
and, ha rag com pyrdicate was rpled, by thie them to C. Pac and Reconnaisance Coderite
planning by Force Commanders.
When these plans were approved, the raids were carried out.
plan of " Overlord
No detailed study of the " Overlord" beaches had been made at the time the original outline
was discussed at the Quebec Conference in August, 1943.
C.O.H.Q. suggested a further study of these beaches as a result of the examination of the
Arromanches-Asnelles region from the
point of view of the artificial harbours.
Evidence was
found, in the first place from a French Guide Book, of the existence of peat in commercial quantities
at several places on these beaches.
The presence of peat suggested difficulties for wheeled and
tracked vehicles in crossing the beaches.
On 3rd November, 1943, Professor Bernal, the Experi-
mental Scientific Adviser at C.O.H.Q., wrote to 21st Army Group, who were planning to assault
across these beaches,
suggesting that a much more detailed study should be made of the peat
characteristics, and C.O.S.S.A.C. gave early approval.
From topographical, geological and biological data of the areas of the French beaches and
comparison with similar beaches in England, Professor Bernal made a hypothetical reconstruction
of the whole projected assault beach area, indicating places where peat and clay might be expected
to occur, and where the places might be covered with deep sand.
Up to this time very little was known about the bearing power of peat or sand, with softer
formations underneath.
However,
Brancaster in Norfolk was eventually chosen as the locality
The Combined Operations
Pilotage Parties from C.O.H.Q. carried out their preliminary training at Brancaster in December,
1943, and eventually made reconnaissances of the beaches for " Overlord" in December, 1943, and
January, 1944. On 1st February, 1944, C.O.H.Q., in conjunction with 21st Army Group, were able
to issue a comprehensive report on the conditions of the Normandy beaches.
This report was fully
borne out by the conditions experienced on "D" day.
Brancaster beach was also used for trials on the effect of bombs on the " going" for wheeled
and tracked vehicles on beaches which had been attacked from the air.
As a result, only 100-1b.
bombs with instantaneous fuses were used against beach defences in " Overlord."
The small raids and the beach reconnaissance carried out by Combined Operations Pilotage
Parties enabled the Allies to form a striking picture of the novel and formidable German beach
The clearance of these beach obstacles had been made an Admiralty responsibility but
C.O.H.Q. frequently gave advice.
Every form of beach obstacle encountered during any recon-
naissance was reconstructed at one or another of the Combined Operations Establishments and
methods of destroying or neutralising it were decided upon after extensive trials.
This technique
helped to cut down losses from beach obstacles although they were still severe.
C.O.H.Q. Advises on Training and Planning
17
extr
WO 277/21
27
3
73
