Reorganization, 1940
D.S.T., War Office, had sent out a representative to look into these
matters on the spot, and that officer advocated the abolition of the group
system, and the formation of second line transport units, to cover 40 miles,
with reserve M.T. companies behind them for the carriage of supplies on
His view was that the nearest parallel to the East African
force was the Armoured Division, with brigades acting independently far
from their sources of supply. He therefore considered that the Armoured
Divisional R.A.S.C., organized to meet these conditions, was eminently
suitable for adoption in broad outline by the E.A.A.S.C.
recommendations were approved,
abolished, and a new organization substituted in June,
1940.
The basis
of this was the Brigade A.S.C. company, organized into supply section, petrol
section, and ammunition section, with a divisional troops company on similar
lines.
These companies were to carry one day's requirements of all com-
modities for the troops they served.
The remaining transport was organized
into three troop-carrying companies, each capable of transporting the per-
sonnel of one battalion, and as many reserve M.T. companies as the available
vehicle strength would provide.
The second line companies were designed to operate over a double
echelon of 80 miles, and their workshop sections were intended to maintain
the Brigade Group " B" vehicles as well as their own.
The four brigades, two East African and two
West African, were at
the same time organized into two divisions, and the allotment of the four
brigade companies followed suit.
The reorganization, and the abolition
of the Battery Ammunition Columns, made available personnel and vehicles,
from which in June and July, 1940, were formed 16 reserve M.T. companies,
each to carry four days' supplies in bulk for one brigade, from railhead to
In the field of supplies, reorganization was also carried out, the Field
Supply Depots being changed into sections of a Supply Personnel Company,
which were placed on the establishment of third line transport, and allotted
to divisional groups as required.
Each section was able to maintain 7,500
Another Supply Personnel Company was formed from existing supply
units, and took over the railhead supply depots and detail issue depots on the
Vehicle Situation, 1940
The vehicle situation was far from
satisfactory.
Not only had the
E.A.A.S.C. units to be equipped, but also the first line transport of the West
African troops.
The vehicles required to equip the transport on mobilization had been
obtained by hasty requisitioning without inspection, and large numbers of
the vehicles which came into V.R.D. were rejected as unsuitable.
of those accepted had covered 30 to 40 thousand miles, and all had suffered
from rough usage and poor maintenance.
A heavy strain was therefore
placed on the semi-trained workshop staffs in keeping the vehicles on the
Another unfortunate result of the poor condition of these vehicles
was that the first consignments of spare parts from abroad were exhausted,
390
as soon as received, in meeting the continuous demand for replacements
on impressed vehicles.
shortage of essential M.T. stores,
may have accounted to
the campaign.
some extent for the
which was later felt acutely throughout
general neither the
Small consignments of new vehicles came from South Africa, but in
quality
quantity of vehicles could have been
sufficient for operations against the Italians, numerically superior and better
of workshop equipment for
A contributory factor to the unsatisfactory situation was the inadequacy
third class vehicles in use.
maintaining the large number of
21 workshop sets had been asked for in June,
1940, but they did not in fact arrive until September, 1940. In June that
year, when Italy came into the war, and East Africa began to be directy
affected by the war, the E.A.A.S.C. had no mobile workshop sets, except
a few locally made ones.
Frequent representations had been made to War Office for authority
to buy sufficient vehicles to complete war establishments, but no sanction
had been forthcoming.
It was now represented to War Office that vehicles
must be provided to meet the operational commitments. These required the
maintenance of two brigade groups 500 miles, one brigade group 260 miles,
and one 300 miles, beyond railhead.
15 reserve M.T. companies would
be required, averaging 80 miles a day, to maintain these forces. An additional
1,200 2-ton lorries would be needed, and even that left no reserve pool, so
with lack of repair organization, new vehicles were essential.
accepted the requirement in principle, but considered it would be unsound
to send all the vehicles until trained drivers and adequate maintenance facili-
ties were available.
The plan was therefore to ship 250 lorries at once,
and for East Africa to report the stages at which it could accept further
In addition, sanction was given for the local purchase of most of
East Africa's vehicle requirements.
The situation was further helped when
it was found that three reserve M.T. companies could be dispensed with,
and their vehicles relegated to reserve.
There would still be a large deficiency
of technical store and breakdown lorries, and of ambulances.
Arrival of South African Field Force
Besides the West African reinforcement, which incidentally brought a
*ecome assistance in the shape of 600 trained drivers, the Mobile Field
Poce of the South African Union Defence Force began to arrive in May,
The first S.T. elements included a Base Supply Depot, which was
it at Mombasa, an Advanced Supply Depot, and a Detail Issue Depot.
The arrival of the
South Africans introduced a fresh problem.
elf-contained supply system of the M.F.F., organized to meet its own peculiar
quirements, might leade to triction it a method of co-operation were not
It was decided that the control of all supplies would be the
ponsibility ne the A Dam assisted bu a senior South African
both MEt and Fact Africans nersonnel were to he organized
let to represent their interests.
At Supply Depots, which held stores
abined unit. but every effort was to be made to separate and distribute
391
W9s9e7/17
WO 277/21
27
WO277726
