be raised at an earl date. and it was therefore proposed to send over, as
reserve company, equal in lift to two reserve companies.
reinforcement personnel and vehicles, sufficient to form eight sections of a
be sent to scale, but technical vehicles and artificers could not be sent.
Equipments would
BFF would have to split two existing companies, to furnish nucleus com-
Dany headauarters and nucleus workshops for the new companies
panies which it had been intended to send.
reserve companies would be substituted for two bulk petrol transport com
company, due in the Second Contingent, but put back to March, would be
The formation of a resetve
accelerated; and one L. of C. company would be sent at the end of January,
The important point was emphasized that if War Office carried out thes
mainly composed of tippers, which were urgently
proposals. thev could not at the same time provide works M.T. companies.
struction of airfields. For every works M.T. company sent, one reserve M.T
required for the con
company must be cut out.
O.M.G., B.E.F. replied that they had stated their actual needs, immediate
and future, and these remained their needs, when it was possible to met
unmediate requirements were one L. of C. M.T. company, one worts
M.T. company, one bulk petrol transport company, and three reserve MIT.
companies, one of the latter to consist of 75 per cent. tippers.
units ultimately despatched will be seen in Appendix VB.
The list of
B.E.F. also asked for the three ambulance
car companies, due in the
second, fourth, and sixth contingents respectively, to be sent in December,
with two more; and for 250 charabancs for troop-carrying in non-operationd
conditions, but this could not be met owing to shortage of driver personnel.
Yet another demand was owing to the desire of the C.-in-C., B.E.F, to
combine three independent brigades into a division; but the difficulty was
that they had not their full R.A.S.C. organization.
War Office could make
no more R.A.S.C. available from home resources, without upsetting other
arrangements then in hand, and consequently if the R.A.S.C. for the proposi
division were provided, the B.E.F.
must forego a subsequent division
Already a large number of units had been sent out earlier than had been
planned, and each of these was holding up something else.
As an expedient to release transport for general L. of C. services, B.EP.
proposed a reduction in the third line transport of certain formations which
were nominated for line-holding roles, and were therefore not fully mobile
War Office agreed to this on condition that the units were kept in being i
their original form, so that they could be readily switched over to thi
proper functions if the operational need arose.
Animal Transport
In October, 1939, it was proposed to provide animal transport in the
B.E.P for carrving rations ete to forward positions which Mr. could not
India aoreed to provide four animal transport companies, totalling 1 536 m
reach, or where roads had been badly shelled.
To meet this commitme
and 528 Army transport carts.
an 800-1b. load and drawn by two mules, which can be instantly convertel
The latter are two-wheeled vehicles, camp.
use as pack-animals if necessary.
of December, and were followed by two pack transport companies pit
The companies arrived in France at the co
120
Cypriot drivers, from the Middle East.
R.Á.S.C. M.T. section for its second line requirements.
Each company was provided with a
Vehicle Maintenance and Repair Organization
The base M.T. depot installations, as described in Chapter III, went into
operation as planned, but under considerable handicaps.
Some of the diffi-
culties are described in Appendix VIB, but the installations also suffered from
being badly located in relation to one another.
The closely-knit organization
of the Base M.T. Depot obviously required for its maximum efficiency that
its three components should be located close to each other.
In France, how-
ever, they were not generally speaking favourably sited.
The H.R.S. was
fifteen miles from the M.T.S.D., its constant feeder.
The M.T.S.D. was some
miles from the docks, and the advanced M.T.S.D. was, until December,
actually behind the main depot; it then moved forward to Rouen.
The
V.R.D. was in three widely dispersed parks.
The growing strength of R.A.S.C. vehicles in the B.E.F., which reached
a peak figure of 20,000 excluding motor-cycles, together with the heavy wear
and tear, necessitated arrangements for lightening the load on the Base M.T.
installations.
An additional group of the three components was mobilized,
but it was not ready to go to France before the evacuation.
In the mean-
time, the strain on the H.R.S. was relieved by arrangements by which vehicles
were evacuated to the United Kingdom for overhaul by the makers, under a
Ministry of Supply scheme.
The standard system in regard to reinforcements was that R.A.S.C. per-
sonnel went, with those of other arms, to the General Base Depot; but it was
the policy of the D.S.T. that, if possible,
R.A.S.C. drivers should actually be
passed to the V.R.D., where they could be usefully employed (as the estab-
lishment of drivers for dealing with reserve vehicles was inadequate) and get
practice in driving; and that R.A.S.C. artificers should be sent to the H.R.S.
to keep their hands in until they were required for posting to units.
No provision was made in the original establishment of the S.T. Directorate
of the B.E.F. for an M.T. Inspectorate.
Experience in the war of 1914-1918
had shown this to be necessary, and action was initiated in October, 1939,
for the formation of such an establishment.
This eventually took effect in
February,
1940,
comprising a
Chief Inspector (lieut.-colonel), five other
officers,
and 41 other ranks.
The initial requirements of road transport vehicles for the N.A.A.F.I.
organization in the B.E.F. were supplied from R.A.S.C. sources, in accord-
ance with War Establishment
entitlement,
and in conformity
with Field
Service Regulations, Vol. I, which made this a responsibility of the D.S.T.
in the field.
The policy to be followed thereafter was thrashed out between
the War Office, B.E.F., and N.A.A.F.I., and it was decided that the provision
and operation of all M.T.
to be the responsibility of that
vehicles engaged on
N.A.A.F.I. services were
Corporation.
W.D.
vehicles and per-
sonnel already provided on that account were withdrawn.
It was agreed
that P.O.L. and rations for N.A.A.F.I. requirements might be issued from
Army stocks on repayment.
121
WO 277/21.
488
27
1027775
