is not strictly a specialist vehicle, as it can be used for almost all ordinary
general transport duties in case of need.
Motor coaches and troop-carrying lorries, tank transporters, amphibians.
snow-tractors, jeeps, and mobile cranes, were among the principal special
types introduced into the R.A.S.C. during the war; they are dealt with at
greater length elsewhere in this volume.
Wheeled Vehicle Committee
It was essential that D.S.T. should be represented on the War Office
Wheeled Vehicle Committee, in so far as its deliberations affected the opera-
tion and maintenance of wheeled vehicles used by the R.A.S.C. D.D.S.T.(T.)
(the head of S.T.3), or his representative, consequently attended its meetings,
to watch the interests of, and advise on, matters connected with R.A.S.C.
operated vehicles.
In January, 1944, a special sub-committee, on which S.T.3 was represented,
was set up to consider specifications for "B" wheeled vehicles.
The terms
of reference included investigation into the strong and weak points, from the
military aspect, of vehicles in W.D. service; to determine the characteristics
required of military types of vehicles; to frame specifications for future types
of vehicles for W.D. purposes, based on these investigations; and to recommend
the directions which research and development should follow, to satisfy these
specifications.
Experiments and Trials
A constant process of experiment in new designs, and trials of new types
of vehicles, was carried out under S.T. auspices.
Thus, the W.D. type troop-
carrying lorry was a product of No. 1 M.T. depot, R.A.S.C. Other examples
of vehicles tested included an experimental refrigerator lorry, with an insulated
body to hold three tons of meat, and with a self-contained refrigerating plant;
gas-producer plants on vehicles for economy of petrol; roto-trailers for the
carriage of petrol; a mobile petrol laboratory; the vehicles and trailers of
mobile field bakeries; and a 1,750-gallon petrol tanker lorry, accepted as
suitable for equipping bulk petrol transport companies.
Tank Transporters Introduced
The need for the provision of transporter vehicles for the carriage of tanks,
in order to save wear of tank tracks and fatigue of crews on long runs in
non-operational conditions, was first raised in September, 1940.
In con-
sidering the type of vehicle to be employed, the following requirements had
to be met.
A vehicle was essential, on to, or off which, a
"live" tank could
run by its own power.
vehicle, and operated by hand-winch.
Mounting ramps must be an integral part of the
a tank was not to exceed 15 minutes.
The time taken to mount or dismount
Tank transporters were generally to be operated by the R.A.S.C; bui
the same type of vehicle, only with a power-winch for loading non-runners,
would be used by R.A.O.C. recovery sections.
The initial requirement was for 1,040 transporters, that being the numbe
of tanks in an Army tank brigade or an armoured brigade.
Of these, 115
transporters were to be of 18-25 tons carrying capacity, and 325 of 40 tons
76
capacity.
The 18-ton type was only included because there were 300 American
vehicles of this sort available, otherwise the 25-ton type could obviously have
been used to carry the 18-ton tank as well.
As a first step,
American 18-ton
"White" vehicles were tried as tank
transporters by an armoured divisional R.A.S.C. in conjunction with a tank
regiment, but proved unsatisfactory; an alternative White-Rustill type was
found to be all right for loads under 24 tons.
In April, 1941, a Middle East demand for transporters was met by sending
out improvised vehicles,
consisting of Mack
10-ton lorries fitted with two
hinged ramps at the
back.
Their maximum load was officially 15 tons, but
they frequently
had to carry up to 20 tons, and were suitable for Honey,
Valentine and Crusader tanks.
They had no winching gear, and so " dead"
tanks had to be towed up by two 10-ton lorries, a process which took at least
an hour.
In June, 1941, this was followed by a very urgent demand for
transporters capable of carrying 25-ton tanks, which was met by equipping
10-ton lorries with special drawbar gear, and providing trailers of a com-
mercial type.
The provision of a 40-ton transporter presented a harder problem, and
a new design was necessary in this case.
Eventually, the American Diamond
T tractor, with a Rogers trailer,
met satisfactorily all the tests, and was
introduced into the service.
The tractor was a six-wheeled vehicle, and
fitted with winching gear; it could load a dead tank in as little as nine minutes.
The trailer was a very solid affair, unsprung and running on three axles, each
of eight pneumatic-tyred wheels.
The cross-country performance was very
limited, as the wheels of the trailer axles tended to push up a bank of sand
in the desert, or of mud on unmetalled roads in wet weather in India, which
had the effect of bogging the vehicle.
The load capacity was 40 tons, and this
type of transporter was able to carry Grants,
Shermans, and Churchills.
An articulated vehicle known as the Federal was introduced later, being
cheaper to produce than the Diamond T, but was never really satisfactory,
its carrying capacity being limited to 15 tons.
Its utility was assessed as half-
way between the Mack and the Diamond T.
The demand for tank transporters grew rapidly.
The original basis of
calculation, of one transporter for each tank in a brigade, gave way to a
more economical idea of the use of these vehicles, and, in February, 1941,
the estimate of the number of companies of transporters required for armoured
formations in all theatres was 11, each of 68 transporters.
By June that year,
as the result of new allotments of armoured formations to Middle East and
Home Forces, the requirement had increased to 40 companies of 18-ton trans-
porters, and 16 of a 25/40-ton type; but the commitment was halved after
re-examination.
In the ultimate event, the lower figure was approximately
reached, as the maximum in all theatres.
By January, 1942, four companies
were operating in Middle East, and three others were in the United Kingdom
awaiting shipment to that theatre, while the equivalent of three and a half
companies was engaged at home.
When the offensive opened at El Alamein
that autumn, Middle East had 18 heavy and 12 light transporter platoons.
The Order of Battle of First Army for the North Africa campaign provided
for five transporter companies, four heavy and one light.
21 Army
Group
had nine companies, and India and A.L.F.S.E.A. between them only four.
(37452)
77
WO 277/21
27
WO 277726
