There was no Heavy Repair Shop to serve the large number of vehicles
at the Base.
The R.A.S.C. units accordingly stepped in, and took over their
respective functions immediately, although the H.R.S, could only function
to a limited extent at first, owing to lack of accommodation.
These units
to te finally absorbed into the R.A.O.C./R.E.M.E. organization in October,
1942.
The civilian side of the scheme was operated by the state-sponsored
United Kingdom Commercial Corporation, on behalf of the Ministry
Supply; but it required a great deal of assistance from the Army.
of
The
primary need was for vehicles.
The tonnage to be carried, for Persia and
Russia, from the Persian Gulf to N.W. Persia, was under 155,000 tons a
month, and U.K.C.C. considered they could deal with this with a fleet of
1,000 fit 8- or 10-ton lorries,
the type preferred for the work.
Vehicles
were already due to arrive at Persian and Indian ports for the U.K.C.C.
and Russia, and 600 a month could be assembled at Bushire.
An order
for 2,500 lorries of the required type was placed.
There were also very heavy
calls for vehicles for Russia, but in March, 1942, it was decided that no
more could be spared for the purpose from United Kingdom manufacture.
The road transport of the U.K.C.C. operated mainly from the railhead
at Andimeshk, and also from Khanaqin, and delivered at Tabriz.
September, 1942, the number of lorries in service on this route was 2,700,
of which half were under contract, and half were Lend-Lease.
There was also an East Persian route, running from Zahidan, the rail-
head for the line from Quetta, to the Russian frontier, and operated by the
U.K.C.C., subject to supervision by G.H.Q., India.
Maintenance and Control of U.K.C.C. Vehicles
When control of Persia and Iraq was transferred to Middle East, the
latter assumed responsibility for the maintenance of M.T. vehicles of U.K.C.C.
in those countries, and demanded from the War Office all requirements of
vehicles, spare parts, tyres, and garage machinery for the Corporation.
The next development was that, in November, 1942, P.A.I.C. assumed
control of the U.K.C.C. transport.
might have led to the Corporation's lift being required for the maintenance
of British forces, and also because of the difficulties under which it was
operating, due mainly to lack of experienced European supervisory personnel.
The principal points in the arrangements made for effecting this control
were the allocation of a H.Q., L. of C. Transport Column, R.A.S.C., to advise
and assist the U.K.C.C.,
and the provision of British military
on the "Aid to Russia" routes, to control, in conjunction with U.K.C.C.
mobile patrols, the movements of corporation lorries.
These began to
operate in December, 1942.
Besides advice and assistance, and operational
control of the check posts, the Transport Column maintained liaison between
G.H.Q. and U.K.C.C. on all operational and technical matters.
Control of the U.K.C.C. fleet of lorries was effected in two ways.
The
British military check posts recorded times of entry into, and departure from,
towns where drivers tended to overstay, and to prevent lorries from strayins
off the route.
The drivers also reported to U.K.C.C. officers at various
points, and there were also inspectors who controlled the vehicles in
larger towns
378
Operation of Transport Column
The Transport Column Headquarters also commanded the military trans-
port companies which began to operate on the work of "Aid to Russia"
This was owing to an urgent call for ammunition for
two G.P.T. companies, R.I.A.S.C., were
could not be entrusted to civilian drivers, and
Studebaker 6x6 lorries from the U.K.C.C., handing over their 23-ton
Fords and Chevrolets in exchange.
The Studebaker had a load rating of
but were being operated by U.K.C.C. with loads of five
British tons, and this larger loading was continued by the Army.
in this case was from Andimeshk to Tabriz.
The companies operated throughout the winter, on a road 730 miles
long, of which only 150 miles was tarmac and the rest rough and shingle-
posts, or medical posts, workshops, or
facilities were available on the last 300 miles of the journey.
were self-contained, except that petrol was drawn en route from Anglo-
Oil Company installations.
In spite of the complete lack
facilities in the Russian zone, also climatically the worst section, casualties
of any kind were negligible.
The previous experience of the Indian drivers
was limited to driving 50-cwt. lorries on the plains, but they stood up to
the extremely cold conditions, often below zero Fahrenheit, and brought their
loads through safely.
In 1943, the Americans took over the Andimeshk route, and the British
military transport and the U.K.C.C. were transferred to the Khanagin route.
This ran via the Paitaq Pass (3,000 feet), Kermanshah, Shah Pass (6,000 feet),
Hamadan, Aveh Pass (7,500 feet), Zinjan, Mianeh, Shibli Pass (6,000 feet),
Six additional transport companies were allocated to what was now a
These included three Indian Studebaker companies,
with 5-ton lorries; two Indian Studebaker companies, with 63-ton articulated
lorries; and one R.A.S.C.
company, with Mack 10-ton Diesel lorries.
November, 1943, one R.A.S.C. company and seven R.I.A.S.C. companies
were employed on these services.
The movement of convoys was controlled by the Main Headquarters
of the Transport Column at Khanagin, and Advanced H.Q. at Hamadan, as
far as Tagistan, 400 miles out; for the last 300 miles, convoys ran on their
At Tabriz, there was a column office, a medical officer, a small camp
reception station, and an Indian Light Aid Detachment.
The turn-round in summer conditions was 14 days, plus a lay-over period
of four days at Khanaqin on return.
The lay-over period was employed as
follows: -
First day ...
...
... Unload; bathing and disinfestation of
personnel.
Second day
Third day
...
Vehicle maintenance by drivers.
Vehicle inspection by L.A.D.; repairs
by I.E.M.E. workshops.
Fourth day
... Loading; rest of day off.
379
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
