Next in the chain of supply came the bulk
storage installations al
plants, and can-making factories, some operated by military unit and se
by the civilian oil companies.
Civil Oil Companies
In connection with the supply of P.O.L. in the Middle East, the Ar
had to place
much reliance upon the civilian oil companies their god
offices, their advice, their personnel, and their material resources. These rep
afforded ungrudgingly and to the utmost possible extent, and relations way
generally harmonious between the two parties.
A report made in 194
by a member of the Ministry of Economic Warfare in Cairo throws co:
interesting sidelights on the question of these relations.
The fact that t
oil company employees were better paid than the troops was a cause d
friction, and put difficulty in the way of a greater degree of interchange
ability between oil company officials and members of the armed force.
A most important factor was said to be the desirability of allowing the ol
companies to manage their own affairs, within the limits of national policy,
as they were far better qualified to do so than any Service or other Goven.
ment authority.
It was suggested that, had closer relations existed betwee
the oil companies and the armed forces at the outbreak of war, certain
problems might have been solved more quickly and readily.
Reliance od
the 4-gallon tin was cited as an example of the lack of co-operation. In thi
connection, however, it has to be remembered that the report only discuss
local conditions in one theatre of war, and ignored wider considerations
The oil companies sometimes tried to impose their views on general POL
policy without full understanding of the strategical or tactical consideratios
governing Army requirements.
At the beginning of 1942, however, the Shell Company could no longe
provide assistance to the Ar, in the form of engineers and materia; o
pro contrary, nee to the now askin the SiT. for help in both these ropes.
As a result of this circumstance, and also because the technical staf
Relative Responsibilities, D. of W. and D.S.T.
at D.S.T's dinosal was inadequate to carry out his ordine all responsibiliti
in regard to COnstruction work in netroleum proiects i+ harame necessary to
make a local arrangement for the divisile of responsibility in this comatin.
between the Director of Works and the D.S.T.
the increasing demand for materiale recuired for erection of installations,.
Another consideration was
building can-making plants, and laying pipelines.
The division of responsibility was defined as follows:—
(a) Responsibility of Director of Works.
i Provision for oil companies of equipment which they cou
not buy.
(i) Laying pipelines and construction of tankage.
(ii) Construction of buildings for can-making plants.
(iv) Repair of ex-enemy installations.
(v) Maintenance of Arm in bulk storage installations.
198
It was only in fact the duties which had hitherto been carried by the
oil companies which had been transferred to the Works Service.
(b) Responsibility of D.S.T.
i Completion of R.S.E. scheme.
(i) Provision of can-making plants.
iii) Provision of cartons, cases, and crates, for containers.
(iv) Operation of Army bulk installations.
As hitherto, all schemes for pipelines, tankage, and ancillary equipment,
all repairs and adaptation of existing and ex-enemy installations, and all
planning in such matters,
had been the function of S.T.2., the arrangement
was at
first regarded at War Office as a somewhat dangerous precedent,
but in all the circumstances it was accepted; and a directive was later
issued, setting out relative responsibilities on P.O.L. matters of the different
services within the War Office (see Appendix XC).
Subsequent events proved that the division of responsibility in Middle
East was a wise and timely move. Without the contribution made by Works,
S.T. could not possibly have carried through all the petroleum projects
which later materialized in the theatre.
Pipelines
Owing to the fluctuating operational situation in the Western Desert,
pipelines could not be used to the same extent in this theatre as in others,
and their employment was confined to the Base areas.
The following is
a brief account of those projects which were actually carried out, and those
which were considered.
The pipeline which formed part of the original Gebel Dave scheme
was merged into the R.S.E. scheme.
An extension was
carried to the
tinplant and bulk loading facilities at Moscar, between the Canal and
Cairo.
This reduced very considerably the road haul for tankers employed
in maintaining petrol supplies to the very large camps in the area.
Exten-
sions were also carried to local airfields.
A scheme for a pipeline from Suez to Cairo was turned down by War
Office before the war as not essential on military grounds. It was carried
out in 1943 to release the large number of rail cistern and box wagons used
for the conveyance of bulk and packed petrol from Suez to the Cairo area,
both for military and civil requirements, and also the large fleet of road
tank lorries employed in the distribution of bulk petrol in that area.
proposal for the extension of this line to Alexandria was only given a low
priority by G.H.Q., Middle East, in 1941, though it had many advantages and
was backed by the Navy.
advantaged by the Navy. inted ity the change in the tactical situation,
When it was reconsidered in 1943, most of the
and it was abandoned.
As a result of the heavy losses sustained in tankers sailing between
Alexandria and Tobruk, and the dificulty in obtaining crews to man these
vessels, it was proposed during the period before the third battle of Libya
to lay 100 miles of line from Capuzzo to Tobruk.
There was insufficient
rolling stock to run rail tank wagons through to Tobruk.
It was proposed
to transport petrol by rail to
Capuzzo.
Tobruk was recaptured by the
enemy before the work could be started.
100
Mars micro 0.5mm
WO 277/21
27
WO247/26
