APPENDIX 14
SYSTEM "A"
Minister of Defence
c.C.o.
Chiefs of
Staff.
Senior
Mantary
Officer.
Senior
Naval
Officer.
Senior
Officer.
Chief of
Staff, R.M.
Inter-Service Staffs.
Note. -In considering the rank of C.C.O, it should be borne in mind that he has at present under
his Command G.O.C. Special Service Force, Director of Combined Training (Vice-Admiral) and Major-
General Training.
SYSTEM "B"
Minister of Defence
Admiralty
War Office
Air Ministry
Chief of Staff Committee
Combined Operations Staff
(a)
D.C.O.
D.C.O.
D.C.O.
Air Minisuy•
Director of
C.O.
Staff as
necessary
Director of
C.O.
Staff as
necessary
War Office.
Admiralty.
+ Secretary (R.M. Officer).*
(b) Inter-Service Staff.
(c) Secretariat as necessary.
* The Secretary would sit as an additional member of the Committee.
Director of
Staff as
necessal y
APPENDIX 15
STAFF CHANNELS OF COMMUNICATION BETWEEN
G.H.Q. 1), LE.F (ALFSEA), FOCRN, I.E.F., AIR HEADQUARTERS, H.C.O.
January, 1942-October, 1942
The As.C.O. Committee being responsible for advice only on combined operation matters, had direct
access to the Commanders of all three services in New Delhi through theit respective service members.
In addition they maintained close liaison with C.O.H.Q. and D.C.O. (M.E.).
October, 1942-October, 1943
With the appointment of a Director of Combined Operations (India) and the formation of an
independent directorate, the D.C.O. (I) became directly responsible to, and took instructions from,
C.O.S. in New Delhi.
their respective headquarters.
Matters which concerned individual services only were dealt with directly through
October, 1943-September, 1944
channels of communications with the above mentioned headquarters was issued.
in Dotober, 1943, Rear Admiral Maund was appointed D.C.O. () and a new directive outlining his
September, 1944 October, 1944
In September, 1944, the responsibility for combined operations training and the organisation and
M.T.6 (b) being formed in order to take over these duties.
admit septembe tre, the respons traitor dahlichment massed fra to cO. toast T
226
October, 1944- October, 1945
In October, 1944, the combined operations training commitment increased to such an extent that
the responsibility for training and the organisation and administration of theo combine extent tions
establishments
were returned to D.c.0.(1).
directly under Defence Headquarters.
The Directorate became an independent headquarters
January, 1942-October, 1942
INTERNAL ORGANISATION
division of the committee.
During this period the As.C.O. worked as a committee located in one office.
here was no suD
October, 1942- October, 1943
branch of G.H.Q.(I).
R.A.F. personnel on the strength
In October, 1842, the Ditty ate Combin on he asian a no siD, 4 and the BeN, eng
of their respective Headquarters in New Delhi.
The three senior
inter-Service members formed a joint committee as previously, with S.D. 14 and the Naval Combined
Operations Office dealing with matters affecting military and naval affairs respectively.
October, 1943-September, 1944
of the directorate was revised.
As soon as Rear Admiral Maund was appointed D.C.O.(I) in October, 1943, the internal organisation
September, 1944 October, 1944
Soon after the formation of M.T. 6 (b) and the ceding of the responsibility for training to the
Director of Military Training, India, the internal organisation of the directorate was revised.
October, 1944-August, 1945
Immediately on re-assuming the responsibilities for combined operations training and the up-grading
of the directorate to the equal status with " Focrin," G.H.Q.(I) and Air Headquarters (India), General
Chater reorganised the directorate on similar lines to C.O.H.Q. in London.
APPENDIX 16
CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE
C.O.S. (43) 207-OCTOBER, 1942
Arising from the Minutes of the Forty-second Meeting, a revised directive for the Directorate of
Combined Operations (India) is circulated as C.O.S. (43) 207.
A copy is placed below.
Signed, P. MASON,
Secretary,
Chief of Staff Committee,
17th April, 1943.
CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE
(C.O.S. (43) 207)
DIRECTIVE FOR DIRECTORATE FOR COMBINED OPERATIONS (INDIA)
Title
The title of the Directorate will be the Directorate of Combined Operations (India) —(Short title
D.C.O. (I)).
Composition
(a) The Directorate will consist of three members, one from each service, under the chairmanship
of the senior member.
(b) To assist the Director and to relieve him from routine tasks, a Lieutenant-Commander will be
appointed as Naval Member of the Directorate for all matters not concerned with policy.
in the future either of the other senior members should become Director, an officer of
suitable rank of his Service should similarly be appointed for the same purpose.
(c) The Senior Officers of the Directorate will each have a small staff section, and they and their
sections will form part of the staffs of their respective Services Headquarters.
(d) The Directorate will also have a small secretarial and clerical staff.
227
WO 277/21
27
3ф
