assumption of responsibility for displaced Rus and prisoners of war o
assume of the German Army, released British and Allied prisoners of Wa
and other contingencies.
The request for units was calculated on the standard yardstick without
regard to the reasonable
expectation that, at this stage in the campaign,
supply units should be able and required to work considerably in exoes of
their rated capacity.
The units included in the demand were seven
B.S.Ds., 35 D.I.DS., 31
Field Bakeries (Mobile), and five Port Detachments.
Against this, there
were, of course, no units available at all.
In order to provide at least a
nucleus of the total demands,
and to take advantage of the new "light"
organization,
War Office considered the possibility of forming two B.S.Ds.,
and three Supply Companies (Light) of four platoons each.
This would also
mean that some supply companies would later be available and ready for the
Far East.
Eventually, four Supply Companies (Light), each of four platoons, were
formed and sent out in May, 1945.
As far as the bakeries were concerned, it
was agreed to provide one warrant officer baker, and five senior N.C.O. bakers
and supervisory personnel for each field bakery, up to ten, that 21 Army
Group could form with prisoners of war.
Besides the ovens already ear-
marked for such bakeries, eight sets of equipment were sent
out from the
United Kingdom to enable them to be formed.
Supplies Budget
Increases in the provision commitment were necessitated by additional
demands on stocks in N.W. Europe.
60,000 civilian mid-day meals had been
budgeted for, but the potential daily figure was now placed at 200,000.
There
were also 8.600 rations a day required for employees in Army hostels and
clubs, of whom 6,500 were locally recruited.
At the end of February, 1945,
the stren who of Britis and Allied forces, and liberated manpower, to be
maintained, was agreed at two million overall for provision purposes.
mitments in respect of Allied and United Nations prisoners of war had been
covered at half a million for four months.
Provision was also proposed for
over half-a-million Russians in the S.H.A.E.F. Zone, who might be prisoners
of war, displaced persons, or serving in the German Army.
E.F.I. and Unit Canteen Supplies
Two requirements making a persistent drain on R.A.S.C. stocks, were
those of E.F.I., and unit canteens, to which 21 Army Group set no limit.
stringency of the supplies situation made it necessary for War Office to lay
down as a matter of policy that faced for PET use chauld be confined to
sugar, flour bread. frozen meat. and potatoes, and for unit canteens to th
ingredients for buns and cups of tea.
Maintenance, March, 1945 and after
What appeared to be the excessive demands for normal maintenance by
21 Army Group were examined by War Office.
Group could not exactly doree the audito of cates tendined with each
It transpired that 21 Army
demand and had therefore no reliable feures of dues in to include as an
asset in preparing demands.
of vessels, owing to want of accurate documentation in this respect.
The information lacking was that of out-turn
A system
368
up,
ning
eipts by
e, S.T.
winter
reneral
n, the
nned to
de beyond
and dried peas
for shipment,
1th America.
100 tons of
4,000 tons
lents were
their cap
and beans,
and future supp
In the middle
shipping space a da
of cold storage were
made for deep-draft refrige.
hips
Allied P.W. P
Even before D-day, consideration had been o
Lo the question of feed-
ing Allied P.W. by air in the event of a German collapse; the rations provided
would have to maintain them adequately until the ground forces reached them.
By September, 1944, a satisfactory pack had been evolved.
The rations
were made up on a uniform, fully balanced scale.
All items were packed in
new cement sacks, and only those which would otherwise deteriorate were
in tins, such as dehydrated meat, spam, and chocolate. Tea was in {-1b.
packets, as generally sold; milk and eggs were in powder form in cartons, and
margarine was in 1-lb. packets.
Trials showed that 90 per cent. of the rations were recovered on free
dropping.
Powders and solids did not suffer any serious ill effects, but tinned
iquids had to be given up, as their containers burst on hitting the ground.
Ten thousand tons of food, representing eleven million rations, were
packed in this way in three weeks in 1944.
Most of the work was done by
Roners in the S.R. Ds., but millers also packed four under Ministry of Food
arrangements.
The rapid advance made by the Allies, however, released so many P.W.
tar, a the end of April, 1945, these rations could be turned over to use for.
feting the starving priple of Holland.
Between 20th April and 8th May,
93 million rations were free-dropped in Holland hesides nearly one million
imilar, but less attractive, rations prepared specifically for Civil Affairs use.
" Medloc"
In January, 1945, the project was considered of opening a railway L. of C
for personnel across France to be known as « Medlor"
A similar line had
ben in operation during the period December. 1939, to May, 1940, for the
convevance of the coal on ether taone to Middle Post and of
personnel and families returning from the Middle East, India, and the Far
All executive action was now taken in the theatre.
a transit camp, capacity 6,000 to 10,000 at each terminal, served by a R.A.S.C.
The proposal was for
Depot holding 20 days' reserve and ten days' maintenance stock.
and one secticn of a Field Bakery were needed for each.
The halting places
369
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
