the six bombarding ships were each provided with an A.L.O.
During this operation there was
but the principles evolved in training at the C.T.C.
little opportunity for naval support,
ound to be satistactory, as was shown by the following extracts from the report of the Flag Officer
Commanding Force "
nO s carried out their bombardment duties in a very able manner and there were
no cases of confusion between them and the firing ships.
B.L.O.s (formerly A.L.O.s)
were most useful. . . .
The organisation and training of these officers had been
erice no carried out and their presence made it quite unnecessary to have a Naval F. V.o.
or Directing Officer ashore."
The F.O.0. parties remained with 29 Independent Brigade and,
other than one officer who
returned to U.K., moved with it to India where they established a Bombardment Section.
Formation of No. 1 Bombardment Unit
The next and most important step taken was the proposal to form the individual F.O.0, parties,
which were at that time attached to H.Q.R.A. Force i10, into a Unit.
forward to the War Office by the Commander Force 100 in February, 1942, and was at once
supported by C.C.O.
The term Bombardment Liaison Officer (B.L.O.) was adopted about the same time in place
On 26th April, 1942, No. 1 Forward Observation and Bombardment Unit was formed at the
C.T.C. Dundonald under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel L.
S. Seccombe, R.A. Major Long
continued as the Chief Instructor of the Bombardment School which had moved to Dundonald, in
March, and which had now become an integral part of the Unit. Courses of three weeks' duration
was made responsible for its training.
The administration remained an Expeditionary Force
responsibility, but all matters of policy and selection, with regard to appointments and promotions,
The War Establishment strength of the Unit was forty-nine officers,
fifteen gunners (Observation Post Assistants) and two clerks. It was sub-divided into three Sections
each designed to support one Assault Division, each commanded by a Major and consisting of five
F.O.0. parties and ten B.L.O.s. Unit Headquarters comprised the Lieutenant-Colonel, his Adjutant
and two clerks. The Unit was not designed to be self-supporting and had therefore to be attached
to another formation, the same applied to the sections.
The naval ratings, who made up the com-
munication personnel of the F.O.Ô. parties (two telegraphists and one signalman) were borne on
the books of H.M.S. Dundonald II as part of a Beach Support Unit.
unit it it he diary For at the Come carried out tre attached te Spent at artilery
Brigadier Laycock's Commandos.
In June, 1942, C.C.O. moved one section of the Unit down to the Isle of Wight for training
with the 2nd Canadian Division and Force "J"; this section under the command of Major
G. F. Sinclair, R.A., took part later in the Dieppe operation.
Also in June, 1942, C.C.O. obtained approval from the War Office to the change of title to No. 1
Bombardment Unit as the old title was unnecessarily unwieldy.
The Dieppe Raid, Operation " Jubilee," August 1942
assault on Dieppe, three British F.O.O. parties were landed, together with three
Canadian officers who had been trained at the Bombardment School.
F. Sinclair, R.A.,
embarked in H.M.S. Calpe as the Senior B.L.O. and Major F. K. R. Long as his deputy was in
the standby H.Q. Ship, H.M.S. Fernie. B.L.O.s were embarked in the five Hunt Class destroyers,
one in the gunboat Locust and one in the Polish destroyer Slazak.
The F.O.O.s suffered heavy
casualties, two were killed and two were taken prisoner; one, a Canadian, subsequently escaped
through Spain and was awarded the D.S.O. Four of the B.L.O.s were wounded.
The Section remained with Force "J," expanding to a Unit in January, 1944.
Section of the Unit was formed shortly after Dieppe in order to provide the requisite number oi
F.O.O.s and B.L.O.s for Operation " Torch."
Formation of Bombardment Troops authorised by the War Office
The demand for F.O.O.s was constantly increasing as more and more combined operations
were being planned and more forces raised. C.C.O. submitted a proposal to the War Ofice In
October, 1942, for the formation of a Bombardment Training Pool which would hold and train
126
F.O.O. parties and B.L.O.s at Dundonald in readiness for allotment to formations earmarked for
These proposals involved a non-operational headquarters of five officers and an
unspecified number of operational bombardment troops each of sixteen officers.
plan met with a certain amount of opposition, particularly from the War Establishment Committee,
and was finally withdrawn in December when C.C.O, put forward a proposal to form Headquarters
Bombardment Unit, Bombardment Wing, Combined Training Centre, consisting of three officers
and eight other ranks at Dundonald, which would be under the command of the Commandant and
administered by the staff of the C.T.C.
At the same time an establishment for a standard
Bombardment Troop consisting of a Major, fifteen Captains and five Artillery N.C.O.s was submitted.
These proposals were agreed by the War Office War Establishment Committee at the end of the
year and, on 9th January, 1943, C.C.O. asked the War Office to mobilise four Bombardment Troops
to meet the following requirements:—
(1) One Troop in the Western Mediterranean to exploit
bombardment in support of land operations that may continue to occur.
(2) One Troop with Force 125. (For capture of Canary Islands but the Force was never
(3) One Troop with Force "J."
(4) One Troop to be trained for attachment to Force " K."
on Malta.)
(A naval striking force based
The War Office approved and authorised the raising of a fifth
Troop
Troop organisation remained throughout the war in Europe, except that early in 1944 when
more Troops were required, further Bombardment Units, each of three Troops, were raised, and
the Troops then comprised seven F.O.B. parties each.
North Africa, Operation " Torch"
In 1942 " Torch" involved five F.O.O. parties with the U.S. 2nd Corps at Oran and five B.L.O.s
in the supporting British warships. Major F. K. R. Long, R.A., was the Senior B.L.O. on Admiral
Troubridge's staff in the H.Q. Ship Largs.
At Algiers, seven F.O.O. parties were landed, including two with No. 6 Commando and one with
No. 1 Commando.
Colonel L. S. Seccombe, R.A., was released by C.C.O. to be Senior B.L.O. in
the Force H.Q. Ship Largs on the proviso that he would be returned immediately after the operation.
The main shore bombardments took place at Oran where H.M.S. Rodney, on call from an F.O.O.,
bombarded the fort of Djebel Santon intermittently for two days before its final surrender.
The F.O.O.s again proved their worth, not only in directing ships' fire but also in providing
communication between H.Q. Ships and units ashore. The final attack on Oran by two American
Regimental Combat Teams was ordered by the Corps Commander in the H.Q. Ship through an F.O.O.
In the middle of the battle off Oran, the Squadron Signals Officer,
Lieutenant-Commander
Phillimore, R.N., decided to allot a special communications wave for bombardment traffic between
ships, this was found to be so successful in speeding up the reallocation of ships to F.O.O,s and the
receipt of shore information on board the H.Q. Ship that it became thereafter standard practice.
On more than one occasion a F.O.O. through his attached bombarding ship, called for and was
given air support, the combination of air strikes and naval gunfire proved most effective in reducing
the main resistance from the French forts.
After the completion of Operation "Torch" all the F.O.O.s and B.L.O.s were recalled by
C.C.O. to their parent unit at the C.T.C. for re-equipping and refresher training.
F.O.0.s in Support of Airborne Forces
Early in 1943, C.C.O. foresaw the possibility for the employment of F.O.O.s in support of the
rapidly expanding airborne forces.
Major-General Haydon made arrangements with Major-General
Hopkinson, commanding the Airborne Division, for F.O.O. parties to be trained as parachutists
at Ringway. Bu the time Operation " Husky"
started to be planned in earnest, there was in
existence a small pool of parachute-trained F.O.0. parties, for*
whom C.C.O. had obtained the
additional qualification pay granted to the parachutists of the Airborne Division.
first corin enter i ot of con Coting on dedin- paint M, dider No, 1: K. K. Long TA, Ving tho
destined to remain in that theatre for the rest of the war.
Seven parachute-trained F.O.O. parties
followed in May and joined the Ist Airborne Division.
By August the strength of the F.O.O.s in
the Mediterranean hadisrown to seventy officers and one hundred naval telegraphists and other
ranks; and with the agreement of the C.C.O., a headquarters and training base for them was
(C52794)
WO 277/21
27
3ф
