into force (see Appendix [X) and remained in operation until 8th August.
inte most meagre ration then followed for a week, just before the arrival
of the famous "August" convoy, which had such difficulty in getting through.
This scale was similar to the special scale, but stocks of M. and V. (meat
and vegetable tined ration) were entirely exhausted, and great difficulty was
found in obtaining the potatoes and vegetables to issue even at the reduced
As a result of the arrival of this convoy, slight token increases were
made in certain items as a stimulant to morale.
The dependence of the island for fresh vegetables and potatoes on what
it could itself produce made it necessary to ensure that production was
The particular requirement in this respect was seed potatoes.
Until 1942, the War Office was responsible for the supply of this item. In
November, 1941, however, it was impossible to provide the requisite 3,000
tons from the United Kingdom.
Malta then demanded 2,000 tons from
Middle East, in order to avoid having to import 20,000 tons in 1942. Middle
East met this by arranging shipment from India to replace what they sent
As will be seen in Chapter VI, this made things difficult for
Middle East, as the Indian seed failed to germinate.
Civil Food Supplies
As long as siege conditions obtained in Malta, the use of supplies from
the U.S.A. under Lend-Lease arrangements, to meet the island's civil food
requirements, could be justified on grounds of mutual security.
those conditions ceased, it was expected that there might be strong reper-
cussions from the Americans when they realized that supplies, ostensibly for
Army use, were being diverted in this way. Accordingly, arrangements were
made for the Colonial Office to resume responsibility for providing common-
user food stuffs for Malta civilians from November, 1944.
In October, 1940, three officers and 32 other ranks were added to the
R.A.S.C. establishment for supply duties, to meet the increase in the strength
of the garrison. Shortly afterwards two modified D.I.Ds. were sent, on a
special War Establishment of one officer, four clerks, and seven issuers.
A third was added in 1941.
These units were later designated " Supply
civilian sources.
The balance of the personnel came trom local military and
In October, 1942, a Middle East establishment for a " Supply Depol
was approved.
It consisted of the headquarters of a B.S.D., four
supply sections, a P.O.L. section, a cold storage section. and a Wn bakery
section, and totalled 170 all ranks.
Dilution of R.A.S.C. units with Maltese personnel was carried mut to a
considerable extent, mainly in the transport companies.
Until 1942, the
Maltese element was drawn from the Malte saviliary Corne hit after
that from the Army Service Corps (Malta Territorial Force).
important development, as the men were trained as soldiers. and could be
depended upon to carry out their duties in all circumstances.
414
Increasing difficulty was
experienced in finding crews for the W.D.
Volunteer personnel was not forthcoming in
sufficient numbers
from the United Kingdom, and of those
who did arrive some were un-
satisfactory types.
Eventually, partial militarization
became necessary to
maintain a satisfactory service.
A Water Transport Company, of local
personnel with a British nucleus, was consequently formed in 1945.
Transport Organization
The first War Establishment for the R.A.S.C. Transport Company was
effective from February, 1941; till then, the old peace establishment had been
supplemented and reorganized by local arrangement.
The total vehicles now
authorized were 185, but actual employment to meet increased commitments
The new establishment allowed for four sections, i.e., supply,
ammunition, car, and medical.
By June, 1942, the strength of W.D. and impressed vehicles had risen
to 280, which was too much for one unit. Middle East accordingly approved
the formation of a second company and opportunity was taken
same time to reorganize on the new platoon basis.
prised three transport platoons, an ammunition platoon, and a
platoon, while the other had four transport platoons.
field ambulances had been mobilized, the transport element being provided
by the R.A.S.C., which relieved the transport company of a considerable
Provision of Vehicles
Restriction of shipping facilities
had its effect on the importation of
M.T. vehicles, which were low on the priority list.
The best had to be
of what there were on the island, the majority of the vehicles required being
Large sums were thus expended without acquiring owner-
ship, and much would have been saved if vehicles had been purchased at
an early stage.
About 60 vehicles were in fact bought. In November, 1939, the " M.T.
Purchase Board "
was formed under the permanent presidency of the O.C.
R.A.S.C., the members being drawn from the R.A.O.C., the Malta Regiment,
and the unit for which the vehicle was required. In 1942, the presidency
passed to the R.A.O.C. The Board maintained lists of vehicles suitable for
purchase, carried out inspections, and assessed the prices considered fair
and reasonable. Owners were able to appeal to the Emergency Compensation
Board against price awards.
Early in 1943, W.D.
vehicles began to arrive on the island in large
numbers, and it was possible to dispense with all impressed vehicles.
majority were in any case worn out, but they had bridged the gap, partly
as the result of the small mileages involved in daily work on the island.
M.T. Spares
The decision given in 1939, permitting the holding of six months' stocks
of M.T. spares, placed the R.A.S.C. in Malta in a singularly fortunate position
in this respect.
In March, 1942, when other island stocks were greatly
depleted, a nine months' stock of spares was held, except for certain minor
From that time, there were difficulties as the result of those shortages,
and vehicles were off the road in consequence.
415
(37452)
1F
