Establishment.
Location.
H.M.S.
Northney (includes
Initial Training Centre for Naval Combined
and
Combined
Personnel
Northney II and III)
Operations
Operations Training
tOr
South
Eastern
Command).
Tormentor
Raiding Craft Training Centre (and Combined
Operations
Training for
Southern Com-
mand):
Parent Ship of Raiding Craft Flotillas (and
Helder
Combined Operations Training for Eastern
Command).
T.L.C. Training Base.
Special Training Establishment
Hayling Island, Hants.
Warsash, Hants.
Brightlingsea, Essex.
Stopford
Bo'ness, Linlithgow.
Dorlin
House,
Argyllshire.
Acharacle,
Dorlin
11. Special combined operational ships commissioned as H.M, ships in the British Isles are under
the command of the C.C.O. except during the period when they are placed under the orders of a Force
Commander
appointed for the execution of a specific operation.
The movements of such ships
arranged by the C.C.O. who will keep the Admiralty and the appropriate Naval Commanders-in-Chief
informed of projected movements.
12. Merchant Navy ships which may be allocated by the
Admiralty for combined operational
purposes will be attached to the C.C.O.'s command or that of the Force Commander as the case may be.
CLASSIFICATION OF SHIPS AND CRAFT
13. The term " Assault Ship" covers :—
Infantry Assault Ships, Classes I and II (I.A.S.).
Hired Transports employed as Assault Ships.
Merchant vessels employed as M.T. Ships
Tank Landing Ships, Classes I and II (T.L.S.).*
M.L.C. Carrying Ships (M.C.S.), and
T.L.C. Carrying Ships (T.C.S.).
14. The term " Landing Craft" covers :—
Tank Landing Craft (Marks I to V) (T.L.C.).*
Motor Landing Craft (Marks I and II) (M.L.C.).*
Vehicle Landing Craft (V.L.C.)
Assault Landing Craft (A.L.C.).*
Raiding Craft (R.C.).
Navigational Raiding Craft, and Coble Raiding Craft (C.R.C.).
* Consequent on an agreement reached with the U.S.N. authorities in 1942, the words Landing Ship
(L.S.) or Landing Craft (L.C.) were placed first and then the designation, e.g., L.S.T., L.C.T., etc.
15. The term " Support Craft " covers :—
Beach Protection Craft (B.P.C.).
Heavy Support Craft (H.S.C.).
Light Support Craft (L.S.C.).
Note.—The guns' crews for all support craft are found by the Royal Marines.
NAVAL ADMINISTRATION
te The administration of the above Commande and attached shins the naval units of which
continue to remain the C.C.O.'s responsibility unless they
Stations. is carried out as follows
are permanently detached from the Home
17. The
naval administration of all bases and establishments under C.C.O.'s command.
StatioAdmiral Landing Craft and Bases (R.A.L.B.) is responsible to the C.C.O. for the
Establishments (and Attached Craft)
Ships and Craft (S.O.A.S.C.)) will be administered by the
18. All northern Combined Operations Bases (excluding those occupied by the Senior Officer Assault
Northern Rases (S.N.O.C.O.N.) on behalf of R A TR
Senior Naval Officer,
Combined Operations,
Operations Base), Roseneath, is appointed " and as S.N.O.C.O.N."
The Commodore, H.M.S. Lowisburg (Combined
a to with a do it a matter oh them hit matters of policy
R.A.L.B.
and matters directly affecting the Combined Operations Organisation are to be submitted by him to
20. R.A.L.B. administers the Southern Bases direct, for the present.
216
+777
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
Normandy beaches Coasters beached.
DU K.W.s taking stores ashore,
Normandy beaches L.C.T. beached showing roadway.
