Special Service Troops
T. The Special Service Troops will be under yose copate to he Administratin will, however.
remain the responsibility of the War Office.
as combined
operations are concerned, as specialists.
Beyond such tasks as you may allo to thom, e g, at the various
centres of instruction, these
troops will be available for specific combined operations when they will be
placed under the Commander appointed for that operation.
Para. 7 is subject to early review.
APPENDIX 6
SECRET
C.O.S. (41) 732
9th December, 1941
WAR CABINET
CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE
DIRECTIVE TO ADVISER ON COMBINED OPERATIONS
The attached revised directive to the Adviser on Combined Operations has been approved* by the
Chiefs of Staff and is circulated for information and record purposes.
(Signed) L. C. HOLLIS.
Great George Street, S.W.1.
9th December, 1941.
* C.O.S. (41) 414th Meeting, Minute 7.
DIRECTIVE TO THE ADVISER ON COMBINED OPERATIONS
1. You are appointed Adviser on Combined Operations. This title is always to be used when
"When exercising your executive functions, you will use the you
General Responsibility
2. Under the general direction of the Chiefs of Staff you will :—
(a) Act as technical adviser on aspects of, and at all stages in, the planning and training for
combined operations.
(b) Be responsible for co-ordinating the general training policy for combined operations for the
three Services (see para. 5 (a) below).
(c) Study in conjunction with the Chiefs of Staff Organisation tactical and technical developments
in all forms of combined operations varying from small raids to a full scale invasion of the
(d) Direct and press forward research and development in all forms of technical equipment and
special craft peculiar to combined operations.
3. The procedure by which planning for operations other than those referred to in para. 4 will be
carried out is shown in Annex. II.
You will note that it is incumbent upon the Commanders-in-Chief
at Home, Force Commanders and Staff to seek your technical advice at all stages of planning and to
keep you informed of their intentions.
4. In the case of operations which are carried out by Special Service Troops only, you will appoint
the Commander of the Special Service Troops who will prepare the detailed plan in conjunction with you
and under the Commander-in-Chief carrying out the raid.
In such cases you will keep the Joint Planning
Training
5. You will : —
(a) Be responsible for co-ordinating the teaching at such schools of instruction or training establish-
ments as it may be found necessary to set up.
advice of the Staffs of the Centres.
This advice will be your responsibility.
c) Advise, as required, Force Commanders, subsequent to their appointment for an operation,
on the technical training of their forces. It is equally incumbent on them to seek your
* These include Initial Trainino Centres such as IT V S. Northnev and H.M.S. Tormentor and Raiding
Craft Bases such as Brightlingsea and H.M.S. St. Helier, and such other training centres or bases as it
208
Inter-Service Committees
6. You will :—
(a) Preside over the Combined Operations Committee which will have as members Assistant Chief
of Naval Staff (Weapons), Admiralty ;
Director of Military
Director of Operational Training
Air Ministry •
Training. War Offce
development policy for combined operations and
This Committee will formulate training and
will maintain
organisation for the training and development of airborne forces
(b) Preside over the Combined Operations Air Committee which will have as.
members the 5th
Sea, Lord, Admiralty, or his representatives: Vice-Chief Imperial General Staff or his repre.
sentatives, War Office; Vice-Chief of the Air Staff, Air Ministry, or his representatives ;
Air Commodore C.T.C.
This Committee will examine the air requirements for combined
operations.
The Committee will formulate co-ordinated proposals on air requirements
for submission to the Chiefs of Staff
(c) Set up a Combined Operations Sub-Committee which under the guidance of the Committee
referred to in para. 6 (a), will deal with questions of training, equipment and administration,
and keep touch with progress.
(d) Set up a Combined Operations Communications Committee with representatives
of the Signal
Branches
of the three
Services to deal with all communications questions affecting
combined operations.
7. The policy for the allocation of assault ships and landing craft throughout the world will be
decided from time to time by the Chiefs of Staff.
All ships (other than Merchant Navy ships) and craft in the British Isles allocated for combined
operations will be under your command except during such time as they are specifically turned over to
the Force Commanders for an operation.
to your chant day sh thallo ted by the dominay for, ombid or ation prep ges will battach el
You will be required to inform the Admiralty from time to time of the state of availability of all
ships and craft held for combined operational purposes.
Special Service Troops
8. The Special Service Troops will be under your command.
Their administration will, however,
remain the responsibility of the War Office.
Beyond such tasks as you may allot to them, e.g., at the
various centres of instruction, these troops will be available for specific combined operations when they
will be placed under the Commander appointed for that operation.
ANNEX II
C.O.S. consider Outline Plan
with A.C.O. as adviser
- apprOveline Plan as
to Force Commander.
as guide only
C.O.S. issue necessary instructions
for project to be examined by Joint
Planning
Staff
writh
advice
A.C.O.
Force
Commanders.
Force Commanders produce Final
Plan in
conjunction with Joint
Planning Staff and with advice of
Final Plan considered by C.O.S.
with A.C.O. as adviser.
by preme coroman er nosed play
Joint Planning Staff and Service
Ministries.
1e79e717
WO 277/21.
27
3ф
A requirement arises
209
