CHAPTER 13
THE LANDING CRAFT AND BASES ORGANISATION
Administration of Ships and Craft, 1940
In 1940 the activities of the Combined Operations forces were confined to a few small raids
on the enemy coastline.
As the available craft were so few, the existing facilities available at
naval and civilian shipyards for maintenance and repairs were sufficient.
At first, the fitting out and manning of ships and craft was done in a somewhat haphazard
way, using the Admiralty organisation supplemented by the various training establishments such
as Inveraray,,
where on 12th September,
1940, a Senior Naval Officer Landings (S.N.O.L.) and
Senior Naval Officer Transports were established to administer the ships and craft
assembled in
the Clyde for the
projected operations against the Atlantic Islands.
This establishment was
commissioned as H.M.S. Quebec
Combined Operations forces, for which the Vice-Admiral Combined Training Centre under the
D.C.O. was responsible.
Personnel Organisation, 1941
The year 1941 saw a big increase in the number of personnel being absorbed into Combined
Operations and a need was felt for a separate Personnel Organisation.
The Personnel Records
Office for Combined Operations personnel was therefore established in H.M.S. Quebec on 8th May,
1941.
At the same time the Pay Section was also established in H.M.S. Quebec where all accounts
and records for major and minor landing craft personnel were held.
This arrangement existed
until the transfer of Captain, Landing Craft Tank (Captain L.C.T.) to Troon on 3rd March,
1942, when he took with him,
from Quebec, the Personnel Records and Pay Accounts of all
officers and ratings of major landing
craft.
The Personnel Records and Accounts of officers
and ratings of minor landing craft and of units such as Royal Naval Beach Parties remained in
H.M.S. Quebec.
Captain L.C.T. (afterwards Captain, Major Landing Craft) commissioned H.M.S.
Dinosaur at Troon on lst April, 1942, as his Administrative Headquarters.
Throughout 1941 the commitments of H.M.S. Quebec increased and, between October and the
end of the year, the Combined Signal School and Navigational Aids Unit were established there.
In November the drafting pool of ratings was transferred to H.M.S. Quebec from H.M.S. Northney.
At the end of 1941, the functions of Commodore, Quebec II were absorbed by the new
appointment of Senior Officer Assault Ships and Craft (S.O.A.S.C.) who established his head-
quarters at Largs to which H.M.S. Quebec II was transferred. Most of the ships in S.O.A.S.C.?'S
command moved to Greenock and, although the staff offices were at Largs, the Accountant Officer
opened his offices and stores at Campbell Street, Greenock.
ments, turned out to be a far-sighted move.
This, in view of subsequent develop-
Rear-Admiral Landing Crait and Bases Appointed
As the building programme got under way in 1941, and the ships and craft ordered from
о v capid erransion in the number
of crews required to man them.
submitted the following proposals for an effective organisation to control them :—
Consequently on 3rd December, Commodore Mountbatten
" The Admiralty wish me to take over the command and administration of all landing
cratt and crews, which will amount to 500-700 .C.T. (250 tons cash) and 2,000 smaller
a cut hh0 ca a m on tine me command within the nept 16 months.
They also wish me to organise and administer suitable bases.
For this purpose a small
administrative staff will bars a he anted which may subsequently require expansion
It is proposed that this she he done Amiral Tendine Craft and Paces (RAL.B.)
100
and I should like to propose Rear-Admiral H. E. Horan for this appointment.
Assault
shipping and their associated landing craft would be under a Commodore in company
with them to be known as Senior Officer
Assault
appointment I propose Commodore G. L. Warren."
Ships and Craft (S.O.A.S.C.).
for this
This proposal was approved by the Chiefs of Staff on 9th December.
The Landing Crait and Bases Organisation, 1941
During December, 1941, the transfer of ships and bases to the C.C.O. took place.
that under the R.A.L.B. a naval administrative staff came into being whose duty it was to carry
out the day-to-day naval administration of the Combined Operations Command.
into Personnel, Material, and Ships and Craft Sections.
For the first three months, the most important role played by the Administration was that of
providing the necessary base and accommoda
ation facilities for the personnel of the command.
By the beginning of 1942, however, the best sites for both bases and accommodation facilities
filled by other Services and Ministries and there was very little left from which
Administration of Bases
All the Northern Combined Operations bases (except those occupied by the S.O.A.S.C.)
were administered under R.A.L.B. by the Senior Naval Officer Combined Operations Northern
Bases (S.N.O.C.O.(N).), who was the Commodore, H.M.S. Louisburg at Rosneath.
S.N.O.C.O.(N.) dealt with the Admiralty on matters of routine administration, or with the local
naval authorities in matters of their concern, but in all questions of policy and in those affairs
directly affecting the Combined Operations Organisation, he dealt direct with R.A.L.B.
Administration of Ships and Craft
Ships allocated for combined operational purposes in the British Isles, together with their
associated landing and raiding craft, were organised into groups by the Admiralty.
All home-based
ships and their attached craft in the Combined Operations Command were under the command of
the S.O.A.S.C., who received his orders from C.C.O.
Ships or craft required for an operation were,
however, placed under the orders of Force Commanders.
The administration of these ships was
carried out through the normal channels, until they reverted to S.O.A.S.C. after the operation.
The Development of Bases, 1942
Early in 1942, it was known that the personnel of Combined Operations would be increased
to the target figures required for the invasion planned for the Spring of 1943.
With these increased
numbers in view, the R.A.L.B. wrote to the Combined Operations Section of the Admiralty stating
that it was becoming a matter of urgency to establish a base in the Clyde area as a Combinec
Operations Depot.
Ist May, 1942.
appeared from earlier enquiries that Rosneath, which was being given up by the American authorities,
would be suitable for these purposes.
As a result of a meeting held on 3rd March, the base at
Rosneath was commissioned as H.M.S. Louisburg on 15th April, 1942.
Other developments were also afoot at this time and on 23rd January, 1942, a few days before
R.A.L.B. raised the question of a depot in the Clyde area,
S.O.A.S.C. recommended to the
Admiralty the opening of a Landing Craft Maintenance Base at Port Glasgow.
Maintenance work
had up to that date been carried out by personnel embarked in S.S. Machada.
This recommendation
was followed by a visit from R.A.L.B. after it was decided to requisition and open a base of this
description.
On the same day, 14th April, 1942, that the completion of the requisition was reported
by the Chief Surveyor of Lands, the base was started up by the party landed from S.S. Machada.
At this time there was no accommodation available for officers or ratings in the area and all
personnel had to be billeted in the vicinity.
This situation lasted for some time and was most
unsatistactorv.
Expansion of Bases
The base at Rosneath soon began to prove its usefulness.
Here was a reasonably equipped
hutted camp with a deep-water quay adjoining which were workshops with machine tools installed.
It formed
the holding camp for the naval ratings who had completed their training at the small
schools in the South of England.
Training areas were good, and it was well situated for mounting any
overseas operations which sailed from the Clyde.
The rapidly increasing size of the Command on the
West coast oti Scotland made it necessary to appoint a Senior Officer to have
general charge
of the bases in this area.
Accordingly, the Commodore, Rosneath (Commodore I. M. Palmer) was
appointed Senior Naval Officer Combined Operations (S.N.O.C.O. (N),) and assumed that office on
28th June, 1942.
101
2294*
-7
WO 277/21
27
