Based on these figures,
the automatic shipments
were made up as
follows: —
(a) On personnel ships-seven days' special
reinforcement reserve
rations.
(b) On store ships-30 days' for the strength of a force for all items
on the Middle East Field Service ration scale, except frozen meat,
fresh potatoes
and vegetables, onions, fresh fruit, and cocoa, for
all of which tinned equivalents were included.
The full scale was
shipped, in case the troops were diverted to another port.
Quantities were based on the number of days a month that each com-
modity was issuable.
30 days for half the force, in order to provide a full meat and vegetable
issue for the whole force for a month.
Also loaded on store ships were 150 days for the force of all items usually
supplied
trolly
the United
Kingdom.
The items usually obtained under
contract from Australia were demanded automatically by War Office from
that country, and items normally
provided by Middle East remained the
latter's responsibility to provide.
Hospital supplies were also sent for 180
days at scales laid down by the medical authorities.
Sources of Supply
In 1940, War Office, after full consideration of the world food situation,
decided the sources from which items of the ration scale should be obtained
by Middle East.
The policy then enunciated held good in later years.
'The
sources were briefly as follows: —
Meat, fresh or preserved
Dominions
of
South
Sugar
Biscuits,
cheese and margarine
sausages,
tinned
and
potatoes,
Southern
America.
Australia or Dutch East Indies.
Southern Dominions or United King-
dom.
United Kingdom or U.S.A.
Milk,
nacoll.
vegetables
tinned fish.
Tea
Hospital supplies, disinfectants
Tinned fruit
Dried fruit
Jam, rice, pulses
Ceylon, Dominions or United King
dom.
United Kingdom.
Southern Dominions or U.S.A.
Africa, Turkey or U.S.A.
Local.
Local Resources
From
early in
1940 the increasing importance
of local resources of
foodstuffs
was realized by Middle East Command,
especially the necessity
for stimulating the production of food and forage
above the existing level
to meet the anticipated increased requirements of the Army.
164
One of their first steps to this end was to obtain War Office agreement to
contracts for
locally
produced commodities being made for 12 months
for guaranteed quantities.
In some cases, it might be necessary to issue
seeds, give financial assistance, or even take over the control of farms.
The results achieved in Middle East in the exploitation of local resources
reached very large proportions.
Some indication of their range and extent
will be found in the list of items obtained localy, and in the statement of the
financial and tonnage aspect of the various contracts and schemes operated,
contained in Appendix VIIIE.
It is sufficient to say here that, in the year
ending March, 1943, over a million tons of shipping space were saved in this
way.
Local Provision Office
It was found desirable in 1941 to establish a link between Middle East
Command and the Chief Provision Officer, G.H.Q., India.
This took the
form of a Local Provision Office in Cairo, under a D.Q.M.G., with the
functions of co-ordinating demands between the services, obtaining informa-
tion on which to estimate provision of military requirements for Allies, actual
or potential, acting as Supplies Intelligence Centre of the
Middle rasu
countries, ensuring the economical use of local resources, and allotting priority
of shipping space between the services.
A D.A.D.S. was included in the
establishment.
Procurement of Flour
In 1941, the method of procurement of flour for Middle East was reviewed.
At that time, flour was provided from two sources; from local resources
through the local provision office, and from sources outside the area through
War Office.
This led to confusion, because more than one organization was
demanding cereals for the Middle East area.
It was suggested by the Foreign Office that all cereal requirements should
be centralized, the Ministry of Food, Cereals Division, being responsible for
all purchases outside Middle East, and then handing these over to U.K.C.C.
for distribution through trade channels.
Although Middle East would have
prefere bution through trade existing arrangement, the proposal was accepted
by War Office, subject to the conditions that military requirements had pre-
cedence of all others, and were met complete, that deliveries were punctual
and that only first quality was supplied.
the Army
In effect the new system meant that
through U.K.C.C.
in Middle East demanded on M.E.S.C., who arranged purchase
The latter bought from Ministry of Food, and sold to
the Army On arrival in Mide bEast, recovering the cost of freight.
Supply from U.S.A.
Direct shipments of supplies from UJ.S.A. to Middle East and Malta were
in operation by 1941.
Confusion was caused in Middle East by uncertainty
as to whether supplies Confusionded for the R.A.S.C. or the M.B.S.C.
Wa1
Office was asked to examine the system of advice of shipment, with a view to
eliminating the difficulty.
Of details of chinmente for pA GO hafore the vessels arrived in M.E. ports,
Middle East considered it essential to be informed
165
wesgert
117
WO 277/21
27
WO 277726
