Special Supply Arrangements
A number of despatches were made, in the early sonths, of items which
had not been included in
the agreed maintenance scheme or which were
urgently required.
Some of these are mentioned here to show the contin-
gencies which had to be met, and to afford further examples of the varied
nature of the commodities handled by the supply service.
They were sent by
express and ordinary coaster and by air.
An urgent request came on D-day for boiled sweets and chewing gum to
combat sea-sickness on air/sea rescue launches.
On D+1, the feeding arrangements for the crews of sections of the
"Mulberry" port were found to be unsatisfactory, and were set right by the
provision of Compo, self-heating soup, cocoa, and rum.
The Commander-in-Chief, 21 Army Group, asked on D-day for cigarettes
to be flown over for him to distribute to the troops.
They were bought with
funds he provided, and found from S.R.D. stocks.
held in readiness.
In all, about
six tons was sent in this way.
After D +30, bread became available from
bakery units in the theatre.
180 tons of bread-making ingredients were flown
over between 27th June and 2nd July to enable an earlier start to be made on
bread issues than originally planned.
Beer, a gift from a brewery firm, began to be shipped on D +42, the first
of nearly 3,000 pints, in 41-gallon casks.
Foot-powder, anti-mosquito creams, matches, sodium arsenite, self-heat-
ing soups, pigeon food, Paris green, lemon crystals, dried egg powder, and
D.D.T., were among other commodities despatched.
Adjustments in Scales
In order to conserve stocks of Compo, the sea passage ration for vessels
sailing from S conserve sto South-Eastern Commands was almost at once
reduced to one day; and self-heating soup was deleted from this scale after
the first three weeks.
an November, 1944, a ration was evolved for the sea
the first three weeks. On Now me FA, oration and landing ration (see
Appendix IX).
To conserve stocks of the normal Compo packs containing hiscuit, the
hieritless neck was shipped after D+40. together with the proper quota of
biscuit in bulk.
The reduced scale of hospital supplies (foodstuffs), based on 2,000 men.
was found to be inadequate, and the normal scale based sen 1,000, was sub-
Civil Affairs Supplies
U.S.A., often resulted in supply crises in respect of Civil Affairs supplies,
The course of operations, and the general falling behind of loadings in
These could be overcome only by immediate shipments from
Kingdom, either from existing
Civil Affairs stocks,
or from releases by
332
Ministry of Food of United Kingdom foodstuffs for Civil Affairs use.
persistent,
delay by
though largely unavoidable, hand-to-mouth supply policy, and
Continent, did not help the position.
S.H.A.E.F. in starting to build up a thirty-day reserve on the
The first loading was of 15 tons only for D to D +7. Thereafter procure-
ment was by demand as required.
tons were shipped in June, 1944.
The figures rapidly increased, and 11,000
800,000 tons.
The total up to September, 1945, was over
without much labour and many difficulties.
The channelling of these large quantities was not achieved
The foodstuffs
were held at.
literally, thousands of Ministry of Food buffer depots all over the United
Kingdom, often in very small quantities.
One shipment might mean draw-
ing on as many as 170 different depots. Often ten vessels were being loaded
concurrently.
Again, although the number of basic items was comparatively
small, alternatives were very numerous, and, when broken down into detail.
the provision of each shipment required very detailed schedules and close
liaison with supply agencies and movements branch.
P.O.L. Build-up
By D+1, there were two Petrol Depots, Type "C", in each of the beach
sub-areas, and, even though imports of petrol had to be reduced in favour of
ammunition, and 100,000 gallons of liquid fuel were lost by enemy action
on D+2, a reserve of P.O.L., was built up, because consumption in the
bridgehead was only one-third of the planned figure. By D+6, there were
about 2½ days' fuel for every vehicle ashore.
Meantime, arrangements for the introduction of bulk supply had already
begun, with the construction of " tombolas" at Port-en-Bessin.
The first of
these was working by 24th June, and the first load of bulk petrol was dis-
charged from ship to storage ashore six days later. By 5th July, although
bulk petrol was then flowing steadily into the theatre, packed products were
also ariving in large quantities, so that there were now one Type " A " Petrol
Depot, nine Type "B" and nineteen Type "C", working within the beach
The first Mobile Petrol Filling Centre arrived on 30th June, and the
first Bulk Petrol Transport Company on 5th July.
Storage tanks were erected
in the R.M.A., and connected by pipeline with Port-en-Bessin.
By Sth August, the stock of M.T. spirit was sufficient for 33 days'
requirements.
Supply of Packed P.O.L.
Pre-loading was carriesupply before the operation began, and the loads
were stowed on as carried out bee initial crossing, and in stores coasters.
Requirements of packed P.O.L. during this phase were consigned to beach
Pre-arranged maintenance requirements were called forward immediately
the operation began, and were shipped in coasters.
War Office
demands as necessary within the shipping allocation, provided they were
notified of alterations 72 hours before loading.
Maintenance by demand was
carried out on a ten-day period basis.
of the period.
ments were sent to War Office by 21 Army Group 17 days in advance
Demands covering ten days' require-
of the demande to all concerned for imalamentation
War Office was responsible for forwarding the relevant portions
Demands from D+31
Onwarde were concioned to advanced cradheade end rear maintenance area.
(37452)
333
wester
7/17
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
