Barrack Services
The only provision made in peace time to provide for ..
o supplies
of coal, coke, electricity, gas, and water, was that Q.M.G.6 should, during the
precautionary stage, complete arrangements with the D.A.C. for the initial
requirements of these items, of which estimates had been prepared.
Officers i/c Barracks had schemes prepared for the issue to units mobilizing,
of those items of barrack supply included in war equipment tables, e.g., candles,
wick, and water purifying and caritying powders; and also for the supply
of paillasse straw, disinfectants, etc., for troops in barracks and permanent
hutments.
Arrangements for the expansion of the staff for barrack services in home
commands on mobilization were limited to the provision of the minimum
necessary to cope with the increased commitments consequent on the growth
of the Army.
No provision of barrack services as such for the field force was
necessary, as these were carried out by other agencies, principally the R.A.S.C.
supply services in the field.
In the months immediately preceding the war, increases were approved
in the establishments of civilian employees in the barrack department to
deal with the additional commitments in connection with the formation of
the Militia, anticipated increases in the strength of the Regular Army, and
the opening of new military centres.
in preparation for war, they were indirectly a useful contribution to that end,
and made the barrack department so much the better able to meet the strain
imposed upon it when war came.
Increases were also authorized in the peace establishments for barrack
services in the principal overseas commands, to meet the additional commit-
ments due to garrisons being strengthened.
Transport
In the case of transport, there were at least cadres of the units which would
be required for the B.E.F.
Each of the M.T. companies existing in the
United Kingdom in peace-time was allotted a specific rôle in the order of battle
They were of course, quite inadequate in size for the performance of their
rôles, and to become big enough to do so, meant their expanding on mobiliz-
tion to many times their peace strength.
For example,
one company
required to expand from i5 vehicles to over 200, and from 50 men to T0
The average expansion was to five times the peace-time vehicle strength.
Spare parts, M.T. stores, machinery and other technical requirements
were held by M.T.S.D., Feltham, or by units, as mobilization stores.
machinery and stores, required for the base M.T. installations of the BEF.
were bought gradually over several years, and stored against the need.
Chief Inspector of Supplementary
Transport
To make up the deficiency of vehicles, as between peace holdings at
war requirements, special powers existed under the Army Act for the impres
ment of civilian operated vehicles of the required categories, on mobilizat.
The impressment arrangements were the function of a special organizat.
under War Office (ST 3) control. known as the Inspectorate of Supplemen.
Transport (C.LS.T.).
34
This Inspectorate, in peace, carried out the essential preparatory work of
discovering and earmarking suitable civilian operated vehicles to meet the
expansion
on mobilization.
An actual census of such vehicles was not
taken; but on statistics supplied by the Ministry of Transport, vehicles with
commercial and municipal operators were listed, and inspected periodically
to confirm their suitability from an age and condition aspect, to meet military
requirements.
This applied only to load-carriers, and not to passenger-carry-
ing vehicles (cars) and motor cycles, as it had been ascertained that supplies
sufficient to meet military requirements on mobilization would be available
by impressment direct from stocks with selected manufacturers and their
agents.
By the outbreak of war, 24,000 lorries had been examined and ear-
marked for impressment.
An agreement was made with the Ministry of Transport that additional
transport required for civil services, Ministry
of Food, Police, A.R.P., etc.,
should be found from categories other than those earmarked for the Army.
In addition lists of vehicles, noted by the War Office for impressment, were
passed to other Government departments concerned, for confirmation that
these vehicles were not also required for the purposes of those departments,
and this was duly confirmed.
On mobilization, the peace strength of inspectors of the Inspectorate of
Supplementary
Transport was to be increased by additional impressment
officers.
Vehicles were to be ordered by impressment officers to be delivered
to vehicle collecting centres, which were to be established, on mobilization,
in selected command areas.
Here the vehicles were to be marshalled in
accordance with a pre-determined programme notified to the centres in peace.
Locations were selected for the vehicle collecting centres in the Aldershot,
Colchester, Catterick, and Salisbury Plain areas, and one R.A.S.C. regular
M.T. company was allotted as the cadre to form each.
Their procedure was
worked out, and tested as far as this was possible.
Units were to collect their
quotas from the centres, priority of issue and collection being determined by
the day on which individual units were scheduled to complete mobilization.
Technical Vehicles and Equipment
The war organization of R.A.S.C. units necessitated providing them with
various technically-fitted vehicles, such as workshop and store lorries for
repair and maintenance purposes, specially fitted pontoon and bridge carrying
lorries, and motor ambulances.
To minimize the task of conversion of these
vehicles at Feltham, where the technical bodies were held, by sending peace-
time load carriers there for conversion, and to enable units to carry out peace
training in field repairs, all peace R.A.S.C. companies had one workshop
sub-section, comprising one workshop lorry, one store lorry and one break-
down lorry.
The balance of technically-fitted vehicles required to complete
the units to war establishment were to be obtained on mobilization by collec-
tion direct from the R.A.S.C. Depot, Feltham, in accordance with the pre-
determined programme.
Vehicle equipment and technical workshop equipment were as a rule
held by the cadre units.
If available in time,
mobilization packs of M.T.
stores, are parts, the tyres ae raisized in parieu i met dales dermy
35
WO 277/21.
27
WO 277/26
