LOF 32
L.C.F.-Bow view.
(10) The necessity for fire support in any operation where it is not possible to rely on the
element of surprise.
This fire support must be provided by heavy and medium naval
bombardment, by air action, by special vessels or craft working close inshore and by
using the fire power of the assaulting troops while still sea-borne.®
Special close-support
craft, which should be gunboats or some form of mobile fort, do not exist and must be
designed and constructed.
limits imposed by time and space.
Support by the Royal Air Force is effective within the
(11) Assaults must be carefully timed.
Whether to assault in darkness, at dawn or dusk or
in daylight, must depend on the nature of the raid and on certain conditions such as
tide and distance which will vary in every case.
(12) Tanks should not be landed until the anti-tank defences have been destroyed or cleared.
L.C.T.s carrying tanks must not linger on the beaches beyond the time required to
disembark their loads.
(13) Great and continuous attention must be paid to security problems and greater use made
of subordinate officers who should be partly briefed so that they can control the men
under them.
Only important extracts from operation orders should be taken ashore.
These should be kept in manuscript form and have their official headings removed.
(14) Briefing of the troops should take place as late as possible. If airborne troops are used,
arrangements must be made to increase the number of terrain models available so as
to cut down the time needed for briefing.
Airborne troops provide means of achieving
surprise and should be used as often as possible, subject to the limitations of the
weather.
It should be regarded, however, as exceptional for a plan to depend for
success entirely on their use.
(15) Unless means for the provision of overwhelming close support are available, assaults
should be planned to develop round the flanks of a strongly defended locality rather
than frontally against it.
(16) A far higher standard of aircraft recognition is essential both in the Royal Navy and the
Army.
This should be achieved by means of lectures,
photographs and silhouettes.
If possible, personnel of the Royal Observer Corps should be carried in ships.
(17) Beach Signal Parties should not land complete with the first wave, but only when the
beach has been secured.
(18) The importance and necessity of using smoke cannot be over-emphasised and larger
quantities of smoke must be carried in any operations of the size of the assault on
(19) Some form of light or self-propelled artillery must be provided once an assault has
passed beyond the beach and is advancing inland.
The above list, although long, is not necessarily complete.
It was clear that tactical surprise
was achieved although strategic surprise was almost an impossibility; in fact the Germans had been
holding anti-invasion exercises and were maintaining advanced states of readiness at suitable
stages of the tides.
This ability to obtain tactical surprise was demonstrated again and again in
the Mediterranean and elsewhere and finally, and to the ultimate degree, in " Overlord." It is an
astonishing fact that large concentrations of shipping and other forces can be gathered together
without their existence being known to every enemy agent and that it is still possible to keep their
final purpose secret.
Yet this was done at Dieppe although the security arrangements for this
operation did not reach the high standard achieved on later occasions.
It is stated that unless overwhelming close support is available, assault should be planned
to develop round the flanks of a strongly defended locality rather than frontally.
This is perhaps
an understatement of one of the most important results of the raid. In the planning stage there was
considerable discussion as to the relative merits of frontal and flank assaults; the naval authorities
held strongly that although the Navy could put the forces ashore in a frontal attack if necessary,
their success ashore was doubtful. Since the frontal attack had been made and had failed, it became
dear that alternative plans would have to be adopted in an invasion of the Continent.
Certain
interesting speculat sue theselor the Mulberry
Would such intensive efforts have been made to develop
" harbour, if penetration beyond Dieppe had been
achieved?
Would the Germans not have made better preparations to resist invasion, if they had
not been given false confidence by their success in throwing back our forces from the beaches at
Dieppe ?
Be that as it may, Dieppe was a landmark in the history of combined operations which makes
a fitting climax to the storype Raiding. A raid on a considerable scale had been planned, mounted
and executed against severe opposition.
All three Services were deployed and co-operation between
them was on a highese. Flapping hod been done by integrated staffs from the forces to be employed
(C52794)
7
2291г
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
Invasion of Italy (across the Straits of Messina)
Vehicles landing from L.C.T.
