and capture Cherbourg (and possibly other
western ports) so as to ensure a rapid and steady
build-up of the invading forces.
When this build-up had been achieved, the break-out could be
made and the advance eastward in strength begun, with the great deep-water ports of Cherbourg,
Brest and St.
Nazaire in our hands.
This would ensure that the supplies for the Army on the
Continent could be maintained.
Another point that C.O.H.Q. favoured was the fact that the road and rail communications ran
parallel to the coast in the area to the eastward of Cherbourg whereas, in the Pas de Calais,
converged on the coast, thus making it easier for the enemy to bring up his reinforcements quickly
Visit of Mr. Harry Hopkins and General Marshall, April, 1942
When Mr. Harry Hopkins and General G. C. Marshall, Chief of the U.S. Army Staff, visited
London at the beginning of April, 1942, they brought with them the American Chiefs of Staff's views
concerning the future conduct of the war.
At the first meeting with the Chiefs of Staff, which was held on 9th April, General Marshall
outlined his ideas on how the American and British Forces could be combined to invade France as,
in his opinion, Germany could only be beaten by military forces on land.
by that time included the C.C.O., pointed out that they had been planning for an operation to be
called " Round-up'
any real prospect of carrying out a re-entry into the Continent in 1942 and would not commit
themselves by saying that they would be ready in 1943.
General Marshall then expressed a desire to visit C.O.H.Q. first and on the following day he arrived
there accompanied by his staff officer, Lieut.-Colonel A. C. Wedemeyer.
The C.C.O. explained the organisation and gave General Marshall some idea of what the
Combined Operations Command was trying to achieve, on the conclusion of which the General
expressed his pleasure at finding an organisation already in being for dealing with the problems he
had come over to discuss.
Before he left C.O.H.Q., General Marshall said he would like to send some
of his officers to join the C.C.O. staff and work in C.O.H.Q. This was endorsed in the report of the
Chiefs of Staff meeting1 on 10th April, as follows :—
" The Committee invited the Chief of Combined Operations, after consultation with the
American Authorities, to make arrangements for American Planning
Officers to gain
experience in planning Combined Operations with his staff."
Nine American naval, army and air force officers, under Brigadier-General L. Truscott, were
appointed to the staff at C.O.H.Q., and joined on 11th May, 1942, thus making C.O.H.Q. the first
integrated inter-allied inter-Services headquarters in the war.
It was during the meeting at C.O.H.Q. that the C.C.O. suggested that British orders for landing
ships and craft, already placed in the U.S.A., should be doubled so that the American Forces would
have some for their own use.
craft for the conveyance of infantry in the assault.
The C.C.O. explained his ideas for a completely new design of landing
This was the Landing Craft Infantry (Large)
(L.C.I. (L) ) which was adopted by both nations and used for the first time in the landings in Sicily
The visit of General Marshall and Mr. Harry Hopkins had other repercussions for the Combined
Operations Organisation.
While they were in England, they stayed with the Prime Minister at
Chequers" and it was there that the C.C.O., who was one of the party, explained to Mr. Harry
Hopkins the dificulty in getting the engines for the Thames barges (L.C.B.). Mr. Hopkins then and
there promised to see that the engines were provided.
In addition, the C.C.O. seized the opportunity of explaning to both General Marshall anc
Ir. Hopkins a scheme proposed by Mr. Pyke (a scientist on the staff of C.O.H.Q.) for dropping a
airborne party inhe other by at ke a scientist of ate to against the German lines ol
communication.
For this task a special vehicle was required which could be dropped by parachute
name "Plough" and the vehicle required for the operation was known as the'
and which could also out-run any German vehicles across the snow. This project was given the code
ot this discusion, Mr. Pyke was sent to the U.S.A. accompanied by a Brigadier.
agreement of General MacNaughton, the G.O.C. Ist Canadian Army, the project became a
1 C.O.S. (42) 24th Meeting (O), 10th April, 1942.
TAEDTLER
Canadian/United States joint effort and the force, which was finally raised, was under the command
of Brigadier-General Frederick of the U.S. Army.
The vehicle was developed under Dr. Vannevar
Director of Scientific Reasearch, U.S.A., and, although it arrived too late for operations in
Norway, it proved its value crossing the muddy foreshores of South-East Asia.
cout the a motion i Hoping and Cereal pal with he Chin of Staf, the ate
" Round-Up " and " Sledgehammer"
On 4th May, 1942, the Force Commanders reported to the Combined Commanders that, on
account of its dependency on the weather, the difficulties of maintenance and the lack of sufficient
special landing craft,
' Sledgehammer,' with the resources available, was not a sound military
The Combined Commanders sent this report to the Chiefs of Staff on 6th May, generally
agreeing with it and recommending :—
" (a) That the Force Commanders should be instructed to prepare a detailed plan for
' Sledgehammer,' to be carried out this year if German morale cracks.
(b) That all preparations which will not cause serious dislocation should be continued. ...
(c) That the policy of large scale raids should be intensified."
At their meeting on 8th May the Chiefs of Staff decided :—
"To maintain the plans for Operation ' Sledgehammer' in a state of preparedness,"
and also invited the Combined Commanders " to initiate the preparation of the best plan
possible for a major raid on the French coast within the area of fighter protection.
should be planned to take place about the middle of July."
This date was in relation to the expected Russian offensive.
In April and May the organisation for planning " Round-up" was under review and the lack
of proper naval representation was put right by the appointment, on 15th May, of Vice-Admiral
Ramsay as Flag Officer Commanding Expeditionary Force.
This was in addition to his being Force
Commander for " Sledgehammer."
C.C.O.'s position was also difficult, because he had six distinct functions :—
A Chief of Staff,
A Combined Commander with major planning responsibilities,
A Commander of Special Forces,
Controller of small raids,
Adviser on technical development, and
Training for Amphibious Warfare.
every stage and worked on innumerable Committees.
On 18th June, Vice-Admiral Ramsay was
promoted Admiral and appointed
Expeditionary Force and on 27th June he was added to the authorities for parming
" Sledge-
Shortly afterwards, a new Force Commander, Rear-Admiral H. I.
Baillie-Grohman,
was appointed as Rear-Admiral Expeditionary Force.
While the Combined Commanders and the C.C.O. (now no longer a Combined Commander)
and their planning staffs were busily engaged on operational planning,
the logistics aspects were
also being examined.
The administrative arrangements to be established on the far shore were the
responsibility of the Administrative Sections of these planning staffs, but a separate organisation
was required in the U.K., the near shore.
The arrangements for the reception of the United States forces in the U.K. was the responsibility
of the Bolero Committee on which at this time Brigadier Wernher (C.M.S.F.) represented the
C.C.O.
All other logistical planning was in the hands of the Principal Administrative officers, who
in May, 1942, set up the
" Round-up" Administrative Planning staff in Norfolk House.
Planning staff was under the chairmanship of Major-General Gale, then M.G.A., Home Forces, and
comprised representatives from Home Forces, Admiralty,
War Office, Air Ministry,
WO 277/21
27
