Combined Signals Centre (H.M.S. " Braganza I ")
2 The Combined Sionals Centre HMS Pradona III is a training establishment and holding
unit administered by C.-in-C.,
through the Senior Royal Naval Offer (S.P.N.O.) Bombay,
instructions are issued as regards combined training policy by D.C.O.
It consists of three wings,
Navy, Army and Royal Air
mi Army and R. A.F. Wings are attached to parent formations tor
the purposes of major disciplinary action,
come under con maid of the Comy acting of cat, i. Ent, But all personnel of the three ion con
3. The functions of the Combined Signals Centre are :—
(a) The development of signals in combined operations at the special training of personnel in
combined signals, in accordance with instructions issued by D.C.O.
(b) To hold and train such I.Q. and Senior Naval Landing Of sers (9.5 a.O.) Signal Sections as
are not embarked in their ships.
In cases where such sections arrive in ships, mutual
arrangements may be
made between the Commanding Officer, H.M.S.
Braganza III,
arra the Commanding Officer of the ship concerned for any special training at the Combined
Signals Centre.
(a) To give initial training to beach Signal Units and to hold and intease the efficiency of these
units when they are not undergoing collective signal training with their Beach Groups.
wilbe the responsibility of G.H.Q. to co-ordinate all training prior to formation training
at the Combined Training Centre (C.T.C.) or Dryshod Training Teams after taking the advice
of the Combined Signals Committee.
The D.M.T. will be responsible for all training of Beach Signal Units at C.T.C.s, when training with
Beach Groups and during amphibious exercises.
D.C.O, will be responsible for advice on the co-ordination of training as between H.M.S. Braganza III
and other training.
(a) To arrange co-ordinated signal exercises for Support and Reconnaissance units when allocated.
(e) To give "refresher" courses for Combined Operations Signals personnel as requested by
Assault Force Commanders.
(1) To give initial training to R.N.V.R. and R.I.N.V.R., Combined Operations Signal Officer and
Landing Craft Signalmen, qualifying in India.
ANNEXURE II
RESPONSIBILITIES OF E.-in-C., AND D.C.O.(I.)
Responsibility for Policy
1. The Engineer-in-Chief (E.-in-C.) is responsible for laying down the engineer policy in combined
operations just as he is responsible for engineer policy in all other forms of operations.
In formulating this
policy he will be advised by D.C.O. Constant and close liaison is, therefore
necessary between E.-in-C.'s Branch and D.C.O.(I.).
Communicating Policy
2. Directives communicating this policy to the combined training authorities in India are issued
by D.C.O. (I.).
Research
3. D.C.O. (I.) is responsible for advising the E. in-C. on new engineer equipment, and modifications
of existing engineer equipment, which are considered necessary for combined operations.
If the E.-in-C.
agrees to the necessity for this equipment, D.C.O.(I.) is responsible for carrying out experiment and
development, and reporting to E.-in-C.
At the same time the E. in-C, is responsible for keeping D.C.O. (I.) informed of the latest developments
in equipment that may affect him.
Close liaison is necessary between the Combined Operations Development Centre and other
engineer experimental establishments.
Stores
necessary.
1. D.C.O. (L.) is responsible for advice to the E_in-C, on types and scales of stores considered
Provision to stores of engineer supply is the responsibility of the E-in-C. as for all other engineer
stores required for South-East Asia Command operations.
ther enetice ot which to base provision figures is obtained by E, in-C' branch in the same way as
for other engineer tasks contemplated by South-East Asia Command.
232
ANNEXURE III (a)
COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF IN INDIA
DIRECTIVE
TO THE DIRECTOR OF COMBINED OPERATIONS (INDIA)
12th December, 1944
Status
in India.
You are appointed Director of Combined Operations, India, under me as the Commander-in-Chief
In carrying out your duties you will, as necessary, have direct access to the Commander-in-Chief on
all matters for which you are responsible.
the C.-in-C.'s (India) War Committee and Chiefs of Staff Committee when required."
You will also hold yourself available to attend meetings of
individual services will normally be dealt with by you through the service staff concerned.
Matters affecting
In addition you will act as the representative in India of the Chief of Combined Operations, and will
keep him directly informed on all matters affecting amphibious operations.
Responsibility in General
2. Your responsibilities in general will be :—
(a) To advise the Commander-in-Chief, in India, the Supreme Allied Commander, South-East
Asia, and appropriate Commanders of all three
Services on the doctrine of Combined
Operations, as approved by the Chief of Combined Operations.
(b) To act in an advisory capacity as may be required by the Commander concerned during all
stages of the preparation for a combined operation.
(c) To study the tactical and technical problems of amphibious warfare.
(d) To provide advice and instruction in combined operations technique to such formations,
units and individuals as may from time to time be detailed to undergo amphibious training.
(e) To initiate and carry out trials and research for the modification to suit local conditions of all
forms of technical equipment including ships, craft, and vehicles peculiar to amphibious
warfare.
(f) To co-ordinate the development, as affected by local conditions, of communication material
and inter-communication technique in amphibious warfare.
(The application of these general responsibilities is dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.)
Preparation for Combined Operations
3. At all stages of preparation for combined operations you will be prepared and available :—
(a) To give specialist advice as may be required by the Commander-in-Chief concerned, or by the
Force Commanders appointed by him.
(b) To advise Commanders, as may be required, on the special training of their forces.
Further, you will advise and assist as necessary in overcoming technical difficulties which may
become apparent during the preparatory stages of operations.
of the
In carrying out these duties, you will when invited to do so, have direct access to the Headquarters
Supreme Allied Commander, South-East Asia Command, on all matters affecting combined
operations.
Training
4. Your responsibilities will be :—
(a) To co-ordinate and direct the basic training policy for amphibious warfare in respect of all
three services.
(b) To control all combined training establishments and to ensure that the training imparted there
is in accordance with the doctrine and technique of amphibious warfare as approved by
the Chief of Combined Operations.
(c) To maintain at all times intimate liaison with the appropriate training authorities in India.
5. In respect of the training in combined operations of formations or units your responsibility is
limited to the provision of advice, instruction, and the necessary training facilities.
The
Commanders concerned.
completion of the training to the necessary standard remains the responsibility of the
Control of Combined Operations Establishments
6. In order that you should fulfil adequately your functions, certain units and personnel will be
placed under your control.
233
WO 277/21.
27
3ф
