(5) In due course, an inter-Services commite me fore up under the Deputy First Sea
Lord to investigate the manning requirements of the fores shown in a paper... da fed
16th May, 1943, which was prepared in advance of the ' Trident ' Conference.
(6) On 9th June, 1943 . . .
, the Deputy First Sea Lord's Committee reported that
some further 31,000 officers and ratings would be required, and put forward certain proposalt
as to how this shortage could be met.
These are complicated and should be examined
(7) Briely, it was proposed that the load must be divided between the three Services,
the Army and the Air Force making a certain contribution to assist the Navy, and the Navy
terganising the Royal Marines Division in order to provide Marines to man minor landing
craft.
This proposal required a further intake of recruits into all three Services, which in
turn required Cabinet approval.
(8) On 10th June, 1943, a further report was submitted by the Deputy First Sea
.. stating that he had examined and found satisfactory the basis upon which
manpower calculations. had been prepared.
(9) C.O.S. ... Meeting of 24th
June, 1943, further discussed this
problem of
manpower for the ultimate invasion (' Overlord'), and decided that ' Overlord' should
receive priority in the Service Departments in the allocation of available manpower, and
agreed in general to the report of the Deputy First Sea Lord, subject to certain modi-
fications. • "*
(10) This started the introduction of Royal Marines into the manning of minor landing
craft; previously they had only manned the guns of support craft.
Although this
decision was inevitable, it introduced further considerable complications in the already
extremely difficult problems involved in the build-up of forces, in that a re-training
programme was now necessary.
The Royal Marines required to be trained as minor landing
craft crews and the existing trained minor landing craft crews and flotilla crews had to be
broken down and re-trained for major landing craft.
This programme was commenced
and proceeded satisfactorily, except that we were faced in the end, some three months
before ' Overlord, ' with the necessity to stop this shuffling process as the Force Commanders
were not prepared to accept it any longer.
Commanders were not prepared to recommission with Marines.
(11) It is interesting to note that the total manpower requirements for Combined
Operations had now reached over 80,000.
1943,
decisions was now causing anxiety.
in it out the cos Mering a man orner
(13) Consequently with the long-term problems discussed above, we were faced with
the immediate problem of meeting
'Husky's'
manpower requirements.
These
were
dealt with by dévious means and entailed manpower movement problems of considerable
complexity, since bases had to be built up and training flotillas manned at each end of the
Mediterranean, with an indeterminate date as to when passage through the Mediterranean
would be possible; this depending on the progress of the Tunisian campaign.
These problems
required detailed forecasting of dates of arrival via the Cape and by the first transport
through the Mediterranean.
Shortages of manpower occurred due to these complexities
both in the Eastern and Western Mediterranean, and the shortage fell particularly on base
aaministrative ctatts.
(14) At this time the strengthening of Hostilities Only' personnel was called for by
the Force Commanders and brought out the necessity for extreme care and tact in the
infiltration of Active Service personnel into a force which,
entirely of R.N.V.R. and ' Hostilities Only'
although composed almost
some of it operational.
personnel, had had considerable experience,
As was to be expected, considerable criticism with regard to the
discipline and bearing of the combined operational cratt crews then existed, but the fact
remains they did carry out successfully hazardous and difficult operations,
and, in many
cases, crews which had never been out of sight of land before brought major landing craft
of a new type across the Atlantic without mishap or incident. ot is suggested that much
of the criticism, which had been levelled at the Comicident, rations personnel, has not
taken into account adequately the other side of the balance sheet."
106
The Landing Craft and Bases Organisation becomes too large for the Combined Operations Command
In October,
1942, the problem of manning the large number of L.S.T. became increasingly
serious and an Admiralty memorandum was discussed by the Cabinet in which it was pointed out
that the manning of our portion of the Amphibious Fleet would have a drastic effect on the Eastern
and Home Fleets, the convoy system and the drafts to foreign stations.
In effect, the Director of
Plans stated that the commitment until 31st March, 1943, amounted to approximately 44,500 officers
and men.
This state of affairs was presented to the First Sea Lord on 10th October ;
later a revised
estimate gave the figures as 61,000 officers and ratings, to be incorporated by ist August, 1943.
This statement became the basis of considerable
enquiry by the First Sea Lord and in the
minutes of the Chiefs of Staff Committee Meeting held on 27th November, 1942 is found the
" The First Sea Lord considered that the Assault Fleet and the personnel to man it
had reached too large proportions to be dealt with by the Combined Operations Organisations
and it would appear that the Admiralty should assume responsibility for this commitment.
He suggested that the Deputy First Sea Lord should go into the whole question with the
Chief of Combined Operations and the Controller, and make recommendations as to what
as between the Admiralty and Combined Operations Headquarters,
necessary to deal with the Assault Fleet and its attendant problems."
At the same meeting the C.C.O. stated that :—
" Although some help was being received from the United States, very great difficulties
were being encountered in obtaining the personnel and equipment for the maintenance and
repair of landing craft now coming into service both at home and overseas.
The stranding
and damaging of a great many landing craft in ' Torch' would accentuate these difficulties.
He considered that the time had come when he must press for the provision of the necessary
resources in full, both at home and overseas, otherwise it might be impossible to implement
our plans for 1943."
" The Committee :-
(a) Invited the Deputy First Sea Lord, in consultation with the Chief of Combined
Operations and the Controller, to investigate the organisation, as between the
Admiralty and Combined Operations Headquarters, required to deal with the
very great increase in the Assault Fleet.
(b) Invited the Admiralty to accord the highest priority to the immediate needs of the
Chief of Combined Operations for engine room and maintenance personnel."
As a result of this, the Deputy First Sea Lord made his recommendations as to the future
administration of the Assault Fleet.
These recommendations are contained in Chapter 8.2
1 C.O.S. (42) 329th Meeting, 27th November, 1942.
a See page 67 under " Admiralty takes over the Assault Fleet".
107
