in French North Africa in November, 1942; and the enemy forces were obliged
to surrender on 13th May, 1943, thus bringing hostilities in Africa to an end.
Thereafter, Middle East ceased to be an operational Command, though it
Italy.
was concerned in the mounting of the operations for the invasion of Sicily and
In September, 1942, P.A.I.C. became an independent command, and re-
mained so until February, 1945, when it returned to Middle East.
R.A.S.C. Organization at the Outbreak of War
The Supply and Transport services in each of the two commands, British
Troops in Egypt and British Troops in Palestine, were under the direction
of an A.D.S.T., assisted by two D.A.Ds.S.T.
These services were of the usual
nature and administered in accordance with the normal system.
the Command Barrack Officer was a regular serving officer.
In Egypt
In Egypt, there were nine R.A.S.C., M.T. Companies, of which two were
allotted to the Armoured Division.
4 Indian Division had its own second
line transport, but without any ammunition company, as the R.I.A.S.C. was
not at this time responsible for ammunition supply, which was carried out by
the Royal Artillery
in the Indian Army.
Egypt amounted to about 800.
The total R.A.S.C. vehicles in
There was a small M.T. Depot, comprising
H.R.S., V.R.D., and M.T.S.D. elements.
In Palestine, there were four M.T. Companies. The vehicles totalled 400.
The supply services were carried out by detachments of R.A.S.C. supply
personnel, who also staffed the administrative transport and barrack offices.
The barrack services were organized on similar lines to those in the United
Kingdom, i.e., with a cadre of military personnel, supplemented by civilian
employees.
The establishments for barrack services were increased in con-
sequence of the growing strength of the forces in the Middle East.
Supply Situation 1938-1939
In 1938, the garrison of Egypt, including the Sudan and Cyprus, con-
sisted of about 30,000 troops.
The peace-time rationing system was in force, as in the United Kingdom.
Underdrawals were permitted, and purchases to the value of these were mad
from the N.A.A.F.I.
demands for other commodities of R.A.S.C. supply were made on the W
were obtained by local contract, and
Office.
These included flour and frozen meat, of which direct delivery was
made from the Dominions.
The authorized reserve was 60 days. The chief problem in regard 10 lis
was that of turnover and getting stock issued before the expiration of waraty.
Storage presented no dificulty, as the total tonnage was les than 400 ni
spread over four depots.
of 3,800 tons, which was more than adequate.
Two W.D. cold stores at Port Said had a capacit
There were three V.D, stati
bakeries.
After the outbreak of war, the supply services continued on a peacete
basis, but active preparation went on for the operations which were town
146
In July, 1939, War Office had authorized the holding of 120 days' reserves
of supplies, plus 30 days' working margin.
Shipments towards this began, and,
the end of August, the reserves had reached 60 days for 24,000 at the
Field Service ration scale.
At the same time, however, the strength was increasing, and at the out-
break of war, had reached 42,000.
The supply situation was, therefore, far
from satisfactory.
Shipments of a number of commodities were short, and
local resources were unreliable.
The organization of P.O.L. supply in the Middle East on a war basis
began with an appreciation by War Office early in 1938 of the petroleum
This took account of the combined plan for all three
Services for the defence of Egypt.
The position was that reserves of petrol
in Egypt averaged 15,000 tons, held by the civilian oil companies.
The two
main storage centres were Suez and Alexandria, the former being the vital
point of the system, as the policy of the Shell Company, the principal firm
operating in Egypt, was to refine local crude oil in the refinery there and
There were tin-making plants for the production of the
common 4-gallon non-returnable tin at Alexandria, Suez, Port Sudan, Haifa,
Stocks of tin-plate, sufficient for 400,000 tins, were
The problem of maintaining forces in the Middle East turned on the vul-
nerability of Suez and Alexandria, the latter place in particular being open
to sea and air bombardment.
Ships bringing oil through the Red Sea were
also liable to enemy interference.
In the event of war, the British Force in Egypt would have 60 days' reserve
in hand.
Beyond this, it would depend on the vulnerable normal supply
system, while for containers it would be dependent on the tin-making and
filling plant at Suez for the production of the sole distributive medium, the
4-gallon tin.
As a result of this appreciation, an officer from the S.T. Directorate, War
Office, and a civilian expert,
were sent out early in 1939 to examine the
question on the spot.
They did so in conjunction with the local military and
air authorities, and the Shell Company's engineers, and a summary of the
principal points of the report are contained in Appendix XB.
It may be noted
here that it included a plan for the use of returnable containers in war.
War Office decided to implement the third of the four plans put forward
and to develop the fourth as communications developed.
This was a radical
change in policy, and was based on the factors:-
(a) That the reserve should be increased to six months' holding in fully
protected storage;
(b) recognition of the fact that, if the Suez refinery was put out of action,
recognition of the fact that, ported, and the tanks laid down must be
of sufficient capacity to accept an economic tanker cargo.
The scheme was a joint Army and R.A.F. undertaking, known as the
Gebel Dave Scheme.
It provided for 27,000 tons of buried tankage in the
Geneifa and For A rud rovide for Pipelines connecting the former with
was get;
117
WO 277/21
27
WO277726
