The principle had now been established that economy of trans.
port could only be fully exercised if pools of transport were held at
the disposal of the highest formation for allocation to lower forma-
tions.
Corps transport columns had therefore been converted into
Army transport columns, consisting of a headquarters C.R.A.S.C., and
Army transport companies on the scale of one for corps troops and
one per infantry
division in the corps.
Additional G.T. companies
might be added as necessitated by exceptional circumstances, due
to increased distances and/or lifts.
The primary rôle of these Army transport companies was to
carry forward all commodities and stores from the L. of C. terminal,
in the carly stages of an operation on a fixed pack basis, later on a
fixed pack basis with variations to keep the stocks in F.M.A. balanced.
The organization of these Army transport companies was, in the case
of those allotted for infantry divisions, four transport platoons (two
3-ton, and two 6-ton), with two R.D.Is., and, in the case of those for
corps troops, three transport platoons (3-ton), with two R.D.Is.
(e) G.H.Q. or Army Group Transport.
Transport units of a specialist nature, troop-carrying companies,
tank transporter companies, and bridge companies,
came primarily
under the control of G.H.Q. or Army group H.Q.
The number of
these companies depended on the operational requirements of the
force, conditioned by the availability of the particular type of trans-
port.
Troop-carrying companies consisted of three transport platoons
of 3-ton lorries with folding seats to accommodate 20 personnel.
Tank transporter companies consisted of two or three transport
platoons, with three R.D.Is., and a general duty platoon.
A number
of these companies was normally grouped together, and formed into
a tank transporter column under a C.R.A.S.C.
Thus all tank trans-
porter vehicles came under a central control, avoiding to some extent
the problems arising from independent platoons being attached to
armoured formations.
Bridge companies consisted of a basic organization of head-
quarters, R.E. platoon, workshop platoon, and a varying number of
transport platoons carrying the different types of bridging equipment.
For further details, see later in this chapter.
Five bridge companies
were normally grouped to form a bridge column, R.A.S.C., thus pro-
viding a system of centralized control.
(A) Transport on the L. of C.
The principle of provision of transport units for employment on
the L. of C. was in accordance with the tonnage it was anticipated
would fermire in he lifted and not on anv predetermined scale
Other factors taken into consideration were the length of the L. of C.
the nature of the loads and the requirements of transport for local
commitments.
It was intended to be operated as a pool.
72
For this work, general transport companies were provided, which
were intended to carry out both local transport duties, and to be used
in place of the railway for the carriage of stores to the L. of C. ter-
minal.
These companies
were of four platoons each, and might
operate 3-ton, 6-ton, or 10-ton lorries.
They were organized in general
transport columns, under a H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., L.
of C. transport
column, controlling a variable number of G.T. or other transport
companies.
The latter included, for special duties on the L. of C.,
such units as tipper companies for R.E. tasks and general transport
duties; ambulance car companies for the conveyance of casualties
between train and hospital, or hospital and ship; bulk petrol transport
companies;
water tank companies; and L. of C. infantry
brigade
companies; whose functions are self-explanatory.
The C.R.A.S.C., L. of C. transport column, might also have other
R.A.S.C. units, for supply and petrol duties, placed under his com-
mand, where there was no C.R.A.S.C., supply units or petrol installa-
nous.
The Organization in Practice
The extent to which the transport and supply organization and the system
of maintenance outlined above were adhered to, or departed from or developed,
in the course of the operations of 21 Army Group, is indicated in Chapter
VIII.
It is sufficient to say here that the changes made in the actual organiza-
tion of R.A.S.C. units were almost entirely due to the necessity for meeting the
shortage of manpower.
operated successfully as originally designed, but there were certain marked
variations of procedure from that laid down in the War Office paper on
Maintenance Organization in the Field, issued in February 1944.
of this was the method adopted in the campaign in N.W. Europe for stocking
corps field maintenance centres, i.e., by transport under the control of D.D.S.T.,
Corps, and not by Army.
While not strictly within the scope of this history, the findings of the post-
war standardization committees on R.A.S.C. organization in the field, in the
light of the practical experience gained in the war, are included in Appendix
IIN, as a kind of epilogue.
Transport for Royal Marine Division
The Admiralty asked in August,
1942, for the provision of R.A.S.C.
second line transport for the Royal Marine Division, as a permanent part
of that formation.
They considered that, for active operations, second line
transport would be essential for the following reasons:
(a) The beach battalion would require additional transport to clear the
beaches and deliver to beach dumps;
(b) technical personnel would be required to operate the D.I.D.;
(c) transport would be needed to take ammunition, P.O.L., rations, and
water, forward to ammunition points, supply points, petrol points, or
B echelon first line transport.
The personnel for these duties could not be provided from Royal Marine
sources.
It was considered that the technical duties of the D.I.D. personnel
required lengthy training,
while the transport would require drivers of long
73
WO277/21.
27
WO 277/26
