S.T.3 (b).—Provision,
issue, maintenance, and repair, of R.A.S.C. M.T.
Provision and issue of spare parts and stores.
S.T.3 (c).—Home transport administration.
Hired transport from civil
War Office Stafi cars and War Office transport ser.
W.D. Transport-Staff Duties
Until July, 1942, the staff duties connected with the control and use of
W.D. transport were the responsibility of the Director of Quartering (Q.M.G.1);
but, as this was an anomalous arrangement, they were then transferred to the
D.S.T., and all questions of this nature were thereafter referred to S.T.3.
Formation of R.E.M.E.
Consequent on the decision that, as from Ist June, 1942, certain dual
responsibilities performed separately by the R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C., would
be carried out in future by
the R.A.O.C. alone,
repair of R.A.S.C. M.T. vehicles
would be undertaken by
formed Royal Corps of Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (R.E.M.E.), it
was necessary to transfer to the R.A.O.C. and R.E.M.E. departments in the
War Office a total of ten officers and 23 clerks from S.T.3 (b), who had been
employed in connection with these duties under R.A.S.C. jurisdiction.
is discussed in greater detail in Chapter III.
The organization of S.T.3 was, therefore, revised as from Ist June, 1942;
those duties, affecting the technical operation of R.A.S.C. vehicles, which still
remained the responsibility of S.T.3, were taken over by S.T.3 (c).
The division of duties was then as follows: -
S.T.3 (a).—General policy; organization; operational planning; war estab.
lishments; amphibian transport; air transport services.
S.T.3 (b/c).—Administration of home road transport services.
questions affecting operation of R.A.S.C. vehicles and unit
repair facilities.
Control of use of War Office pool of cars.
The reduction in the establishment of the branch proved to have been
excessive, and, in September, 1943, S.T.3 (b) was reinstated, to deal with
technical questions, and seven officers were added to the establishment.
Air Supply and Amphibians
In May, 1945, approval was given as a temporary measure, for all matters
of air supply and maintenance by R.A.S.C., and of amphibian transport ser-
vices, to be centralized in one separate branch of S.T.3.
The arrangement was
to last for three months, while the necessity for special operational activities of
air supply and maintenance persisted.
(See also in Chapter III in connection with air despatch.)
The branch was known as S.T.3 (d)
On 8th August it was abolished, and the duties of air supply and amphibis
transport were merged into S.T.3 (a).
The normal process of reduction operated in S.T.3 thereafter.
Operational and Administrative Aspects of Transport
Transport, from the point of view of the R.A.S.C., had two distinct aspect
The first was the operational side, concerned with the actual running and
maintenance of R.A.S.C. vehicles.
The second was the administrative sid.
which was concerned with the control or employment of War Departme
transport, both R.A.S.C. and unit, and of hired road transport, and also
arranged hirings, and effected the conveyance of baggage and stores by road,
rall, and water.
The principle was that the R.A.S.C. was responsible for the manning,
operation, and repair, of all W.D. vehicles allotted for general transport duties,
both in barracks and in the field, and as the first line transport of formation
headquarters, medical units, and certain others.
It was responsible for the
delivery of the load, i.e., it was not solely a transport agency operating vehicles
with the responsibility for delivery resting on another department.
The func-
tions of operation and of delivery were regarded as indivisible.
The basic unit of the R.A.S.C. transport organization was the company.
This was a self-contained unit, of varying size and composition, according to
its rôle.
It had its own workshop element for the repair of its vehicles.
In
peace-time, the existing companies were mere cadres, comprising only about
15 assorted vehicles each, and with a small workshop element.
The locations
of the pre-war R.A.S.C.
transport companies, with their allotted rôles on
mobilization, are shown in Appendix VA.
The total vehicle holdings of the R.A.S.C. at the outbreak of war were
2,000 at home, and 1,600 overseas, excluding motor-cycles.
M.T. Depots, R.A.S.C.
Before the war, there was one R.A.S.C. M.T. depot in the United Kingdom,
located at Feltham, Middlesex.
It included a Driver Training
Vehicle Reserve Depot, a M.T. Stores Depot, and a Heavy Repair Shop.
The Vehicle Reserve Depot held about 850 vehicles, and made all initial
issues of R.A.S.C. vehicles.
The Stores Depot supplied all home and over-
seas stations with M.T. stores and spare parts.
carried out major repairs and overhauls to R.A.S.C. vehicles at home.
For further details, see the account of these depots in Chapter XII.
There was also one small R.A.S.C., M.T. depot in Egypt.
Animal Transport
Animal transport in the R.A.S.C. had been almost entirely abolished after
the war of 1914-1918, but one small animal transport training company was
retained at Aldershot, mainly for training junior officers in animal transport
duties, and to form a cadre for the provision of pack transport units if
necessary on mobilization.
See further in Chapter XII, Section 2.
Administrative Transport Functions
The small pool of R.A.S.C. transport, available in peace-time, carried out,
to the maximum extent of which it was physically capable, the day-to-day road
transport services of the Army.
Everything was subordinated to avoid the
necessity for incurring the additional expense of hiring.
Until the end of 1938,
the use of R.A.S.C. vehicles in this way for administrative purposes took prior
place over their use for training.
It was a momentous decision which reversed
this policy, and made it legitimate to hire transport, even if R.A.S.C. transport
was available, if the latter was required for training purposes.
The detailing of transport, both W.D. and hired, for general transport
duties, was carried out by R.A.S.C. officers in charge of transport.
Under the
(37452)
29
WO 277/21.
27
WO27 7/26
