With the emergence of the " Sledgehammer" plan, it at once became nece
them in the southern ports.
At the same time the deliveries of craft from the U.
to arrive at our west coast ports in the ships sailing in convoy.
The move of the craft from the North, combined with the reception of the craft from overseas,
gave the Administrative Staff a rather complicated problem.
It is of interest to note that, not only
was this concentration of craft carried out by lifts in the ships under the command of the C.C.O.,
but also by road in motor lorries.
It was not possible to use the railways as the beam of the craft
would not come within the loading gauge.
As the deliveries to the west coast ports increased,
it became necessary to use the canal system and in this way canals, which had been disused for
years, came once more into use.
As certain of the canals in the Midlands ran through low tunnels,
it was impossible for the landing craft to go through them under their own power owing to the
exhaust fumes fouling the atmosphere.
It was therefore the custom for the ferry crews to lie on
their backs on the craft and walk them through by using their feet on the roof of the tunnel.
In
these many ways the concentration of craft was gradually built up in the southern bases during the
months of May, June and July.
Co-operation with the United States
At the end of December, 1941, the Prime Minister paid a visit to the President of the United
States.
Accompanying him were the Chiefs of Staff and, for a period of about a fortnight, very
important conferences took place on the highest level.
The general trend of the future strategy
to be employed against the enemy powers was formulated.
As a direct result of these deliberations, United States officers came to England to co-operate
in the Combined Planning work.!
Representatives from C.O.H.Q. took part in these staff discussions and its Planning Staff
contributed both useful ideas and important information to all the deliberations.
So far no long term arrangements had been made to prepare England for either the reception
of the American reinforcements or for its role as a base from which continental operations could
be launched.
In fact many prominent people considered that a landing was impossible against
he heavily defended coast of France.
Co-ordinator of Ministry and Services Facilities (C.M.S.F.)
For the preparation for the re-entry into the Continent, it would be necessary for not only the
Service Departments but also many of the other Ministries to play a part.
For the preliminary work
the question of the provision of raw materials and labour would have to be studied and allowed for in
the allocation of both to the forces and industry.
Accordingly the C.C.O. obtained the approval of
the Prime Minister, through the Chiefs of Staff, to have Brigadier Sir Harold Wernher appointed
to the staff at C.O.H.Q. with the title of Co-ordinator of Ministry and Services Facilities (C.M.S.F.).
This became effective on 3rd April.
His role was to bring together the authorities involved in any
project and, having explained the matter to them, to co-ordinate and follow the progress of the work.
Among the first tasks given to him by C.C.O., was the provision of loading hards to augment the
available port facilities, and the fitting of derricks to coasters for the carriage of motor transport.
Brigadier Wernher was duly appointed Chairman of the C.M.S.F. Committee which was at
first composed of officers from the Admiralty, War Office and Ministry of War Transport.
Later
the committees over which he presided had members of nearly all Government Departments working
in them from time to Time.
Sir Harold Wernher records in his book :-
"I felt at the time that a number of the members thought that much time was being
wasted felt at the time that a muten swich came us at the meetings, but I was gratified
to hear from the most sceptical, after the Invasion took place, that they considered that all
the effort which had been involved was fullv
justified and that without the preliminary
arrangements which be had initiated it would have been impossible to meet the staff
requirements of the various Services."
problem presented by a landing on the north-west coast of France.
1 Details of their work is contained in C.O.S. (42) III (O) which also contains a detailed examination of the
A STAEDTLE
an example of the work undertaken by C.M.S.F., another of his earlier duties was a
connaissance of the entira tate capacity rod the Wash to the Bristol Channel,
inventory of every
A complete
berth was taken and embodied in a document which became the basis for all
future planning.
assembly of a large military force.
Also on the east and south coasts it was necessary to make arrangements for the
Concentration Area
Accordingly the areas were defined as follows :—
25 to 30 miles from the coast.
Assembly Area
5 to 10 miles from the coast.
Transit Areas
Camps, roads and hard standings for vehicles were either constructed or widened throughout the
Eastern, South-Eastern and Southern Commands.
The other activities, which fell to the lot of the C.M.S.F. Committees, will be covered in the
course of the narrative and it will be seen that Brigadier Wernher as C.M.S.F, was eventually
absorbed into S.H.A.E.F.
Development of Combined Operations Headquarters
The responsibilities and work of C.C.O. and his staff were considerably increased and there is
no doubt that, for the next three years, pressure was great.
Not only was the C.C.O. the head of
an organisation that was growing fast, but he was also a member of the Chiefs of Staff Committee
and, for some months, a Combined Commander.
At this time, therefore, C.O.H.Q. may be said to have emerged as an important entity in the
conduct of the war. It had started as a Directorate with little or no executive authority and with
practically no resources either in men or material, it had now become an important Command.
Further, the training staff and establishments in the Command were the acknowledged experts on
the technique of a type of warfare which had become an integral part of our strategy.
that our re-entry into the continent of Europe was largely dependent on amphibious warfare and
that the more the subject was studied the clearer it became that the efforts required, both in
research and preparation, would have to be on a very large scale.
On top of all this there was the question of training the personnel for the work. As an example,
the first duty of a seaman had always been to keep his ship or craft from going ashore. In amphibious
operations, it was the role of these same seamen to learn how to ground their ships and craft.
It
was particularly difficult to overcome the prejudices of the senior officers of both the Royal Navy
and the Royal Naval Reserve in this matter.
Further the amount of repair work entailed in keeping ships and craft serviceable on account
of continual groundings was not readily appreciated by the various authorities.
Progress was at
first slow but, in the end, success was achieved.
The fact that the operations that had been planned and mounted under the C.C.O. were
successful showed that, providing sufficient thought and ingenuity were used, the matter was not
a black art.
With these increases of work there was naturally need for a larger staff and during the first
quarter of 1942 C.O.H.Q. grew by 25 per cent.
These additions were generally distributed amongst
the existing branches as were the U.S. officers who joined in May.
Co-ordinator of Experiments and Developments
By his directive, the C.C.O. was responsible for Amphibious Warfare technique.
this was undertaken by the Inter-Services Training and Development Centre (I.S.T.D.C.), but at
about this time it was apparent that, not only were new designs for ships and craft necessary, but
there was also a demand for other facilities and novel forms of warfare.
Accordingly, on 13th April,
1942, a Department was set up at C.O.H.Q, under Captain T. A. Hussey, R.N., who was known as
the Co-ordinator of Experiments and Developments (C. X.D.) :
With him were officers of all three
Services and,
in addition, three scientists, Professors Bernal and Zuckerman and Mr. Pyke.
August the title was changed to Director of Experiments and Staff Requirements (D.X.S.R.).
Liaison in Washington
where he
In April, 1942, Captain J. Knox, R.N. with an Inter-Services Staff was sent to the United States
Officer (C.O.L.O.).
joined the British Joint Staff Mission with the title of Combined Operations Liaison
This title was changed in March, 1943, to Chief of Combined Operations
Representative (C.C.O.R.).
31
(C52794)
WO 277/21.
27
3Ф
