(e) Ofensive purposes, for screening the beach heads, and for issue to
forces in the field (e.g., for the screen laid down on the Rhine
before the crossing).
In fact, as enemy counter-measures were on a smaller scale than had been
anticipated, the first two requirements did not materialize.
Provision of Containers
Although, from early in the campaign, considerable success was achieved
in the supply of fuels in bulk to the forces on the continent, the availability
of the containers of all types was one of the major problems confronting
S.T. 2.
Sufficient containers had to be provided: —
(a) To cover the initial consumption of the forces until bulk supply
could be started.
(b) To allow for the very considerable locking-up of containers in ships,
railway wagons, etc., which must always occur in so large an
This is because of the necessity for loading ships con-
siderably in advance of the period of delivery, so that the cargoes
become available in the theatre for use in the period for which
demanded).
(c) To ensure that there was a sufficiently large container population in
the theatre to maintain a steady flow of empty containers back to
the bulk installations for refilling.
average time taken for a container to complete the round trip
increases, and the container population has to be augmented to
compensate).
(d) To replace those lost or damaged by enemy action, and damaged by
fair and unfair wear and tear.
(e) To enable stocks to be built up in advance bases; but, at the same
time, to retain sufficient reserves in the United Kingdom to make
certain that, should reserve overseas stocks be lost, or were the
advance bases to become inaccessible because of a switch in the
lines of supply to new ports or beaches, the forces could still be
adequately supplied with their P.O.L. requirements.
The number of containers required by all arms and services for such an
operation was thus enormous, and the problems of production, transportation
and distribution very great.
Figures of shipments of all types of containers
are in Appendix XH.
Packed P.O.L. Stocks
American depots in the United Kingdom had begun in 1942, and it continued
The preparatory building un of stole of madled pOT in Pritich and
during the early months of 1944.
(See also in Chapter XII.)
of packed phT thinner in the continent on britich and TiS. accoun
exceeded noduction however and stocke in the United Kingdom had fallen
by some 220,000 tons by the end of 1944.
problems had heen overcome and stocks had been built un on the continen
By that time, the most dificult
so that the fall was by no means serious.
306
P.O.L. Supply in the Field
The basis of the P.O.L, organization designed for "Overlord" was the
gystem operating in other theatres, and particularly in the Middle Past.
The planned system o supply was that stocks would be imported in
packed form in the early stages of the operation, and delivered to red rol
depots, Type " C", from which units would collect in their own to pert.
Later, existing bulk installations would be made fit for use, a transpore.
necessary, new tankage erected by R.E.., and bulk stocks imported by tanker.
The installations would be controlled by Petroleum Bulk Storage Platoons,
four of which came under one Company H.O.
From bulk storage, delivery
would be made forward, either by pipeline laid by the R.E., or by road tank
lotry to Mobile Petrol Filling Centres for filling into returnable containers.
These would then be sent to Petrol Depots, at first Type "C", and later
Type "B", and possibly Type "A":
Fuelling of vehicles would be carried
out either at unit lines or at the petrol depots.
Planning for Bulk Supply
It was proposed that petrol should be brought into the theatre in bulk by
wo ulcals.—
(a) By tanker vessels, either loaded in the United Kingdom or, on coming
from overseas, directed to discharge at continental ports.
(b) By submarine pipeline laid from storage in the United Kingdom to
terminal points on the continent.
The necessity for the use of shallow water ports for the maintenance of
the assault forces in the early stages of the operation, added greatly to the
difficulties of introducing bulk into the theatre.
Such ports (e.g., Port-en-
Bessin, which was that actually used by 21 Army Group) all for shallow draft
tankers, small enough either to be beached without endangering the cargo or
to run inshore close enough to discharge through " tombolas
", which pro-
vided a partial solution to the problems arising from lack of deep anchorage.
In March, 1944, a warning was issued to all Services by the tanker
division of M.O.W.T., that, in view of these special conditions which small
400-ton tankers alone, that, in vit satisfactorily, there would be dificult in
finding adequate numbers of this type of vessel to satisfy the demands likely
to be made upon them by the services concerned.
In this connection, see
also Chapter XII, Section 5. For the next two months, attempts were made
to decide the allocatiotion s. all ta then between the services, but this proved
no easy matter, chiefly because of the grave shortage of small tankers.
Finally, there was a deadlock, which S.H.A.E.F. was called on to resolry
Admiralty. War Office (on hehalf of and in coniunction with 21 Arm
Groun) and Air Ministry had all placed large bids.
If these were adhered to
The Naval requiremistry, had those of 2l Army
Group, could not be met
in full. The Navy wanted to use these craft off home shores as water boats,
21 Army Group
and they had included ted to mer the be held as reserves,
wanted the inn tan vescale hecauca that could tale the ground with the
structural damage.
S.H.A.E.F. to be of paramount importance, as the employment of small
The latter requirement was considered by
1/77
WO 277/21
27
WO27776
