Travelling Inspector was attached to each
Catering Adviser.
Eventually
there were about 38 catering advisers and 14 specialist messing officers in the
theatre.
In the Western Desert operations, it became the policy to attach advisers
to operational formations.
field maintenance centres.
were generally well forward, usually at
In addition to their normal duties, they assisted
in forming stragglers' camps, and in distributing captured rations, especially
perishable items.
In order to improve the standard of messing of tank crews, the Mobile
was
Appendix XIC).
Catering Advisers played their part in organizing the messing in most
difficult circumstances during the early stages of the occupation of Greece:
and some were sent to organize emergency feeding in Crete on the evacuation
of troops from Greece.
Solid Fuel, 1941
In July, 1941, the procedure for the provision of solid fuel was simplifed
when the Director General of Transportation co-ordinated all military coal
demands in the Middle East.
He notified requirements direct to S.T. 6, ho
then asked M.O.W.T. to allot tonnage, and notified details of this to Middle
East.
The latter then gave India details of the type of fuel required.
From 1941 onwards, Middle East stock states included all military and
railway installations
in the
theatre,
but their demands covered military
requirements only.
Supplies for the civil railways were obtained through
normal commercial channels by the railways.
Stocks were controlled by the
Middle East Supplies Council to the extent that they ordered diversions of
non-military colliers, having regard to the general coal position of bunkers,
railways and military stocks, at the time.
Subject to the agreement of GHO,
Middle East, they could also similarly divert military colliers.
P.O.L. Reserve Storage
The decision was taken in December, 1940, to provide additional storage
accommodation for P.O.L. on the basis of 45 days' reserve of packed petto.
for 15 divisions.
Although sites were reconnoitred, none of the new acon:
modation became available until the latter half of 1941; and very litte rodig
for P.O.L. reserves was available before 1943, with the result that fres
wastage occurred.
The scale on which reserves were to be held in eat
command under G.H.Q., Middle East, was as follows: —
(a) M.T. Petrol.
Country
Working Margin, days
Packed
Bulk
Egypt
Palestine
Sudan
A den
Greece
Crete
Scale in days
Packed
Bulk
45
45
45
45
90
60
30
60
168
(b) Diesel Fuel.
The scale was 150 days' packed for the number of C.I.-engined
vehicles in, or expected in, the various commands.
(c) Lubricants.
The reserve target was 150 days', calculated at six per cent. of
the petrol and diesel consumption.
It was evident that the or meal scheme for bulk storage of metal it. ear
was now inadequate for the new and greatly increased commitment.
Office therefore provided twenty-six 6,000-gallon tanks, to be used as an
extension of the Gebel Dave storage project.
The plan was known as the
Reserve Storage, Egypt (R.S.E.) scheme.
Work began in December, 1940,
construction being carried out by the Shell Oil Company under contract.
Most of the tanks were located in the Canal Zone, but four were sent to
Haifa. and two to India.
It was planned to complete one tank a week, but
dislocation, due to air raids, of production in the United Kingdom and ship-
ping difficulties, made it impossible to work to any programme.
Five tanks
were lost at sea.
Tankage and pipeline schemes elsewhere were carried out under the
Director of Works, who would also be responsible for maintenance of the
whole project when completed.
Provision of P.O.L. Containers
The necessary bulk storage being thus provided for, the main priority was
the provision of the containers for distributive purposes.
Continued efforts
had been proceeding to find a solution to the container problem in the
direction of the returnable can, but nothing satisfactory had yet been found.
Proposals made through departmental channels for the provision of a plant
capable of producing 100,000 4-gallon drums a month as a safeguard against
the plant at Suez being put out of action were not supported. 70,000 2-gallon
cans were ordered from India, but were not delivered for many months.
old plant for the production of 2-gallon cans was set to work, and the Works
Directorate had many of this type made by small contractors; but practically
the whole output of this sort of container was required for equipping vehicles
with cans our us of this stet and petrol, and for the supply of water in the
The local product had to be made from the tin-plate imported for
the manufacture of 4-gallon tins, and the result was a weak and unsatisfactory
package, with a life for water distribution of only two trips.
As sufficient cans could not be produced in time for the projected
offensive, fieRt cans could sualized distribution up to 80 per cent, in ins.
The total canaditu of evicting plants in Hevot. Sudan and Palestine, was
50,000 tons a day, and the requirement was for an additional 76,000 tins a
War Office therefore provided eight plants of 10,000 tins daily capacity
each, and for East Africa, and these began to arrive in March, 1941.
Meantime, a crisis had developed, as shipments of tin-plate were not
arriving as quickly as tensicad and hu November 1040 stocks were down
to one month's supply, and in November to four days:
Fortunately,
unexpected shipment arrived and saved the situation.
Scrap lead had to be
bought in the barent arrives e as solder.
169
17
WO 277/21
27
WO27726
