The arrangements for mobilization, and for the provision of yehicles, have
already been described in Chapter II.
The more detailed plans for the main-
tenance of the B.E.F. are dealt with below.
Supply Planning
Planning for supplies may be said to have begun in 1937, with the con-
sideration of a Field Service Ration Scale.
A " guide" scale was drawn up
(sce Appendix [X), which included tinned items, as alternatives to fresh, tor
use in conditions when the latter could not be obtained locally or
veniently transported.
With a few minor amendments, this scale was that
used in the B.E.F. in 1939-1940.
The problem before Q.M.G. 6, in respect of supplies, was the provision of
the "hist month's requirement", ie, the quanties of foodstuffs and other
items of supply which would have to be available within one month of
mobilization being ordered. This was established on the following basis:-
30 days for the first month's consumption;
30 days' reserve for overseas;
15 days' working margin for overseas; and
30 days' intake to maintain stocks in the S.R.Ds. in the United Kingdom;
or a total of 105 days.
For the definition of the term
" working
margin", see Chapter XII.
The next step was to arrange provision of a reserve of the necessary food-
stuffs, based on the above requirement, in terms of the guide ration scale.
It was decided that considerably more than thirty days' stock would have to
be held in peace-time of certain items which were difficult to maintain, eg,
tinned goods, while items in ordinary commercial supply, e.g., sugar in sacks,
would be obtained only on mobilization.
Financial authority was obtained for the purchase of the " first month's
requirement" of the difficult items, at a cost of £282,000, to be spread over,
half in 1937-1938 and half in 1938-1939.
This arrangement was primarily in
order to assist in the problem of turnover, which could only be effected to any
extent at stations abroad, because of the system whereby the greater part of
the food affected was, in the United Kingdom, provided by N.A.A.F.I.
Actual progress in accumulating the reserves was slow.
Factors causing
delay included doubt as to the strength of the Force, the effect on N.A.A.F.I.
turnover if items were turned over at home, consideration of equivalence with
items in normal issue, and the extra cost of effecting turnover.
Although the
process began in November, 1937, little of the first half had been bought by
March, 1939 but provision was in fact completed in time for the outbreak
of war.
Plans for the movement to France of the stocks to cover the overseas
portions of the "first month's requirement" provided for automatic shipmen
of all supplies (except frozen meat, see below) until M +32 (8th
October),
by which date it was calculated that a reserve of thirty days would have bern
built up, after allowing for normal maintenance consumption.
The planned
vate of shipment was about 4,000 tons a week cohich, it was considere
would enable the required reserve to be accumulated very quickly.
104
The supply of frozen meat was covered by a reserve of 2,300 tons (in-
creased to this figure from 1,600 tons shortly before the war) held by con-
tractors in the United Kingdom.
the whole force.
represented 40 days' supply for
For its despatch to France, special arrangements were
necessary, in view of the question of availability of cold storage accommoda-
tion on that side.
It was the intention that the full Field Service Ration Scale should be
issued to all troops in the B.E.F. at the earliest possible date after disembark-
ation.
This was one of the particular duties with which the D.S.T. of the
force was charged, the other being that of building up and maintaining a
reserve of 30 days' general supplies, including petroleum products, plus 15
days' working margin.
It was hoped that the B.E.F. would have a fully operative supply system
as soon as cold storage facilities had been found, field bakeries set up, and
base supply depots stocked from the United Kingdom.
The programme was
to have all these units functioning by the seventh day of movement.
In order to facilitate the process of getting the supply machine in France
into operation, and to guard against any hiatus, it was the intention that all
troops should take with them two days' voyage and landing rations; that a
further reserve of four days' rations should be carried in all personnel ships;
and that the first supply personnel company to go over should take with it
200,000 Field Service rations, to provide the initial stocks for the detail issue
depots which its sections were intended to man.
It was, nevertheless, foreseen that, for the first few days after landing, the
B.E.F. would be dependent to a considerable extent on the French for subsis-
tence, and the D.S.T. of the force was authorized to enter into immediate
negotiations with the French Intendant-Général for the supply of fresh local
produce; but he was to avoid direct purchase until a central purchasing branch
had been set up.
Thereafter, it was proposed to use local resources in France
to the greatest possible extent for fresh vegetables, potatoes, coal, wood, fresh
milk, and eggs.
The Maintenance Project, drawn up by the Staff a year earlier for a much
smaller force, and not amended to
provide for the increased commitment,
allotted the following base and L. of C. supply units to the first contingent: —
(a) Two base supply depots.
(b) Two field bakeries.
(c) One field butchery.
(d) Headquarters and sixteen sections of a supply personnel company.
These sections were earmarked for detail issue depots and railhead depots,
to be formed at the four ports of entry, in the assembly and airfield areas, and
wherever there were British troops to be supplied with food and petrol.
So small an allotment of maintenance units could only have been justified
on the assumption, first, that the R.A.S.C. were going to step straight into
ready made installations,
and, second, that, when the first fighting troops
arrived, base and L. of C. establishments would be organized, stocked, and
functioning efficiently.
It is necessary to record here, incredible as it may appear, that the D.S.T.,
War Office, had not been shown the Maintenance Project.
105
WO 277/21
27
WO 277726
