The scale of transport allowed for the carriage of second line
scales of ammunition, fifty miles of petrol for all units (except R.A.S.C.
companies), engineer and ordnance stores, anti-gas reserves, blankets
for the infantry, and supplies on a single echelon basis.
This last
reduction was due to the introduction of the field maintenance area,
from which second line transport carried supplies,
etc., forward to
delivery points, general transport companies being responsible for the
journey from the L. of C. terminal to the F.M.A.
There was no
troop-carrying element allotted specifically.
(b) Armoured Divisional R.A.S.C.
Second Line Companies: —
One armoured brigade company, consisting
of five transport
platoons (four 3-ton, and one 6-ton); one composite platoon;
and three R.D.Is.
One lorried infantry brigade company, consisting of three transport
platoons (3-ton); one composite platoon; and two R.D.Is.
One armoured divisional troops
company,
of four
transport
platoons (two of -ton lorries, and two of 30-seater troop-carry-
ing vehicles); one general duties platoon (the former ammunition
platoon); "A" and "B" sections of a composite platoon; and
two R.D.Is.
These second line companies carried second line scales of ammuni-
tion; petrol for all units of the division (except R.A.S.C.), on the scale
of 55 miles for the armoured brigade and armoured divisional
troops, and 75 miles for the infantry brigade; engineer and ordnance
stores; supplies on the double echelon system; anti-gas reserves;
blankets for the infantry battalions; and there were enough troop
carrying vehicles to lift the marching personnel of the infantry
по не o nous
brigade.
In addition to the second line transport, the armoured division
had one G.T. company, called the armoured division transport com-
pany, as a divisional pool of transport for the carriage of ammunition
and petrol.
Operational experience had shown that it was unsound
to leave an armoured division without any transport equivalent to
the former third line, as, in many cases, drawings might have to take
place from roadhead maintenance area at the L. of C. terminal.
principle was to afford the greatest flexibility possible to the admini-
stration of an armoured division.
This accounted for the retention of
the double echelon supply system.
The armoured division trans-
port company consisted of three transport platoons (one 3-ton, and
two 6-ton); one general duty platoon; and two R.D.Is.
(c) Corps Troops R.A.S.C.
These were now under the command of C.R.A.S.C., corps troops,
the corps transport column and the increment for each division having
been dispensed with.
units: —
The organization now included the following
Two corps troops composite companies, each of three platoons
as before, but including three sections of tipper lorries for R.B.
70
One corps transport company, of three platoons (two 3-ton, and
one with three sections of 3-ton, and two sections of 10-ton
lorries for the conveyance of heavy assemblies, including one
Coles crane for lifting the assemblies); one G.D. platoon; and
one R.D.I.
This company was provided to give the corps a
pool of reserve transport, which might be used for the carriage
of ammunition
forward from F.M.A. to ammunition refilling
point when required, to start a dumping programme from F.M.A.,
or any other transport task.
The M.A.C. was normally
placed under the C.R.A.S.C., corps
troops.
It now included one section of troop-carrying vehicles
for sitting cases, which economized in ambulances.
In addition, there was a headquarters corps car company, R.A.S.C.,
whose rôle was to provide transport for corps H.Q. staff and their
equipment,
and which might operate under C.R.A.S.C., corps
troops, or directly under D.D.S.T., Corps.
It was organized on
a special, non-standard, establishment of two transport platoons,
with its own workshop platoon.
There were two Army troops composite companies for each Army,
for the maintenance of all units of Army troops, other than artillery
The composition of each of these companies was three
transport platoons (two 3-ton, and one tipper); one composite platoon;
Artillery platoons were provided for the maintenance of artillery
regiments, and sufficient transport was provided in these platoons to
maintain these regiments from the R.H.M.A. direct, except in the case
of heavy and searchlight regiments, whose platoons had a second line
platoons for Army field regiments, heavy
Platoons, Light", and were composed of one transport platoon (3-ton);
section of a composite platoon.
platoons serving medium regiments, light A.A. regiments, and heavy
A.A. regiments, were called " Artillery Platoons, Heavy
sisted of one transport platoon (13 6-ton and 20 3-ton lorries); one
R.D.I.; and "A" section of a composite platoon.
Artillery companies, consisting of a headquarters M.T. company
and a workshop platoon, were designed to administer and maintain
up to a maximum of five artillery platoons.
Some of these R.A. units were combined into Army Groups R.A.
(A.G.R.A.), allotted on the basis of one for each corps.
The artillery
company attached to each A.G.R.A. administered and maintained the
artillery platoons forming part of the A.G.R.A.
Army troops composite companies, and artillery companies not
forming part of an A.G.R.A.,
were commanded by a C.R.A.S.C.,
Army troops; but they were liable to be detached, either as a whole
or, in the case of artillery platoons, independently, and placed under
divisional or corps control.
71
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
