APPENDIX 8
MOST SECRET
C.O.S. (42) 65 (O)
18th March, 1942
WAR CABINET
CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE
PREPARATIONS FOR FUTURE OPERATIONS IN NORTHERN FRANCE
Memorandum by the Chief of Combined Operations
I have been impressed in the course of the recent staff exercise conducted by Home Forces in
connection with future operations against Northern France by the exceptional strain which will fall on
certain of our south coast ports through their use as bases for such operations.
There is also the necessity
certain i sost meticulous material preparations for the exercise of the supreme command of sthe
2. The damage that has been done to the Southamptoe are is mll known, as also is the disuse
into which the south coast ports have fallen as a whole.
I therefore felt misgivings on whether we should
not find that lack of port facilities and of a suitably equipped and protected H.O., would not prove the
limiting tactor in any operations which it might become necessary to mount during the coming months.
3. Accordingly, with the consent of the Commanders-in-Chief and other authorities, I recently
convened a meeting to discuss what action was desirable and required to be taken now.
were present or were represented :—
C.-in-C., Home Forces
Executive Planning Section
C.-in-C., Portsmouth
Deputy Director of Operations Division
C.-in-C., Plymouth
(Coastal).
C.-in-C., The Nore
Director of Anti-Submarine Warfare.
Rear-Admiral Coastal Forces
Director of Sea Transport.
A.C.N.S. (H)
Director of Movements.
Director of Plans
Director of Local Defence
- Director of Military Operations and Plans.
Director of Quartering.
Director of Minesweeping
Engineer-in-Chief.
Director of Plans, Air Ministry.
4. The position as disclosed by the conference is briefly outlined in the Annex to this paper.
5. I therefore ask the Chiefs of Staff Committee :-
(i) To seek Cabinet Approval for a policy, to be initiated now, of developing the facilities and
defences of the south coast ports as necessary to fit them to play their part in major
operations against Northern France.
(ii) To invite the Service Departments and the Ministry of War Transport to initiate such detailed
action as is necessary to augment the port facilities from Poole to Newhaven inclusive, to
the maximum practicable scale both for handling M.T. ships and transports, and for loading
landing craft.
(li) To approve in principle a gradual and sustained increase of the normal day to day use of the
port at Southampton.
(iv) To invite the War Office, Ministry of War Transport and Ministry of Labour to collaborate
without delay in whatever action may be needed to expand the available trained dock labour
sufficiently to prevent its being the limiting factor in any combined operation that may from
time to time be mounted.
(v) To instruct the C.O.S. A/A Sub-Committee to prepare detailed proposals for augmenting the
air defences of the south coast area as may be judged necessary.
(vi) To approve the expansion of the H.Q. of the Naval C,-in-C. Portsmouth and at Dover Castle,
so that they can serve as Combined H.Q. for assault commanders.
6. The Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, is in agreement with these proposals.
(Signed) LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN,
Great George Street, S.W.1.
18th March, 1942.
Chief of Combined Operations.
PREPARATIONS NEEDED FOR A LARGE COMBINED OPERATION AGAINST
NORTHERN FRANCE
The measures that will be needed before a large operation can be mounted fall under three main
6) Expansion of port facilities
(ii) An increase of air defences in the area of the base ports.
(it) Preparation for Combined Headquarters for the Assault Force Command.
denia too the mes enor not taily dotea to to pia lot a yentaly adopted, it is not
investigations already m ce by the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, and by the Future Operational
Planning Section enable certain broad assumptions to be made, upon which
be too late.
a considerable amount of
work can be based. If, however, we await the preparation and approval of a detailed ple a mou shall
3. The assumptions upon which it is proposed to work are as follows :—
i That the main initial assaults take place between Brest and Antwerp.
(i) That the scale of the operation will be limited only by the number of landing craft available
(ii) That the landing of supplies and reinforcements over beaches may have to continue over a
period of up to three weeks from the beginning of the operation.
4. The main embarkation will be from Poole to Newhaven inclusive, but limited use will also be
made of Plymouth, Portland and Weymouth. If the scale of the operation exceeds the capacity of these
sorts, use will be made of the Port of London and the Bristol Channel port
5. Within the main area, the intended use of the ports is briefly as follows :—
To be the principal military port of embarkation for personnel, M.T.,
To be used for military stores, and as a naval coast craft base.
To be used as at present by naval coastal craft.
To be used for military
Dockyard to be reserved for naval use.
To be used for Army motor transport, and also by the Navy as at
Their possible use for military stores, and as advanced fuelling bases
for naval coastal craft, is under investigation.
6. The total capacity of these ports, exclusive of their naval facilities, is estimated to be as follows : —
M.T. ships
Transports
Coasters (for stores)
Large landing craft (T.L.C.s and T.L.S.s) .
300 per day.
7. To achieve this capacity the following measures must be taken :—
(i) A detailed recon in sance of the are in taded, afegu of which from suit toad aproaches
li) A total of 50 mobile cranes will be required in the Southampton area, the bulk of which should
be 30 cwt. but with a small percentage of 5 tonners.
(iii) A considerable number of electric trolleys must be brought back to the Southampton area to
(iv) At minor ports a small amount of simple rail construction will be necessary:
(v) Something approaching 5,000 additional stevedore labour will be needed in the area, plus a
coot at of time to the our codin be the vetron of the prey, since the diversion i so
much shipping to a great combined operation would necessarily reduce the demands on labour
for normal import work throughout the country.
But there would still remain a considerable
deficiency, to meet which immediate action should be taken to raise and train the necessary
men under conditions of military discipline.
8. On the foregoing basis it is estimated that the
whole south coast area should be capable of
despatching a force overseas at the rate of two divisions every three days, and of maintaining a total
force not exceeding ten divisions.
For the despatch and maintenance of a larger force it will be necessary
to bring into use the Port of London or the Bristol Channel ports or both.
9. The substitution of small vessels for a proportion of M.T. ships whose use is at present assumed,
is likely to prove necessary for operational reasons.
This will increase the requirements for port facilities
and labour, and will therefore call for intensified preparations.
10. From the point of view of preparing for combined operations, there is a strong case for
(i) It provides the only certain way of ensuring that the facilities of the port will in fact be working
moothly and efficiently when required for the operation
ii) By no other means can any secrecy be maintained when the operation is eventually mounted
since otherwise the mere appearance of a large volume of shipping on the south coast would
put the enemy on his guard.
It provides the best way of testing the efficiency of our A.A.
defence organisation as the importance of the area develops.
WO 277/21.
27
