the 18 companies by companies composed of Belgians, he proposed to
officers and 750 other ranks suitable for service in the Far East.
retain the British personnel, so released, as reinforcements, apart from 80.
proposal was acceptable to S.T. 3, it was not agreed to as War Office policy,
Army Group
were informed that the 18 companies had been
lent on the understanding that they would be returned when the port of
Antwerp was working, and the Belgian companies had been raised in their
As these provisos were materializing, 21 Army Group was asked to
give a phased programme for the return of the companies, as they were
required to undergo training for their Far Eastern role.
Belgian and Netherlands Transport Units
The raising of Belgian G.T. companies began in December, 1944. The
personnel were to be trained in the United Kingdom, and to take over the
equipment of the British companies on loan from the War Office. At the
same time, a start was
made in forming 14 more Belgian,
and nine
Netherlands, G.T. companies, for work under the direction of Civil Affairs.
By the middle of January, the personnel of six Belgian companies had been
sent to the United Kingdom for training, and seven Belgian and two Nether-
lands Civil Affairs companies had been raised for training in the theatre. It
was then decided that the control of all Allied transport, except some French
units, should become a S.T. responsibility. By the end of April, 13 Belgian
and four Netherlands companies were being employed.
These Allied G.T.
companies under British control proved very successful.
As recounted in Chapter XII, there were two British Red Cross Society
platoons of ambulances operating with 21 Army Group.
21 Army Group
also asked for authority to employ women drivers of the Belgian Red Cross
Society, but War Office could not approve of their being organized as a unit
(which it had been proposed to call the "Belgian Red Cross Ambulance
Unit "), functioning as part of the Armed Forces.
The difficulty was that it
was regarded by the British Red Cross Society as contrary to international
Red Cross principles for their personnel to work otherwise than as a self-
contained unit, and then only as a supplement to the Armed Forces.
was confirmed that the employment of these Belgians was not contrary to
these principles, there would be no objection to their being used to drive the
vehicles on the establishmen to no objection which they were attached, pro-
vided that they served as individual volunteers and not as members of the
Belgian Red Cross Society.
Tank Transporters
The advance into Belgium had made the need for tank transporters acute.
of Battle had arrived.
By the first week of October, all nine companies in the 2ll Army Group Order
One was allotted to First Canadian Army, three to
Second Army, and the balance were under G.H.Q. control. Among the tasks
performed by the latter pool were:-
(a) Operational lifts of armoured formations.
(b) Clearance of reserve tanks from R.M.A.
(a) Moving PE, equinment, cranes and other heavy loads unable to be
moved by rail.
362
(d) Clearance of replacement tanks from Boulogne.
(e) Delivery of reserve tanks to the army delivery squadrons.
G) Back-loading of tanks to ports for repair in the United Kingdom.
(8) Lifting back repairable tanks from Army areas to the advance base.
(h) Carriage of naval craft overland.
All tank transporter requirements were coordinated at G H.Q. by 0. (A. .)
Staff. In the ten months during which the five companies under G.H.O.
control were operating on the Continent, they covered 2 million niles 1H.O.
and 2 million unladen, averaging 68 miles a vehicle each day.
There was an
goute shortage of heavy tyres for transporters in December, and four of the
G.H.O. companies had to be taken off the road, and were only used in emer-
gencies, the majority of tank moves being carried out by rail or on their tracks.
Reorganization of Transport Units
A reorganization of all R.A.S.C. transport units, except the L. of C. G.T.
companies, was begun in October, 1944, partly because operational experi-
ence had shown the desirability of modifying the organization of Army
transport companies, and partly because it was necessary to effect an economy
in manpower, to enable demands to be met for R.A.S.C. personnel to be
made available as infantry reinforcements.
16 Army Transport Companies
were reorganized into 14 standard 3-ton or 6-ton G.T. companies of four
platoons each, but they retained their former designation.
A fourth company, the Armoured Divisional Troop-carrying Company,
Nas added to the second line transport of the armoured divisions, to operate
the two troop-carrying platoons formerly in the Armoured Divisional Troops
Company. It had been found that the latter unit was not the right one to
handle these duties, and that there was a very real need for a fourth compady
(preferably with three platoons in order to be able to lift the Infantry Brigade
arical which coel apocalize in troop-carrying duties, and, when not so
acupied, couch would poad carriers and assist to maintain the Division.
Third line Armoured Division Transport Companies became Army Trans.
port Companied with the come prognization as the other third line transport
The transport needs of the armoured division, over and above
second line lift, were then met from the Army pool.
The effect on the other tunes of transport units of the measures adopted
for economizing in mannower was mainly in the direction of reducing the
Scale of reserve divere in Tafontry Divisional Core Troons. Troop-carrying
Motor Ambulance, ers d Artillery Companies.
The composite platoons in
Infantry Divisional
R.A.S.C. personnel in Ambulance Car Comnanies were replaced by A.T.S
Companies were reduced in numbers of
1945, owing to shortage of manpower, and then comprised one Corps Troops
The basic order of hattle of Corps Troons RA SC was altered in January,
Commite Commany of four platoone of auton lorries, and one Corps Troops
Composite Company of two platoons of 3-ton lorries, one platoon of tippers,
and one plates consisting of and contion of fingers four sections of 10-ton
lorries, including one Coles crane
six tons, although the Corns Transport Company was eliminated
The total lift was thus only reduced by
363
WS778717
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
