lengthened, and the consequent heavy demands on third line transport for
troop-carrying and petrol and water supply meant that second line transport
had to go back to roadheads for supplies.
shuttle system, and collected one week's supplies at a time, and in this
way a regular and adequate stock of their needs was made available to the
One advantage was the very small demand for ammunition,
as there was little real fighting.
The capture of the port of Kismayu relieved the transport units, and
a ship loaded with supplies and petrol arrived there five days later.
charge was difficult, however, and until it could be effected the transport
had to work back to the dumps up to 200 miles away.
A brigade pushed on, through scrub so thick that the drivers had to
hack a way through, and crossed the Juba River, where the enemy had
hoped to hold us up.
Three days later on 25th February, the British entered
the capital of Somalia, Mogadiscio, and the first stage of the campaign was
The transport had been ceaselessly on the go for a fortnight, in an
advance of over 600 miles, in the conditions already described.
While the
fighting troops rested, the transport personnel were refuelling, repairing, ad-
justing loads, digging slit trenches, and so on.
Workshop personnel had had
no rest, stocks of spares were diminishing, and springs in particular had
suffered very much.
Much improvization was necessary to make good the
A three weeks' rest for overhaul and refit was promised, and it was
needed; but a chance discovery
Italian M.T. petrol
Mogadiscio put an end to this hope.
Half a million gallons were found,
mostly in 40-gallon drums.
This made it possible to resume the advance.
Up to this point,
petrol had been carried in cased 4-gallon tins, which
did not stand up well to the bad road conditions, leakage being as high as
20 per cent.
Movements were sometimes delayed, because the out-turn of
petrol convoys was less than the amount anticipated.
The port of Mogadiscio had been mined by British aircraft, and was
unusable, so vessels were brought to Merca, about 80 miles away.
had been loaded in the greatest haste, and food and explosives were mixed
in indescribable confusion.
There were no proper facilities, and the whole
of supervising the off-loading fell on the supply personnel of an
Infantry Brigade Group Supply Section; but the transport units were loaded.
The Italians were in full retreat, and the force followed them up, reach-
ing Giggiga a fortnight later, 650 miles from Mogadiscio.
miles of this had been easy going, along the tarmac surface of the Strada
Then the road degenerated into a flint-strewn track, followed
by a stretch of jagged rocks laid down as the first stage of metalling, after that
there was a sea of dust, and the last 40 miles were over a grass plain.
The enemy were put to flight again, and the G.O.C. decided to press
on, and not give them a moment's respite.
bility on those maintaining the force.
This threw an enormous responsi-
Already the line from Mogadiscio
was stretched to excess, and, with any further advance of the force, it would
become impossible to maintain it.
398
However, at almost the same time, Berbera, in British Somaliland,
recaptured; and, when the remaining Italian resistance intervening had been
disposed of, it was possible for the East African supply convoys to be
diverted to that port, about 200 miles away.
On 29th March, Diredawa was
taken, on the railway from Djibouti in French Somaliland to Addis Ababa,
and a railway service was put into operation as far as the Auasc gorge, where
the bridge was in ruins, and the gap had to be filled by reserve M.T. com-
panies, which ferried stores across to where they could once again be
was carried out in the most difficult conditions
for three months until the bridge was rebuilt.
All available transport was sent up from Kenya, including companies
formed only three months before, and the L. of C. from Berbera to Diredawa
was kept working.
The rains had broken, and the roads were seas of mud.
Unfriendly local inhabitants and Italian stragglers made the roads dangerous
for supply convoys, which were profitable plunder. The rapid advance over
such bad roads put many vehicles out of action, but the exercise of much
ingenuity on the part of workshop and driver personnel, in the face of
great shortage of spares, got them on the road again.
On 6th April, East African troops entered Addis Ababa, less than two
months after the start of the campaign.
1,687 miles had been covered at an
average rate of 76 miles a day for each day of movement, and of 32 miles
for each day of the campaign.
The distance was equivalent to that from
London to the Black Sea.
Petrol supply had been a big factor. The half million gallons taken in
Mogadiscio had lasted 12 days, and many Corps Troops units had been
stranded 400 miles out from there.
Captured petrol dumps again helped
In the final stages of the campaign, petrol was the only commodity the
troops wanted in their haste to get to Addis Ababa.
The enemy was pursued southward from Addis Ababa, and again com-
pletely defeated.
The operation was rendered difficult chiefly by the heavy
rains, which made the earth roads impassable at times.
The transport was
faced with extremely bad road conditions, of which typical examples were a
stretch of road 100 yards long which took 23 hours to cross, and a patch
of black cotton soil three-quarters of a mile long in which vehicles floundered
There was an increasing shortage of transport,
sickness, and partly to shortage of spares, so that as much as 25 per cent. of
a unit was immobile.
The main Italian force finally surrendered on 3rd July, and the campaign
was at an end except for the attack on the last Italian stronghold at Gondar,
which lasted from October to December.
Operations against Gondar
From the S.T. point of view, the first stage of these operations
build-up of reserve dumps at Dessie, 250 miles from Addis Ababa.
were to hold 28 days' supplies for 160,000 men, and 14 days' for 14,000
prisoners of war, a confident estimate of the result of the operations, besides
200,000 gallons of petrol, and 240 tons of ammunition.
The reserve M.T.
companies had completed their task in a fortnight, although the road forward
of Dessie was a very dificult mountain road, with the usual steep gradients,
hairpin bends, precipitous declivities, and narrow tracks.
399
1D2
(37452)
