Close control had to be imposed on the working of bulk tank lorries
and rail tank wagons.
From time to time, there was insufficient can-making
plant capacity to supplement bulk supplies, and rail respoes had to be
The acute shortage of bulk road and rail transport was caused
partly by the commissioning of the American lorry fleet in advance of its
petrol transport arrangements.
At the same time as the increasing demands for motor spirit for lorry
fleets in Persia came the necessity for securing adequate stocks of oil for
civil purposes during the winter 1943-1944.
had run dangerously low, and there was an oil crisis in Teheran.
winter interruption of communication, stocks were built up over five months
so the level of two months for civil purposes for the whole of Persia, and
14 days to one month for lorry fleets.
When P.A.I.C. was formed, no Army road tank lorries were available.
Although the maximum use was made of the oil companies' road and rail
tank vehicles, these were insufficient for all needs, and no expansion of
bulk oil distribution was possible.
Considering these limitations, the per-
centage, 30 per cent. to 70 per cent., of bulk to packed, was very satisfactory.
32 600-gallon tank lorries were soon obtained through Lease-Lend; but,
although five bulk Petrol Transport Companies were asked for, in addition
to five Mobile Petrol Filling Centres and a Bulk Petrol Storage Company,
War Office was unable to provide any of them.
It had been the intention to use these units to supply bulk as far forward
as possible on the Persian L. of C., and from there on to use returnable
containers, in order to reduce the leakage and waste of transport involved in
the use of 4-gallon non-returnable tins.
P.A.I.C. had urged very strongly that the bulk petrol transport companies
should be equipped with
2,000-gallon capacity lorries, and not the 800-
gallon type.
The reason for this was the waste of personnel, particularly
drivers, on the long L. of C. with small capacity tankers.
Few journeys were
less than 200 miles.
It was stated that the Oil Company had operated 2,000-
gallon tank lorries in the area for many years, and found them the most
economical and satisfactory method of supply for all main products.
Before the war, the A.I.O.C. had three plants in Persia for making non-
Four more were constructed during the War to meet military
requirements; these had to be operated with Indian Pioneer labour.
and priorities of other work; and it was considered that the operation of
have placed PAir Ta Factory relating ad independent position; but
Petrol Tin Factory Operating Companies, R.A.S.C.,
The total capacity in April, 1943, was nearly 32 million tins a mith.
with a further 11 million planned.
Supplies of tin and terneplate, and fibre
cases, came from U.S.A.
In March, 1945, P.A.I.C. changed over from the 4-gallon non-eturnable
tin to small returnable containers, and the output from the S-U.S.-gallon
drum plant at Abadan was allocated entirely for internal distribution pur-
Military demands for non-returnable tins ceased shortly afterwards.
For returnable containers, the only production before the war was a
bitumen drum at Abadan, one line of which was adapted to make barrels;
it eventually produced 55,000 a month.
These served an extremely useful
purpose in reducing the quantity of spirit transported in non-returnable
tins.
erected at Abadan for the
production of returnable
containers, to be available for Army and R.A.F. requirements in P.A.I.C.
to eliminate use of non-returnable tins; for carriage of spirit to Russia;
to hold operational reserves against breakdown in existing methods of supply,
c.g., pipeline failure, loss of rail tank wagons, etc.; and to meet additional
export demands for packed spirit.
There was a year's delay between the
inception of this scheme, and its reaching production in January, 1944, when
output was 3,600 jerricans,
41,000 drums and 20,000 barrels.
of output was controlled by War Office, owing to the great demand for
containers, coupled with the limited and uncertain shipping tonnages available.
There were many difficulties in operating the plants, principally in
connection
with
personnel.
Skilled
civilian labour was non-existent at
Abadan.
Unskilled civilian labour could only
be obtained from
North
Persia, but these men would not stay through the summer, owing to
the
bad climate, unless they had accommodation comparable to that
of the
This the R.E. could not provide.
The percentage of
British other rank personnel absent from work during the summer
was
very high on account of leave and higher incidence of sickness.
It was
evident that the probability of plants reaching their target, particularly
during the summer, was remote, and War Office were asked to scale down
their productions for the months of May to October inclusive.
In addition,
the supply situation in regard to plate, stores, spares, etc., was often serious
through late delivery.
Large quantities of filled 4-gallon non-returnable tins, and both filled
and empty jerricans and barrels, were shipped from P.A.I.C. to Middle
and Turkey.
S.E.A.C. and U.S. demands on India during
1944-1945 were far beyond the latter's production capacity, and the balance
was made up by War Office from P.A.I.C. production.
Reserves
In November, 1942, instructions were issued for the following stocking
programme to be completed not later than 3lst March, 1943: -
G.H.Q. Reserve.-90 days for 14 Divisions = 35 million gallons.
Iraq L. of C.-90 days for 7 Divisions = 17} million gallons.
Of this, 49 days was to be packed, and 41 days bulk.
This included
15 days' bulk at Abadan, the rest being distributed over a number of
places, as far as Kermanshah and Mosul.
Persian L. of C. 90 days for 7 Divisions = 17½ million gallons.
Of this, 40 days was to be packed and ten days' bulk at Andimeshk,
and 40 days' bulk at Abadan.
The quantities to be held in Army depots, as the R.A.F. reserve
for 39 squadrons, were: -
Persia.-
-3 million gallons, 100 octane fuel.
Iraq. -8 million gallons, 100 octane fuel.
385
