The situation is well summarised in the following extract from General Eisenhower's book
"Crusade in Europe."
Since the nature of the defences to be encountered ruled out the possibility of gaining
adequate ports promptly, it was necessary also to provide a means for sheltering beach supply
from the effects of storms.
We knew that even after we captured Cherbourg its port facilities
and the lines of communication leading out of it could not meet all our needs.
To solve this
apparently unsolvable problem, we undertook a project so unique as to be classed by many
scoffers as completely fantastic. It was a plan to construct artificial harbours on the coast of
Normandy.
The first time I heard this idea tentatively advanced was by Admiral Mountbatten,
in the spring of 1942.
At a conference attended by a number of Service Chiefs he remarked:
If ports were not available, we may have to construct them in pieces and tow them in!
Hoots and jeers greeted his suggestion but two years later it was to become reality."
In the summer of 1942 a study was made, leading to small scale trials in November, of a method
of reducing wave height over an area.
This consisted of apparatus to release compressed air beneath
the water to seaward of the proposed calm area. Although successful in small scale experiments,
this method was not pursued and attention was turned to the creation of a breakwater by sinking
old and comparatively useless ships filled with concrete.
As the supply requirements for the forces which would be required in France became more
apparent, it was found that large ships would have to be used. Consequently, a breakwater of ships
would not be sufficient because they would be submerged if they were sunk in such a position as
This problem was given unending
In the Spring of 1943, it became apparent to C.C.O. that, inter alia, the provision of artificial
harbours would not be pursued at high priority unless the Force Commanders stated a firm require-
ment, so he convened Conference
"Rattle" to obtain decisions regarding the provision of
equipment in the short time available.
Investigations of the problem were taken in hand by the Director of Transportation at the War
Office and, under him, Brigadier Bruce White produced designs of concrete caissons which would
fulfil the requirements.
Also the Prime Minister had addressed the following note to the C.C.O. :—
" Piers for use on beaches.
They must float up and down with the tide.
The anchor problem must be mastered.
Let me have the best solution worked out. The difficulties will argue for themselves.
30th May, 1942. W.S.C."
As a result of the above minute, what came to be known as the " Spud Pier" was designed.
and was one of the components of " Whale" which is described later.
The actual requirement for the artificial harbours was laid down in the " Rattle" Conference
which was held at Largs at the end of June, 1943.
Closely following upon the end of this conference, the Prime Minister with all his advisers went to
Quebeck Among the late with him the outline plan for operation " Overlord".
Among the latter was the Chief of Staff to the Allied Commander (Lieut.-General Sir
At the Quebec Conference " Quadrant," proposals for the construction of these harbours were
put forward. The plan was for two of them to be built, one for the British and one for the American
sector. It was decided that a joint Anglo-American Committee should be set up to study the whole
project, and Brigadier Sir Harold Wernher, who had been appointed Chief Co-ordinator for this
project on 6th August, 1943, was summoned to Quebec by the Chiefs of Staff. Before the Quebec
Conference ended, the joint Committee had rendered their report to the Chiefs of Staff who. on 2nd
September, 1943, approved it.
In addition to the actual work entailed by the breakwaters, other requirements had also arisen.
These inchuded the provision of pier-heads which could waters, the we the tide, flexible floating,
stardways and pontoons which were used inside the harbours foll thit discharge of ammunition,
stores and supplies.
as liaison officer with the Admiralty. Likewise, uose! stry of Supply had appointed members of
198
various firms to be available for the project and the American authorities had appointed an officer
in the Corps of Engineers to represent American interests. Thus it came about that, when Brigadier
Wernher left for Canada, he had assembled a team who could get on with the work without any
delay.
During the absence of Brigate Winter, is assistant a coet ot at teli amy sury, War
il the won in instion tip an a ten eat Wen the turalty,
Office and the Ministries of Supply and Production.
ground work had been completed.
Thus came into being the project which received the title of " Mulberry".
In their final form the Mulberries consisted of the following constructions :—
(1) Bombardon:
an outer breakwater of floating structures which were anchored in the
open sea in two rows with 400 yards intervals between them and lying parallel with,
(2) Phoenix: an inner main breakwater of concrete caissons sunk in deep water.
(3) Gooseberry: another breakwater consisting of block ships sunk in the shallow water.
(4) Whale: a number of Spud piers, six American and nine British, floating up and down
with the tide. These were connected to the beach by flexible floating roadways which,
for towing purposes, were divided into 480 ft. spans.
Two of these harbours were built, one for the American and one for the British sectors.
The original design of the Mulberry stipulated that it should last for ninety days and was to stand up
to a gale of Force 6, Beaufort Scale. Actually, several years after the operation took place, the
main components were still in place.
All the component parts of " Mulberry" had to be towed from England and sunk in their
This constituted an operation on its own and was carried out, under the direction
of the Admiralty, very successfully as far as the British sector was concerned.
American sector never attained the efficiency for which it was planned, owing to:
(1) the rapidity with which the American Army endeavoured to erect it; and
(2) the fact that proper soundings were not taken prior to the sinking of the caissons, which
resulted in many of the latter being sunk out of sight.
In the British harbour off Arromanches, the rate of discharge eventually reached the total of
12,000 tons of cargo per day in any weather.
Some idea of the vast nature of the task can be gathered from the fact that the labour force
finally numbered between
43,000 and 47,000.
Material used included 105,000 tons of steel,
850,000 tons of ballast and sand, and 144,000 tons of concrete.
Grand Admiral Raeder, the German Naval C.-in-C., stated, after capture, that the Germans
knew something about the Mulberries but had no details.
He had never believed that such a
degree of perfection would be reached and, without any doubt, it was those ports which made possible
the rapid and total success of the landing.
In the report on the usefulness of the British Mulberries, Sir Walter Monkton, who had been
ordered by the Prime Minister to hold an investigation, records the following statistics taken from
Rear-Admiral Hicklings' records :-
Stores handled during the period ending 3rd September, 1944-543,750 tons.
Vehicles and Personnel passed through during the period ending 31st October, 1944-
Vehicles 47,000 and Personnel 223,500.
In the final paragraph of the report quoted above, Sir Walter Monckton states :—
"I cannot finish my task without expressing in a single simple sentence the admiration
which I have felt, as a civilian wholly unconnected with this enterprise, for the imagination,
resource, resolution and courage of those who planned and carried it out."
707/17
WO 277/21
27
3ф
Report by Sir Walter Monckton on The Part Played in " Overlord" by the Synthetic Harbours.
