The subsequent developments of this branch are described later in this
chapter; and its duties, as they stood at the end of the war, are detailed in
Appendix XIA.
Shortly afterwards, a further branch (Q.M.G. 17 (ater called S.T.2)) was
formed to take over petroleum products as its sole charge. Its formation, and
the stages of its development, are detailed later in this chapter.
New Organization of Q.M.G. 6
Q.M.G.6 (ater called S.T.6) was thus left to deal only with supplies and
barracks, for which it had a total of nine officers.
In March, 1940, the branch was raised to the level of a Deputy Directorate,
under a Deputy Director of S. and T. (Brigadier).
Under the new War Estab.
lishment the Branch was sub-divided into four sections, each under an
A.D.S.T., and the responsibilities of which were as follows: —
(a) Co-ordination Section.
Policy as to sources and methods of supply in co-operation with
the Ministry of Food, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, Allied,
Dominion, and foreign authorities.
Co-ordination with contracts
branches and A.D.S.(P) of demands and provision arrangements for
theatres of war, overseas garrisons, and forces in the United Kingdom
Forecasts of general requirements and general reserves; ration
scales; accounting and administration of rationing, make-up of ration
allowance and ration prices; settlement of ration commodities and
specifications; quality of supplies; R.A.S.C. technical supply instruc-
tions and supply accounting; control of military rationing as part of
the National rationing scheme; co-ordination with S.T.4, N.A.A.F.I.,
Admiralty, R.A.F., Ministries of Economic Warfare and of Health;
and general reserves in supply depots.
(b) Home Section.
Liaison with General Staff on plans for employment of Imperial,
Dominion, and Allied Forces; plans for provision of initial stocks,
reserves, maintenance of supplies, hospital supplies, disinfectants, etc.,
for Home Commands; bakeries, equipment and operation;
supply; anti-gas committee supplies; war establishments; A.Fs. G
1098 (War Equipment tables); internment and P.O.W. Camps; genera
questions afecting supply depots in the United Kingdom (e.g., labour,
camouflage, communications, etc.).
(c) Overseas Section.
Plans for provision of initial stocks; reserves and maintenance,
of supplies at overseas stations; arrangements
with Ministry
Shipping and other government departments for supplies provided
direct from Dominion and foreien sources: methods of carriage and
distribution of refrigerated stores.
(d) Fuel and Light Section.
and coke for shipment overseas; forage scales.
16
Subsequent Changes in S.T. 6
As time went on, and old commitments grew larger and new commitments
arose, additions to the staff of S.T.6 became necessary.
A W.D. Bakery Inspector was appointed for the specific task of dealing
with bakery questions.
Consequent upon the entry of Japan and America into the war, and the
fact that War Office had taken over the responsibility for the supply of British-
type foodstuffs for all forces administered by India, two D.A.Ds.S. were added.
In the middle of 1942, the D.A.D.S. in charge of the Fuel and Light Section
was upgraded to A.D.S.T., and a second Fuel Technologist was added.
little later, an increase of two officers and three clerks became necessary in
the Home Section.
This was because feeding strength in the United Kingdom
had risen by 60 per cent since 1940, the arrival of U.S. troops had caused a
considerable amount of work by way of liaison with the U.S. Army H.Q., on
supply matters, and the re-organization and adjustment of C.S.D. establish-
ments, and additional storage accommodation in the shape of three S.R. Ds.
and six satellite depots had been provided.
The load on the Overseas Section had, by the end of 1942, reached the
besides Middle East, P.A.I.C., and North
Africa, and a staff lieutenant and three clerks were added to the establish-
ment of six officers and nine clerks.
The next important development was the formation in May, 1943, of a
new branch of the Directorate, known as S.T.7, to deal with barrack questions.
This absorbed the Fuel and Light Section of S.T.6.
later in this chapter.
The establishment of S.T.6 was reduced by the personnel of the Fuel and
Light Section, and the branch was now re-organized in four sections, which
Overseas section
Home planning, and organization section
S.T.6 (c)
War Office Liaison Office, Ministry of Food = S.T.6 (d)
Early in 1944, the staff was provided, which was required to act as a link
between the Ministry of Food, as stockholders, and 21 Army Group, as
demanders, for foodstuffs required for feeding the civil population in liberated
countries, at such times as they were in allied military occupation.
It was
considered vital to the success of the work that the personnel should be trained
in the details of the proposed operations, and in the complex procedure of
supply and demand, as between Ministry of Food, 21 Army Group, and the
movement organization.
One D.A.D.S.T. was located with the Ministry of
Food, and was known as S.T. 6 (Civil Affairs Supplies); another D.A.D.S.T.
joined S.T.6 (b). Another officer was added to the element for Civil Affairs
in January, 1945, as the estimate of personnel required had proved inadequate,
and the task in North West Europe was larger than had been foreseen.
At the same time, two officers were added to S.T.6 (a), as the work of
planning and provision of R.A.S.C. supplies had materially increased in pre-
paration for the Far Eastern operations.
The extent of the work had greatly
expanded owing to the complexity of the supply packs, the wide range of
117
WO 277/21
27
WO27 7/26
