in the western part of the island. As a result transportation resources were
not always used to the best advantage.
Moreover, Eighth Army were using
the composite "Mov. and Tn." organization developed in the Middle East,
whereas Transportation units from North Africa and the United Kingdom
were organized on the more usual Transportation Service and Q (Movements)
staff basis.
These differences in organization caused many difficulties and not
a little friction, and it was not until some weeks after the italian campaign had
started that they were finally resolved.
All of these difficulties were, in part,
due to the rapid development of operations and to the complicated build-up
of staff and units arriving in Sicily from the Middle East, North Africa and the
United Kingdom simultaneously.
The Italian Campaign
Transportation took part in the three main landings in Italy. These were:-
Operation "Baytown," The Eighth Army landing at Reggio di Calabria
from Messina on 3rd September, 1943.
Operation "Elstree,"
The Eighth Army operation for opening the Port
of Taranto, starting 9th September, 1943.
Operation "Avalanche." The Fifth Army landings at Salerno, starting
9th September, 1943.
Each operation was controlled by a separate Staff, with units on a separate
Operation "Baytown" was planned and executed entirely by the Eighth
Transportation commitments were on a small scale and no stores,
other than small quantities of tools and plant, were provided.
Movements and Transportation Headquarters was established for the operation.
Under D.D. Mov. and Tn., Eighth Army, was an A.D.Tn., with a staff of one
D.A.D.Tn. and three staff captains. The order of battle included fifteen
transportation units and detachments, all drawn from Sicily and all placed
under Eighth Army command.
The Eighth Army's advance along the south
coast of Italy was rapid, with the result that the forces involved joined up in
a few days with those taking part in operation "Elstree" from Taranto.
transportation units in South and East Italy then came under the unified control
of D.D.Tn. Fortbase, and the Eighth Army Transportation Staff was soon
reduced to one liaison officer.
Operation "Elstree" was mounted at very short notice and, so far as Trans-
portation was concerned, was virtually unplanned.
Such Tn. units and equip-
ment as were available, and for which shipping space could be found, were
despatched to Taranto from Sicily and North Africa.
Once there, these units
were to do their best to meet the Army Commander's requirements by the
use of local resources and opportunism in the light of existing conditions.
No real plan could be made until the Staff had time to take stock of the situation.
Fortbase Transportation H.Q. arrived at Taranto from Sicily at the end of
September, preceded by a small advance party.
This advance party had been
able to obtain collaboration from Italian military, naval and civil authorities
Connected with transportation in the Heel area, and had also been able to keep
the Italian Railways working.
The Ports of Taranto, Brindisi and Bari were
captured undamaged, and in a very short time much of the transportation
system in the Heel of Italy was in working order, under the control of D.D.Tn.
Forbase, who stibe, ained the naff that had been with him in Sicily. By the
beginning of October, all units in the original order of battle for Sicily were
functioning in south-east italy. One serious failing in this speedily executed
operation was that, while it had been possible to move men, transport, tools
and plant into Italy ation sto speed, it had not been possible to do the same
with heavy transportation stores. Owing to the fact that no railway bridging
had been supplied for Sicily from the Middle East, none was forthcoming in
Italy until the planned supplies from North Africa arrived, and owing to the
necessary rigidity of shipping programmes these were not due until mid-October
at the earliest.
Fortunately, bridge demolitions were not heavy in the early
stages and it was possible to effect temporary repairs with Bailey bridges obtained
from the Chief Engineer.
This failure to produce bridging material where
it was needed, though largely due to circumstances beyond Transportation
control, gave rise to much criticism and resulted in a serious, though only
temporary, fall in the high reputation hitherto enjoyed by the Service
The planning for operation "Avalanche" began in Algiers in July, 1943.
A Transportation H.Q. staff, known as Tn. (British) Increment Fifth Army,
was assembled in August and consisted almost entirely of staff detached from
A.F.H.Q. A small American railway staff was also assembled, but this was
kept separate and not integrated with the British element.
The order of battle
included the bulk of transportation units still in North Africa, with a small
number from the Middle East and Sicily.
Stores supply was planned from
North Africa, and in the later stages by direct shipment from Britain and the
Transportation H.Q., with advance elements of units, landed at Salerno
in the assault and follow-up convoys.
There was considerable delay in getting
the main bodies of units over from Bizerta, owing to changes in shipping
The operation proceeded, however, in accordance with plan, though
delayed by fierce enemy resistance to the advance on Naples.
American Staffs reorganized the Italian Railway employees and got them back
to work, thus compensating in some degree for the delayed arrival of military
Transportation H.Q. moved to Naples as soon as the town
was taken and became attached to 57 Area, the British Administrative H.Q.
for Naples. It thus ceased to be part of Fifth Army Staff, but as Fifth Army
H.Q. were near-by, close contact was maintained: liaison was also retained
with the American M.R.S. staff in Naples. Up to this point lack of communi-
cations prevented any attempt to link up with the Transportation organization
then functioning at Fortbase, Taranto.
As the advance continued and firm contact was made between the armies
on the east and west coast, the stage was set for the establishment of a central
administrative organization.
This was set up at Naples, as A.F.H.Q. (Advanced
Administrative Echelon), with, under command, No. 1 District (Sicily) and
No. 2 District (Heel). In line with this policy the Transportation staff was
drastically reorganized.
The various detachments in Italy, Sicily and Africa
were sorted out and by 6th December a new Transportation H.Q., headed by
the Director, was established in Naples with representatives at the H.Q.s of
Nos. 1 and 2 Districts and at A.F.H.Q. in Algiers.
opportunity was taken to eliminate the combined Movements and Transporta-
tion organization and to organize all staff and units on the normal basis.
Early in November the responsibilities of D.G.M.R. for railways in North
Africa were extended to include Italy and an integrated Allied Railway Service
Nes987/
NO 277/2
W027 7/5
28
