loading and discharge and the provision of technical facilities.
This was all
in addition to the operation of Transportation craft for the discharge of shipping
at the various ports.
The organization of an I.W.T. Operating Group was
quite unsuited to this new function of organizing and controlling a civilian
industry, and much improvisation was necessary.
The organization was by
this time stretched to its utmost and no further territory could be covered.
The formation of an I.W.T. Control Group was therefore considered for the
waterways of Holland and, eventually, Germany.
This was not,
however,
found to be necessary as, owing to the improved efficiency of O.R.N.I. it became
possible to hand over the control of all I.W.T. operation by civilian craft to
Q (Movements). Movement control personnel for this purpose were attached
to I.W.T. Groups during January and February, 1945 and took over control on
1st March.
Preparations for Advance over the Maas and the Rhine
During January movement was hampered by weather conditions, and the
thaw during the first weeks of February caused flooding which also affected
craft movement.
The volume of traffic handled continued to increase, however,
and the figure for February was 282,000 tons.
With the release of I.W.T.
units by the handing over of control of civilian craft to Q (Movements), prepara-
tions could be made for future operations.
These included the provision of
craft to assist in the bridging of the rivers Maas and Rhine, the opening up of
military traffic in Dutch craft on the same rivers, and preparation for I.W.T.
traffic in western Holland as soon as it was liberated.
The formation of an I.W.T. Supervisory Group to control the German
Inland Waterways system, at first in the Munster, Hanover and Hamburg
areas and later over the whole area covered by the British Army, was again
considered in March and the formation of this unit began in April.
Owing
to the sudden collapse of the enemy, however, formation of the unit was stopped
in May and the personnel were posted to Regional Control Teams.
May, 1945
With the German surrender in May, 1945, preloading of food supplies for
the relief of western Holland was put in hand.
As the district was liberated
these supplies were sent forward, and normal loadings followed until the stock-
piles accumulated for this purpose had run out.
A total of just over 15,000
tons was moved under this programme.
One Group H.Q., with an Operating
Company and a Light Aid Workshop Company, was sent to Rotterdam, while
a second Group H.Q. with one Company was sent to Zwolle in eastern Holland
to supervise the transport by water of foodstuffs.
Large stocks of produce were
fortunately found in the latter area, with adequate barge capacity for transporting
them
The I.W.T. Groups in Holland also supervised the transport by barge
of German Army stores out of Holland to Belgium.
SECTION 9.-STORES
Organization and Planning
The Transportation Stores organization in North-West Europe was similar
to, though larger than, the organizations for other theatres.
It was headed
by a D.D.Tn. (Stores) in the Tn.
Directorate, H.Q. 21 Army Group, and the
168
units available were two Stores Group H.Q.s and five Companies.
these Companies did e arome overseas, but was virtually replaced in the theatre
by a Machinery Spare Parts Section and six Port Detachments.
were sufficient
Although there
units available, the Stores organization suffered throughout
the campaign from a shortage of staff at Headquarters.
The Stores branch
of the In. Directorate did not start to function properly until February, 1944.
before which there was only one office in the Directorate dealing with stores
matters.
Although the duties of this officer consisted only of planning in broad
outline and of advising on stores matters, subsequent experience showed that
larger staff in these early stages would have eliminated many difficulties later on.
In March,
1944, application was made for a large increase in the H.Q.
stafi, and to substantiate this application, comparison was drawn between the
H.O. staffs in various theatres, the units they had to serve and the tonnages of
stores they had to handle.
As a result of this application, the establishment
was increased to a D.D.Tn., an A.D.Tn, two D.A.D.s TIn., five staff captains
and thirty other ranks.
This establishment was so far below that requested
(which was 23 officers and 77 other ranks) that authority was obtained to attach
one of the Stores Group H.Q. for all purposes.
The Stores branch was
organized into three sub-branches to deal with general provision, plant provision
including spares, and shipping and movement.
An initial supply of stores for British Transportation use in North-West
Europe was provided by the War Office (Tn. 2).
These stores, of all services
supply, were delivered to and held at the home Tn. stores depots.
The provision
of the majority of these stores was based on a phased plan for the repair and
operation, for a period of six months, of two lines of communication, each
200 miles long, and two port areas.
The remaining stores were provided as a
basic stock for overseas Tn. stores depots, and comprised general tools and
materials.
It was found on examination that these initial supplies allowed no
reserve of plant or major equipment to meet commitments unforeseen during
the planning stage.
Supplementary demands were therefore placed to cover
such eventualities.
Some difficulty was experienced at this stage owing to the fact that complete
specifications were not held for many items of plant and machinery, and also
that the procedure for the provision of spares for equipment was not clear.
In order to deal with this latter difficulty, a separate spares organization was
set up within the stores branch to deal with all matters concerning the supply
of spares.
Among the many tasks performed in preparation for the campaign was
the compilation of a "Schedule of Transportation Stores" based on the Vocabu-
lary of Transportation Stores but separating items of purely Transportation
supply from those of other Services.
At the same time, in March, 1944, a
committee was formed which laid down the procedure to be adopted in Tn.
stores depots overseas.
To help Tn. units to indent on the correct source for
any materials they required, a pamphlet entitled "How to Get It" was written
and distributed.
Loading of Ships
As it was essential that stores should be available in the theatre soon after
the assault, ships had to be preloaded and, owing to the amount of work involved
in packing and documentation,
estimates of stores required as far ahead as
D + 50 had to be in the hands of the War Office by D-Day.
These lists were
169
WO27
