discharged, 514,945 tons of them through Mulberry.
The highest average
daily rate of discharge in Mulberry over a ten-day period was 10,400 tons, and
but for the changed military situation it is probable that this artificial port
would have developed to an average capacity of 11,000 tons a day as against the
original planned capacity of 6,000 tons.
At the end of August, two Port Operating Groups were employed in
Mulberry,
Caen and Ouistreham, and the remaining four Groups had been
withdrawn in readiness to move forward.
During the month of September
the situation changed considerably with the rapid advance across the Seine and
into Belgium.
The Ports branch of the Transportation Directorate moved to Brussels on
24th September, and in order to simplify communications the ports were
divided into groups, with Transportation representation where necessary at
L. of C. Headquarters:
Under D.D.Tn. (Ports) at Brussels:-Ostend and Antwerp.
Under A.D.Tn.(Ports) 11 L. of C.:—Dieppe,
Boulogne,
Calais and Dunkirk.
Under D.A.D.Tn. (Ports) 12 L. of C.: —Mulberry, Port-en-Bessin, Caen
and Ouistreham.
Caen was opened as a port at the end of August, but the extensive advance,
coupled with the capture of Dieppe and Ostend, made it no longer necessary
to develop this port to its full capacity as it was situated too far away from the
scene of operations.
The plan for its development was therefore scaled down
and its imports restricted chiefly to coal.
Le Havre was captured on 12th
September but was handed over by S.H.A.E.F. to the Americans.
Dieppe was
captured on 2nd September and opened on the 8th, and its train ferry terminal
was ready for use on the 29th.
The capacity of the port increased rapidly
and reached an average daily tonnage of between 6,000 and 7,000 tons by
the end of the month.
The small port of Le Treport was also captured in
good order and used as a subsidiary port to Dieppe.
Ostend was captured
on 9th September, but this port was more severely damaged and it was not
possible to open it to shipping until 28th September.
Clearance and develop-
ment of the port proceeded during October, and by November a capacity of
5,000 tons a day was achieved.
Boulogne was captured on 22nd September,
but owing to extensive damage was not used until 12th October.
Calais was
captured on 30th
September and opened for use in November.
Dunkirk
remained in enemy hands.
October to December, 1944
During the last three months of 1944, Caen was used for the import of coal
and also for a rising export of stores from the Rear Maintenance Area.
Mulberry harbour was closed completely for military traffic at the end of Novem-
ber.
The use of Le Treport ceased as soon as Boulogne was developed.
The
import of stores through Dieppe ceased on 28th December, having averaged
over 4,000 tons a day since the port was opened.
Boulogne became redundant
1945.
on the operons a day sinee the port was ope to stores import on 13th January
Calais was initially developed for personnel traffic and as a train ferry
terminal. The first train ferry was accepted on 21st November.
160
Antwerp was captured in September, but could not be used because the
enemy still held the mouth of the Scheldt and also because there were mines
in the estuary.
to deep draft shipping two days later.
The port was opened to coastal ships on 26th November and
Tonnages discharged at Antwerp on
British account rose rapidly, and reached an average of 8,600 tons a day by the
end of the year and 10,500 tons a day in January, 1945.
The opening of Ant-
werp made it possible to accept shipping direct from the United States and the
Middle East.
A special organization was set up at Antwerp owing to the size of the port.
The Port Superintendent was relieved of all regimental duties, so that he could
confine himself entirely to technical work, and a Group Commander, designated
Deputy Port Superintendent,
was appointed in command of all Port units.
The port was divided into five areas, each under a Docks Superintendent
with an assistant and staff.
A census of civilian labour was taken which
showed that there were available nearly 7,000 stevedores and over 10,000 dockers
suitable for quay labour.
Civilian labour was therefore used at the port to
the greatest possible extent and, apart from the unloading of vehicles and the
discharge of petrol ships, port operating personnel were used mainly in a super-
visory capacity.
Ghent was opened in December as an alternative to Antwerp in case use
of the latter should be wholly or partially denied by long-range bombing.
Provisional arrangements were made for the discharge of up to 12,500 tons
a day at Ghent on joint British and American account.
The organization
set up at this port was similar to that at Antwerp.
The tonnage imported
through Ghent on British account, however, was never very large, as Antwerp
remained capable of handling all maintenance traffic, and the use of Ghent
for British military traffic was discontinued on 22nd April.
1945
During the first four months of 1945, the policy was to make the maximum
use of civilian resources in order to free British troops for the advance into
Germany.
More and more of the routine work of daily port operation was
therefore handed over to civilians, under control of Transportation.
Antwerp
therefore hande all the traffic requirements of 21 Army Group, and by April
the average daily discharge at this port had risen to over 14,500 tons.
With the cessation of hostilities on 8th May and the subsequent occupation
of Germany, considerable regrouping of port operating units was necessary.
Port Regional Control Teams were appointed at Hamburg, Emden and Lubeck
to control the existing German port organizations.
It was necessary to send
a Port Operating Company to Rotterdam in order to assist the Dutch authorities
in re-opening the port for Civil Affairs cargoes which were urgently required
for relief purposes.
The tonnage of stores dealt with during May remained
at a high level but, with the cessation of hostilities, there was a reduction from
The port of Hamburg
June onwards and more and more units became surplus.
was opened for shipping early in June, and a certain amount of shipping was
diverted there from the Belgian ports.
The intention was to use Hamburg as
the sole port for supply of the British Army of Occupation, but it was necessary
for some time to continue the use of Antwerp, principally on account of the
heavy back-loading programme of stores and vehicles.
161
WO 27
WO27
