The principal function of the Transportation Service in the British Army is
to ensure, by planning, construction and operation, that the lines of communi-
cation of our field forces and garrisons, through ports and overland by rail
and inland waterways, are in all respects capable of handling the requirements
In times of peace, civil railway and port capacities are normally ample to
deal with all military traffic, and the Transportation Service therefore has no
routine technical duties to perform as part of the Army administrative machine;
for this reason its peace-time establishment has in the past been the merest
skeleton, and its very existence as a service has tended to be forgotten except
by its own members and by trained staff officers.
On the outbreak of war, on the other hand, it at once assumes an importance
which grows with every extension of the scope of operations or of the war area,
because plans for the launching of every overseas campaign, and for its subse-
quent build-up and maintenance, must to a large extent be governed by the
capacity of such transportation facilities as exist or as can be developed.
In the course of the war of 1939-1945, with its immensely long and widespread
lines of communication and its vast amphibious operations, the Transportation
Service grew from a pre-war strength of some 500 Regular and 3,500 Supple-
mentary Reserve Royal Engineer troops, to an
eventual total, including
Dominion and Indian units, of more than 146,000 all ranks.
In 1939 Royal Engineers (Transportation) units were among the first troops
to land in France, where they discharged the stores and vehicles required by the
Expeditionary Force, built and operated marshalling yards and rail-served
depots, and collected large stocks of material for the development of rail
After the collapse of France the Middle East became the main centre of
overseas transportation activity. The Palestine-Syria Railway, 170 miles of
heavy construction including a tunnel a mile long, was built and opened in one
year; the Western Desert Railway was extended from Mersa Matruh to Tobruk,
the rate of construction reaching as high as two miles a day: in Egypt existing
ports were developed and new ports were constructed to serve the Middle East
base; and the ports of Libya and Tripolitania were repaired and opened in the
wake of the Eighth Army from El Alamein to Tunis.
From 1941 onwards the Transportation Service was heavily engaged in
Persia and Iraq, notably on the Trans-Persian Railway, the capacity of which
was increased tenfold in connection with the delivery of supplies to Russia.
In North Africa, Sicily and Italy, some 20,000 R.E. (Transportation) troops
were deployed in support of our armies.
On more than one occasion the
progress of military operations in Algeria and Italy was primarily dependent
upon the capacity of the ports and railways.
American allies, these facilities were developed to handle
their peace-time capacity.
traffic far beyond
In Italy, Transportation was
faced with many
difficulties owing to the large German demolitions, but all were overcome,
thanks largely to the use of special "unit construction"
railway bridging and
trestling which had been designed earlier in the war to meet such a contingency.
These bridges proved so successful that they were adopted as standard equip-
When the time arrived for the assault on North-West Europe, Transportation
was again in evidence.
The design and assembly of the Mulberry prefabricated
harbours were largely the work of the Transportation Service, while the actual
construction in France of the Mulberry "B" was entirely a Transportation
responsibility in conjunction with the Royal Navy. The discharge of ships and
craft over the Normandy beaches, and later through the Channel and Belgian
ports, was a heavy commitment, the total cargo discharged on military account
up to V.E. Day amounting to 5,487,600 tons, with a maximum daily discharge
The rapid repair of captured ports was one of the major tasks.
the ports had been thoroughly demolished by the Germans before their with-
drawal, though the large port of Antwerp was an unexpected exception.
remarkable results were achieved: for instance, the small port of Dieppe was
opened five days after capture and was handling up to 7,200 tons daily within
It is noteworthy that all ports were ready to receive and discharge
shipping before seaward approaches could be cleared of mines and other
Railways also played a large part in this campaign, and presented a difficult
problem owing to the widespread devastation caused by allied bombing coupled
In that part of Holland occupied by British forces
up to the end of 1944, every railway bridge was demolished.
however, a main railway route was in operation from Bayeux to Bremen, a
through distance of 650 miles.
Among the major obstacles bridged were the
Rivers Seine (in two weeks) and Rhine (in one month).
With the arrival of the British forces in the Low Countries, movement by
inland waterways assumed importance as a source of relief to the overloaded
railways and road transport.
At one time the Transportation Service was
controlling a fleet of about 6,000 assorted craft in the ports and on the canals
and rivers of Belgium and Holland.
In India and South-East Asia, Transportation played an equally prominent
part. Much assistance was rendered to transportation undertakings in India,
and the Burma campaign was made possible by the large transportation effort
supplemented by air supply. In Arakan a considerable fleet of coastal vessels,
creek steamers and country craft of all kinds was organized and operated,
while on the Chindwin a fleet was built up from craft transported in sections
over the mountains.
Similarly, for the railways needed to support the 14th
ix
WO 277/21
27
Wo 27 7726
28
