employed partly in the Regulating Station and partly on the airfield spurs in
Arrangements were made for the training of British operating personnel
in the rules and regulations of the Region Ouest-the western section of the
Efforts were made to have them trained on the northern
but the French authorities would not agree to this.
was made against this decision, as it was considered desirable that the British
Army should have its own railway operating troops to work military trafic
immediately behind its front: this protest was shown. 1940e amply justified
during the period of active operations in May and June, 1940.
On the German invasion of Holland and Belgiu on May 0940, one railvay
operating company was moved forward to Ath according to plan.
this company was not much canton, as the be gal tenways contined to
When the retreat started, however, British min try train crews had
to be increasingly employed to keep traffic moving.
On 18th May, the final
day of the evacuation from Ath and the forwarm areas the whole line from
Ath to Lille was blocked with trains head to tail moving forward in occasional
This was due to the attempt to evacuate an excessive amount of
rolling stock to prevent it falling into enemy hands.
The only possible way
to work this line was to use wrong line working on the down line, and this was
done in bringing out the last trains.
At the time of the final evacuation, two railway mobile workshops, which
had crossed the Channel by train ferry, were employed at St. Nazaire and at
Rennes in connection with the installation of machine tools, minor repairs to
locomotives and plant, and the fitting of ex-Great Western tank locomotives
Westinghouse brakes
and spark-arresting equipment.
workshops company, which arrived in January, was engaged on the installation
of machinery at a disused locomotive shed in St. Nazaire; while a second
workshops company, which arrived in May, had just started to repair a second
disused shed at Martainville near Rouen.
Both these sheds were to have been
fitted up as workshops for service repairs and for a certain amount of general
Negotiations were in hand with the S.N.C.F. for the use of part of
the Batignolles Locomotive Workshops in Paris as a heavy repair shop. Small
running shed workshops for light repairs were being installed at Savernay in
the existing S.N.C.F. shed, and in a new shed at the Regulating Station at
A third had been proposed for St. Malo.
An ambulance train maintenance section arrived in January, 1940, and was
installed at Dieppe.
A second section arrived in May and had just started to
function at taples when it had to be evacuated.
All the above railway workshop and repair units were combined into a
Mechanical Engineers' Department under a Chief Mechanical Engineer (C.M.E.)
who, in this case, was the Commanding Officer of the Railway Workshops
He was responsible to the Director of Railways for all mechanical
work, including
maintenance and repair of dock and other outdoor
SECTION 4.-RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION
Railway construction work carried out during the campaign was almos
entirely confined to the construction of new rail-served depots with their atten-
dant connecting lines and marshalling yards.
Exceptions were the construc-
42
WO 277/21
27
Wº277/6
2.
tion of hospital sidings for ambulance trains and the laying of feeder lines to
the sites of new airfields in Northern France, which required the delivery of a
large tonnage of gravel, sand and cement for the construction of run-ways.
The railway construction units accompanying the original B.E.F. were one
regular railway survey company, one regular
railway construction and
operating company, and three Supplementary Reserve railway construction
It was soon evident that the amount of work to be done would
require a very considerable increase in the number of railway construction units
if it was to be completed in any reasonable time.
the War Office, and new units were in course of formation and training in the
Four additional railway construction companies arrived
in France, one each in the months of January, February, March and April,
A transportation construction company with heavy earthwork machinery
also arrived, company headquarters and one section in November, 1939, and
the remaining two sections a month later.
During the first few months, railway construction was the responsibility
of the Director of Railways, but as base planning and development proceeded,
the volume of work falling to the construction section made an increase in
staff necessary.
Accordingly, in
February, 1940,
a new Directorate
Transportation Construction was formed.
This was the equivalent of the New
Works Department of a civil railway, and was responsible for all new construc-
tion work for the Transportation Service, including railway construction,
improvements to ports, and the construction of lighter wharves.
A list of the rail-served depots and other works constructed or still under
construction at the time of evacuation is given in Appendix A at the end of this
Between September, 1939 and May, 1940, the consumption of track
was 17 miles of 90-1b. track with 210 turnouts and 124 miles of 75-1b. track
About 70 per cent. of this material had been laid by
British railway construction units, and the remainder by French Army engineers
and the S.N.C.F., carrying out works on behalf of the British Army.
Experience during this first campaign taught a number of lessons which
proved valuable later. It was found that one railway construction company
needed the assistance of at least one thousand unskilled labourers to keep it
fully employed; that in depot and yard construction a railway construction
company could lay an average of four miles of track a week in summer and two
and one half miles in winter, and that in this class of work the number of
turnouts required averaged five for each mile of track; and that one railway
survey company could keep ahead of the requirements of three railway con-
struction companies, but only provided it was given a good start.
short period of active operations the need for railway construction companies
to be mobile by road was very clearly demonstrated.
A line was frequently
cut in several places so that the construction train could not get near the damage
but repairs could have been rapidly effected with material available at or near
the site if men and tools could have been brought up by road.
SECTION 5.—PORT WORKING
In general, all matters affecting a port were either directly or indirectly
the concern of the Docks Directorate, as represented by the docks superintendent
at the port concerned. The Docks Directorate initially consisted of a Director
