Drier, represenhin al it as respons Deportments ng the toy crani ar
the Services.
lion of development projects, and had three sub-committees,
the Harbour
Craft Committee, the Crane Allocation Committee, and the Joint Transportation
Steering Committee which dealt with the detailed requirements of craft for
Bombay Port.
In the second half of 1943, with the Eastern theatre of operations growing
in importance, it was decided to set up Reserve Bases at Panagarh in Bengal
and at Avadi in Madras.
A new. Tn. depot was constructed at Panagarh,
which then became the new central Tn. stores depot in India.
The transfer
of stocks to Panagarh from Benares was almost completed by the end of 1943.
In the second half of 1944 this depot was doubled in size in order to deal with
the increasing amount of stores and equipment for South-East Asia Command.
In 1944 the Progress and Issue sections of the Stores branch moved to Calcutta,
the Policy and Provision Sections remaining at Delhi. The Tn. Stores Group
H.Q. was at Saidpur, with four Companies in charge of the various depots.
One Company was at Panagarh, one at Calcutta, one with 14th Army at Chitta-
gong, and the fourth at Avadi with a detachment at Bombay.
SECTION 8.-CEYLON
March, 1942
After the fall of Singapore, and in view of the consequent Japanese threat
to Ceylon and the east coast of India, an A.D.Tn. and staff were attached in
March, 1942, to the Headquarters of C.-in-C. Ceylon. Plans were at once made
to raise locally a docks section and a railway workshops company to assist in
the operation of
transportation facilities on the island.
In April, Japanese
air raids caused serious shortages of labour and staff in the ports, and it became
obvious that even some of the supervisory staff could not be relied on to remain
at their posts in the event of further attacks.
Build-up of Ceylon Government Railway Organization
Railways w1942, eat vee tay th ineesure that tree Cely the changed
war situation.
The establishment of the A.D.Tn. (who was up-graded to
D.D.Tn.)
was increased, and some eight officers were loaned to the railways
and filled key posts in the civil organization.
A railway operating company
and a railway construction company were sent from India, and three operating,
three construction and three workshops companies were formed from personnel
of the Ceylon Government Railways.
The General Manager of the Railways
was commissioned as Group Commander, and the personnel of these units
generally continued to work at their previous civilian jobs in much the same
manner as the Defence of India Corps personnel in India; the degree of mili-
tarization was, however, greater in Ceylon than in India.
Relaying of Track
Of the 900 miles of line in the Ceylon Railways, over 270 miles were laid
with very light section rail, and this caused many difficulties.
The stock of
196
was 747/1
WO 277/
wO 2777
