with I.W.T. experience were transferred from units within the Command and
set to work to create the nucleus of an organization destined to be ten thousand
Craft, which had already been on hire for six months,
were surveyed, additional craft were taken on hire, accommodation was
acquired or planned throughout the lines of communication to be operated,
re-fuelling was organized, the rivers were inspected and the surveying and
dredging of difficult reaches begun.
Arrangements were made for paying and
The I.W.T. traffic department took over complete
control of loading and movement of craft from Messrs. Gray Mackenzie, and
all the time a steadily increasing tonnage of both harbour lighterage and
up-river cargo was being handled.
By the end of November the organization in Iraq had reached a stage where
it was difficult to proceed further without more information from India, and
the newly appointed Director of Inland Water Transport was despatched on
Progress in India on the fulfilment of the Berry Committee
proposals was found to be very much behindhand for a variety of reasons,
and on his return the D.I.W.T. reported that, apart from a few paddlers and
barges under preparation for the sea voyage to Iraq, no craft or equipment
were likely to be forthcoming during 1942, and that there would be deficiencies
in certain key trades which would seriously hamper operations.
fore decided to accept an American offer of Higgins barges and Eureka tow-
boats which, although unsatisfactory expedients from both the operating and
maintenance points of view, were the only craft likely to be available in any
quantity during the following twelve months.
It was further decided that all
available local craft, whatever their condition, should be purchased, hired or
requisitioned; that local workshops should be taken over and enlarged pending
the construction of new workshops; and that, besides engaging every available
Persian and Iraqi, both ashore and afloat, schemes for training enlisted personnel
in navigation, engine operation and maintenance were essential to the successful
development of the undertaking.
By the end of 1941, the four principal
departments-Marine, Traffic, Engineering and Administration—were function-
ing with a skeleton staff and could readily be expanded to cover all the proposed
operations as soon as the necessary personnel became available.
craft had been acquired locally, principally from the Anglo-Iranian Oil Com-
pany, and the I.W.T. Fleet at the end of the year consisted of 186 vessels of
which 48 were powered.
Organization of Staff
The organization of I.W.T., Iraq and Persia, as agreed between the Berry
Committee and the responsible military authorities in Iraq, followed broadly
that of the I.W.T. in Mesopotamia from 1915 to 1921, namely a departmental
organization on civil lines with a mass establishment, as opposed to the normal
Group and Company system.
Owing to the lack of peace-time training of
I.W.T. personnel in the Regular Army and of any cadre of I.W.T. personnel
in the Supplementary Reserve, there was an almost complete dearth of
officers: it was therefore obvious that I.W.T. Iraq, which required over 200
officers, would have to find the majority of them direct from civil life. There
would be no time to give full military training or courses in staff duties, and.
the organization Would have to be set up so rapidly that technical and adminis
trative ability rather than military experience would have to be the criterion
94
By adopting the departmental organization, with the military
aspects controller able so to of specialists in the Administrative Department,
other officers were able to concentrate on their technical duties while gradually
acquiring a military outlook.
In this way the fullest possible use was made
of the limited number of technical officers available, and at the same time the
total number of officers employed was considerably less than it would have
been under the Group and Company system.
The crew problem was equally difficult.
and types of craft would eventually be provided, and the mass establishment
was a compromise which would cover all types.
The shortage of engineer
tradesmen also made it essential that they should all be at the disposal of the
Engineering Department and not split into small sections under Company
The necessity for engaging every available local tradesman was
another argument in favour of a mass establishment against which these men
could be held.
In view of the early trouble experienced in Iraq with Arab
crews, and in the certain knowledge that the enlisted crews from India would
have the barest minimum of military training, it was decided to ask for a British
I.W.T. Group to assume the supervision of the various races which were to
make up the establishment.
The Group arrived in January, 1942: it was
promptly broken up and the officers and other ranks were posted to the
appropriate I. W.T. departments.
Composite detachments were then made up
and sent to all I.W.T. stations throughout the Command, the composition
and size of each detachment being decided by the immediate requirements
of each particular port.
It was very largely due to the efforts of these British
troops, controlling a medley of Indians of all castes and creeds, Iraqis, Kurds,
Persians, Chinese and Arabs, that I.W.T. Iraq and Persia was able to move
the large tonnages that it did during the next three years of war.
In January, 1942, the Iraq Government passed the Craft Requisitioning
Ordinance, which decreed that river craft of all types could be requisitioned
by the Iraq Government for service
with the British military authorities.
Shortage of
staff, however,
prevented this Ordinance from
becoming fully effective until later in the year.
negotiations were completed for the purchase of the Karun Navigation Com-
pany's fleet of 9 tugs and 24 barges, together with considerable quantities of
Development
The two months that followed the formation of the Tenth Army were months
of steady progress and development.
By March, 1942, the Traffic Department
was handling about 2,000 tons of cargo a day, half of which was harbour
lighterage and the rest up-river traffic.
Requisitioning of craft proceeded
smoothly, while from early March onwards towing steamers and flats began
to arrive from India.
The Engineering Department took over full control
of Messrs. Gray Mackenzie's slipway and workshops, and the craft from
India were stripped and converted to oil firing as rapidly as possible.
Construction Department had prepared plans for both Basra and Kut dock-
yard layouts and for all river port facilities.
The Dredging Section now
possessed four suction cutter dredgers and one grab dredger, and was clearing
2029t7/
WO 277/2
WO 277/3
