APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III
(See page 30)
THE BRITISH ARMY STAFF, WASHINGTON
ORGANIZATION OF THE TRANSPORTATION BRANCH AS AT
29th OCTOBER, 1943
British Army Staff
Deputy Quarter Master General
British Supply Mission
Deputy Director General
D.D. Tn.
Operations
A.D.Tn.
D.A.D. Tn.
S/Captain
Th. policy, planning, intelligence
and training
Tn. 2 (P)
Plans
D.A. D.Tn.
S/Captain
Railways
D.A.D.Tn.
Cincinnati
S/Captain
Washington
S/Captain
Tn. 2 (T)
Technical
Stores
A.D.Tn.
Tn. Stores planning, procurement,
allocation and movement
Tn. 2 (S)
Shipping
D.A.D.Tn.
S/Captain
Port Facilities
D.A.D.Tn.
Craft
S/Captain
Cranes
S/Captain
SUMMARY
1 D.D.Tn.
2 A.D.sTn.
5 D.A.D.sTn.
7 Staff Captains (Tn.)
929t71
WO 277/21
27
Wo 27 1/26
28
CHAPTER IV
FRANCE, 1939-1940
SECTION 1.-GENERAL
Detailed plans for the move of the British Expeditionary Force to France
had been prepared before the outbreak of War, and included arrangements
whereby the French made available for British use such docks and railway
facilities as were necessary for the purpose.
without enemy interference, and the disembarkation of the B.E.F. was com-
pleted by 7th October, 1939.
While the bulk of the personnel and vehicles went in through Cherbourg,
the main stores ports were Brest, St. Nazaire and Nantes.
Bases fed through
these ports were established at Rennes, with temporary installations further west
in the Brest peninsula, and in the Nantes-St. Nazaire area.
Temporary depots,
served by road only or with totally inadequate railway facilities, were at once set
up by the various services, while as rapidly as possible sites for permanent
depots were reconnoitred and selected, plans prepared and work put in hand.
The Base Marshalling Yard for both Bases was at Rennes, some 140 miles
from Brest and 70 miles from St. Nazaire.
From Rennes the railway L. of C.
ran for about 220 miles through Alençon and Rouen to the British Regulating
Station at Abancourt, and thence to the various railheads in the Arras area
some 50 miles ahead.
(See Map No. 5.)
In September a meeting was held at Le Mans with representatives of the
Société Nationale des chemins de fer Français (S.N.C.F.) at which British
responsibilities for railway construction and operation were defined.
It was
agreed that the British should themselves construct such additional railway
facilities as they required, other than connections and alterations to main lines,
but that for the time being all railway operating should be handled by the French.
At a further meeting in Paris a month later it was agreed that the British should
gradually take over the working of British Army traffic between ports and
base depots up to and including Rennes and should provide sufficient loco-
motives, rolling stock and train crews to carry out this task.
As soon as the Army was concentrated in the Arras area, steps were taken to
open French ports further to the east and so to reduce sea and rail mileage.
Caen and Le Havre, and later Rouen, Fécamp and St. Malo were brought
into use, and a third Base, supplied through adjacent ports, was established
in the Le Havre area.
Railway traffic from this base was worked unmarshalled
to Abancourt, which thus became the Base Marshalling Yard for the Le Havre
Base as well as the Regulating Station serving all British Army railheads.
The main duties of the Transportation Service during the inactive period of
the campaign were:
(a) The operation of docks and berths allocated to British use,
(b) the construction
of the Base Marshalling Yard at Rennes, of the
Regulating Station at Abancourt, and of railway connections and sidings
to serve some 20 depots and 5 airfields.
