SECTION 2.-TRANSPORTATION TRAINING CENTRES
There were no Tn. units in the Indian Army at the outbreak of war, nor
was there any nucleus organization such as existed in the United Kingdom.
service had, therefore, to be raised ab initio.
than for Europeans outside Government service, did not exist, and generally
speaking the men enrolled by Transportation would not normally have joined
On the other hand many transportation trades required long
periods of practical experience, and key men could only be obtained from those
already in civilian employment.
A further difficulty in India was that the
proportion of European supervision employed by civil agencies was small,
and had been greatly reduced in the period before the war by the policy of
It was therefore clear from the outset that, in order to form the necessary
number of Tn. units in India, an extensive training scheme would have to be
evolved.
Rates of pay had to be high enough to attract the right type of man.
The late start in forming the Tn. service greatly affected the problem, because
the same man was also in great demand for other services as well as for Ordnance
factories and civilian manufacturing firms.
In spite of India's population of
some 400,000,000, only a very limited number were suitable for training in
transportation trades.
Formation of Two Training Centres
In view of the differences between the sources of recruitment and the systems
of training of railway personnel and docks and I. W.T. personnel, it was decided
to set up two separate Transportation Training Centres.
No. 1 Tn. Training
Centre was formed for the training of docks and I.W.T. personnel with its
H.Q. at Bombay and its Depot Battalion and Pay and Records Sections at
Deolali.
No. 2 Tn. Training Centre dealt exclusively with railway personnel,
and was formed at Jullundur by conversion of the former No. 2 Engineer Depot.
This Centre was at first concerned chiefly with the military training of the per-
sonnel of railway units, but by degrees facilities were provided to enable
technical refresher courses to be given, as well as a limited amount of general
technical work to men trained initially elsewhere.
Technical Training Groups on Civil Railways
It was realized at the start that the only possible means of providing the
technical training required for personnel of railway units would be for the
carry out this training.
An organization
set up under which various Railways formed Technical Training Groups to
undertake the initial training of all railway trades.
Recruitment into these
Technical Training Groups was undertaken by the Railways themselves, and
not through the technical recruiting organization as in the case of other trans-
portation trades. A few volunteers were obtained from the ranks of civil
railway employees, but the number was lamentably small-just over 3,000
out of a total railway staff of 780,000.
Although the above system of technical training was the only possible one
in the circumstances, it did not provide for the collective training so essential
to a military unit, and many of the first formed units were needed in such haste
that they were sent nverseas. mainly to Tran with practically no collective
182
In order to overcome this serious disadvantage, arrangements were
made with the Railway Board to use two unimportant branch lines for collective
training.
The first was a broad gauge branch between Binah and Kotah, and
the second a metre gauge section between Fazilka and Kotkapura.
at a more advanced stage in their training, many units were employed alonside
Later,
the civilian employees on the Assam L. of C., where traffic was growing to such
an extent that the Bengal and Assam Railway staff were unable to handle it
without assistance.
Railway Supervisory Staff
Many experienced officers of the Indian Railways had volunteered and had
been released by the Railways before the entry of Japan into the war.
event, however, created a great increase in demands on the internal transpor-
tation agencies of India, and a resulting deficiency in all grades of supervisory
It therefore became necessary to return many of these officers to the
Indian Railways, and their place could only be filled by young officers from the
United Kingdom, many of whom lacked practical experience.
With the evacuation of Burma in 1942, arrangements were made to recruit
as many as possible of the Burma Railways staff into the service.
Most of the
officers were immediately commissioned, and a number of units were specially
formed to include the largest possible number of balanced trades of Burma
Railway personnel.
This influx of experienced railwaymen was of the greatest
assistance, especially in the case of workshop and other highly technical trades.
A number of officers from the Federated Malay States Railways were also
commissioned into the Transportation Service.
Docks Units
Few volunteers for docks units could be obtained from those serving in
Indian ports, though a valuable nucleus of officers and supervisory staff was so
released.
Docks personnel had therefore to be trained almost entirely from
raw material.
As in the case of railways, training facilities could only be
obtained at the ports themselves, and Technical Training Battalions were formed
at Calcutta, Madras, Bombay and Karachi, where individual technical training
was carried out.
The problem of collective training was more difficult than in
the case of railway units, because, obviously, no facilities could be placed entirely
at the disposal of Transportation.
The extreme importance of a rapid turn-
round of shipping made the port authorities and sea transport officers reluctant
to allow ships to be worked by Tn. units until they were fully efficient.
only the unexpectedly long period before docks units were called upon for
ictive service which enabled them to gain the necessary experience.
I.W.T. Trades
The inland water transport systems of Iraq, India and Burma are entirely
unlike those of Europe, and this fact made the formation of I.W.T, units a
problem of great difficulty.
The system adopted by the civilian inland water-
way concerns, whereby the serang in charge of each steamer engaged his own
crew, had automatically created a large pool of men who at one time or another
had worked on these craft, and large numbers of deck and engine-room trades
Collective technical training
were therefore available from Eastern India.
183
WO 277
WO277]
