APPENDIX TO CHAPTER II
(See page 27)
ORGANIZATION OF TRANSPORTATION TRAINING CENTRE, LONGMOOR
(Known as No. 1 Railway Training Centre until April, 1942)
PRE-WAR
(Approximate Strength: 500 all ranks)
Headquarters
10th Railway Company
8th Railway Company
(including mobilization cadre of
29th Railway Survey Company)
MAY, 1943
(Approximate Strength of Permanent Staff: 2,325 all ranks)
Headquarters
Technical
Training Wing
ca pacily
1,000 trainees)
Depot Wing
(Capacity 2,000)
Collective
Training Wing
(Capacity
3 formed units)
Port Operating
Tech. Training Wing
(Capacity
150 stevedores a month
Headquarter Wing
Field Works
Training Wing
(Capacity
780 trainees)
27
WO 1/h
28
CHAPTER III
THE BRITISH ARMY STAFF, WASHINGTON
SECTION 1.-ORGANIZATION OF THE TRANSPORTATION BRANCH
During the first two years of the war, owing to increasing dollar stringency,
it was only in very exceptional cases that Tn. stores for the British Army were
purchased in the U.S.A.
But with the introduction of Lease-Lend the
situation was radically altered.
A British Military Mission, with an Engineer
Section, was set up in Washington, and in August, 1941, a Technical Supply
Officer (Tn.) was posted to that Section, which later became the Chief Engineer's
branch of the British Army Staff. He was joined shortly afterwards by a second
officer temporarily attached from the War Office; these two officers formed the
Transportation Stores sub-section of the Chief Engineer's branch, and were
responsible for the procurement of the first large instalment of Tn. equipment
from the United States to the value of some 100 million dollars.
With the entry of the U.S.A. into the War it at once became necessary to
strengthen British representation in Washington.
The Chief Engineer's branch
of the B.A.S., of which Tn. still formed a part, became simultaneously, in fact
if not in name, a section of the Supply Mission which was set up to represent
the British Ministry of Supply in Washington.
At the same time the small
Tn. party was reinforced by the addition of an A.D.Tn. who, in addition to his
stores duties under the Chief Engineer, was made available to assist the "Q"
Staff as and when advice was requested on technical matters.
As 1942 progressed, the importance of transportation as a factor in the
conduct of the War impressed itself more and more on the United States War
Department, and in November they established a Transportation Corps, with
its own procurement organization separate from that of the Engineer Corps.
This entailed a corresponding reorganization on the British side, and after a
short period of transitional compromise, during which Transportation remained
technically under the Chief Engineer but with considerably expanded scope
and establishment, it was decided in May, 1943 that it should be transferred
from the Chief Engineer's department of the British Army Staff to that of
the Deputy Quarter Master General, to whom the head of the branch became
responsible for transportation policy,
planning and intelligence.
At the
same time the branch was constituted a directorate of the British Supply Mission
known as Supply Dept. 10, and in this capacity became responsible to the
Director General of the Mission on all matters concerning the procurement,
progressing and shipment of Transportation stores from the United States.
In view of these added responsibilities the head of the branch was upgraded
to Deputy Director.
June,
1943, the Procurement Division of the Transportation Corps,
U.S.
War Department, was moved from Washington to Cincinnati, and in
order
to maintain close liaison with this division an additional staff captain,
later upgraded to D.A.D.Tn., was authorized on the Tn. establishment.
By August, 1943 the peak of production had been reached and this, in
conjunction with the increased complication of procedure and the general
29
