WO 277
British Military traffic was reached with the S.N.C.B.
In the case of traffic
passing through Belgium from France into Holland, the S.N.C.B. were provided
with a certified copy of the warrant to enable their share of the freight to be
assessed.
The basis of settlement with the Railway Company had not been
agreed with O.M.A. at the termination of hostilities, but monthly recapitu-
lations of traffic were received from the S.N.C.B. and passed foward to O.M.A.
after certification.
It was agreed that charges for miscellaneous services such as
demurrage and maintenance would not be raised separately by the S.N.C.B.,
but would be included in the ultimate general settlement with the Belgian
Government.
In view of a ruling from Movements that tramways would not
be regarded as transportation installations, services required from the Tramway
Companies were demanded direct by formations on 21 A.Gp. Form 80.
A system of documentation and accounting for I.W.T. traffic was also
Standard rates and conditions were laid down by an administrative
body composed of representatives of the Belgian Government and the Barge
Owners Agents known as the "Office Regulateur de Navigation Intérieure"
(O.R.N.I.), through whom the chartering of all barges was arranged.
Financial
arrangements were in the hands of agents, appointed by O.M.A., who submitted
bills which were ultimately checked and certified by Tn. Finance.
As from
Ist March, 1945, responsibility for all I.W.T. traffic in Belgium was taken over
by (Movements); financial arrangements, however, remained a Transportation
responsibility.
A considerable number of claims were received involving damage to civilian
craft either in process of loading or discharging, or in collision with, military
vessels. Full details of these claims, with reports from the military authorities
concerned, were passed to the Director of Claims and Hirings for disposal.
Discrepancies were also observed on I.W.T. bills of lading between the number
of packages loaded and unloaded.
In such cases it proved difficult to assess
the bargee's responsibility under Belgian law, but a number of prosecutions
were instituted.
Following the conclusion of a mutual aid agreement with the Netherlands
Government, instructions were issued that procurement in that country should
be on the same lines as in Belgium and France, 21 A.Gp. Form 80 being used
for all demands, and the responsible government department being the Finance
Department of the Netherlands Ministry of War.
The volume of Transporta-
tion procurement in the Netherlands was, however, only small. Meetings were
held with officials of the Netherlands Railways and the Central Transport
Board and a standard system of documentation was agreed.
Details of military
traffic carried over the railway system were forwarded monthly to the Ministry
of War.
The full extent of Tn. Finance commitments in Germany had not been
determined by the end of 1945.
Work was therefore restricted to the issue of
instructions to In. units on the method of procurement, and to the collation
and sorting of railway warrants for British military traffic.
Financial policy for
the operation of the civil transportation agencies was the responsibility of the
Transport Division of the Control Commission and not of the Army.
Throughout the campaign a very close check was kept on those activities
of the Transportation service that would contribute offsets against mutual aid.
These included:—
(a) Loan of War Department locomotives to civilian railway companies.
(b) Hire of cargo handling gear to contractors.
176
(e) Issues of plant and materials to civilian undertakings.
(d) Assistance by n. troops to civilian contractors.
(e)
Works carried out by In. troops in ports that were likely to be of assis-
tance to the civil authorities concerned.
(f) Towage of civilian barges by Army craft.
in all cases, full details were reported to the mutual aid organization of the
appropriate government, with the request that the amounts recovered should
be credited to the British account.
WO2777
177
