Group moved to Bologna to rebuild the marshalling yards, from which every
sleeper had been removed during the German occupation.
The railways in the
Milan-Turin-Genoa area were found to be comparatively little damaged, and
the Italian State Railways repaired the line from Genoa through Turin to Milan
without any military assistance.
In the Brenner Pass the complete German
railway organization surrendered intact, and were put to work immediately
to repair the Verona-Brenner section under American supervision.
With the German surrender the war in Europe was over, but much work
remained that was to take construction troops to Trieste, Austria and the frontier
of Switzerland, and it was not until January, 1946, that-with gradually dwindling
resources- the tasks were either finished or handed over to civilian authorities.
Throughout the campaign there had been plenty of work on Base and lines of
communication development, but the repair of demolitions and bomb damage
had preponderated and construction troops had been faced with many engin-
eering problems of great size and complexity.
An outstanding feature had
been the great success of standard Railway
Bridging especially Unit Con-
Railway Bridge (U.C.R.B.) and steel trestling which received
unstinted praise from all who used it.
The consumption of this material was
heavy, and the stock of bridging material was always an important factor for
consideration when selecting one of two, or more, alternative routes for repair.
SECTION 4.—PORT OPERATING
The North African Campaign
The Port Operating units allotted for the invasion of North Africa (Opera-
tion "Torch") were as follows:—
Two Docks Group Headquarters.
Eleven Docks Operating Companies.
Two Port Maintenance Companies.
One Inland Water Transport (Port) Operating Company.
Towards the end of the campaign two docks operating companies were raised
in the theatre, by absorbing into one of the groups the personnel of two pioneer
companies who had been working in the docks from the outset.
these units was directed at Headquarters by the Tn. 5 branch under an A.D.Tn.
In the early days of the landing, three of the Docks Operating Companies
were employed with the American forces at Oran and Arzew. The remaining
units, with the exception of part of one Docks Operating Company at Gibraltar,
were used in connection with the British landings at Algiers and at points
During the night of 7th/8th November, 1942, forty-five Allied vessels
anchored close inshore near Algiers.
At dawn, the assault troops started a
series of landings with little opposition, and by 9th November, Algiers had
been occupied and its port opened for shipping.
This early opening of the port
was fortunate, for it had soon become apparent that the number of landing
craft available was quite inadequate to deal with the programme of ship dis-
charge and with the distribution of working parties to ships at anchor.
situation was further aggravated by rough weather and would have assumed
very serious proportions if prolonged beach maintenance had been necessary.
Other ports further east were occupied intact and no beach work was necessary.
Philippeville on the 19th November.
Docks units started work at Bougie on the 11th, at Bone on the 18th, and at
A certain amount of enemy action was directed against the ports.
on Algiers were only of a sporadic nature, but Bougie and Philippeville were
attacked sharply, even in daylight, before fighter cover could be given, and at
Bougie several valuable ships were sunk.
first, but during December, 1942, and the beginning of 1943 it was regularly
attacked from the air and a number of casualties was caused among Docks
units, including the Group Commander killed.
No undue difficulties were encountered and ship working proceeded very
satisfactorily. As time went on, more and more civil labour was introduced:
its output was about 75 per cent. of that of military labour.
Clearance facilities were inadequate at all ports during the early days of the
campaign, with the result that stores remained on the quays for long periods,
causing congestion and encouraging pilferage which assumed high proportions.
The rate of clearance was adversely affected by three factors beyond the control
of the Transportation service, namely the inability of Services to take delivery
of stores ex-dock throughout the 24 hours, the natural but usually impracti-
cable desire of Services to receive cargo ex-dock sorted by commodities or by
types of stores, and the presence of officers of all arms and all ranks, each
interested in expediting the discharge of one particular consignment.
last cause of delay was not finally eliminated until the dock areas had been
fenced in and a system of Dock Passes introduced.
First Army Administrative Orders laid down that a Port Executive Com-
mittee should be set up at each port under the chairmanship of the Naval Officer
in Charge, the members being the Area Commander, Port Commandant and
In practice, the Docks Superintendent was usually
The direction of port work by these Committees worked well, and
relations between the Movements Staff and Transportation (Docks) were good.
Although an I.W.T. (Port) Operating Company was included in the order
of battle (for lighterage work in the ports) no provision had been made for the
supply of craft, as it was expected that enough craft would be found intact in
This proved to be the case at Algiers, where about
sixty lighters were taken over and performed good service in helping to reduce
A few lighters were available at Philippeville and Bone,
but not enough to have any great influence on port working.
there was little demand for lighterage, owing to the large number of alongside
Port maintenance work consisted principally of repairs to cargo handling
gear, upkeep of dock lighting and construction of notice boards and quay
The amount of plant to be looked after was small and consisted mainly
The French authorities at Algiers undertook the
maintenance of their own wharf cranes and did not require any British assistance.
The usual type of packing for the conveyance of Petrol Oil and Lubricants
during the campaign was the non-returnable container.
failed to stand up to the methods of stowage adopted, with the result that
many ships arrived in North Africa with as much as two or three feet of loose
petrol in the holds, and were discharged only after much difficulty under
WO 277/2
W0277/
