expansion of the British Army Staff, involved a vast amount of detail work
Transportation found itself very much understaffed, and an increased establish.
ment was authorized in October.
This new organization remained unchanged
in essentials until the end of the War, and as it illustrates die it is e scope and
distribution of Tn. duties during the most intensive stage, it is reproduced
as the Appendix to this chapter (page 38).
In order to conform to its dual allegiance to the Britiser. thy Staff on the
one hand and the British Supply Mission on thehose dutine branch way
organized in two sub-branches,
Tn. 1 and Tn. 2, whose duties were closely
directorate, Tn. 1 being responsible for planning, intelligence, etc., and Tn.?
analogous to those of the similarly named branches
of the War Offic
An account of the work of these two sub-branche
is given in the following sections of this chapter.
SECTION 2.-PLANNING AND INTELLIGENCE
The duties of the In. Branch of the British Army staf in relation to planning
fell into three main divisions. In the first place, they were responsible for
giving technical advice and information to the "ar" planning staft of thi
B.A.S.; secondly, they informed and advised the War Office on the America
attitude to transportation questions in combined theatres, that is to say
theatres under the direct control of the Combined Chiefs of Staff's at Washington
and thirdly, it was their duty to provide the operational background and stal!
in support of British demands for the production or assignmen
of American transportation stores.
In order to fulfil this threefold function,
In. 1 not only relied on the knowledge which its personnel had acquired fron
in the War Office and elsewhere, but also built up a library d
intelligence publications and a collection of logistical and operational information
from theatre progress reports, War Office appreciations and other sources.
Tn. 1 had to be in a position to submit appreciations on transportation
subjects to the "Q" planning staff, to provide data to visiting planning teams
and to attend ad hoc meetings.
They also had to keep in close touch with
the American planning branches in order to learn at an early stage of any
American transportation plan likely to interest the British. Although litte
forward planning was initiated by the British in Washington, the Joint Staf
Mission (J.S.M.) had to be ready to support against any American criticism
plans prepared in London, and it was felt that, if Transportation were requiri
to advance an argument at a moment's notice, they should know of the plan
from the outset.
It was therefore proposed that Tn. 1 should have a repre-
sentative with "Q" (Ops.), which at that time came within the J.S.M. organ:
zation, but unfortunately this was not agreed to at first.
major projects initiated by the Americans had proceeded undetected, althoug
they conflicted with British plans, that this decision was reversed, regular
liaison established with "Q"
(Ops.), and access allowed to all documents in
the J.S.M. Secretariat.
While relations between Transportation and the British planning sat
were thus successfully established, contact was not so easily made or mair-
tained with the American planners.
The organization of the Transportation
Corps in the United States War Department was such that no single divisc
was responsible for a transportation plan in all its aspects.
Each planning
division (ports, railways and highways) contributed its own quota which vas.
digested by the planning division of the Army Service Forces (A.S.F.), a
non-technical body, who in turn submitted their plan to the Operations Division
(O.P.D.) of the War Department General Staff, a still higher and less technical
echelon. It was therefore necessary for Tn. I to cover an extensive field in
their search for developments and to be equipped with unassailable arguments
Tn. 1 was often involved, particularly in 1945, in
questions affecting combined theatres or theatres in which both British and
America had transportation interests.
Their function here was to advise the
War Office "Q" (Ops.), or occasionally *G" (Ops.), and sometimes to provide
information required by the United States War Department.
Transportation was essentially a service concerned with the procurement
All requirements on United States and, later, on Canadian pro-
duction had to be backed by an operational brief, which needed to be stronger
as competing claims on production increased.
officers of Tn. 2 made their own briefs from the little information submitted
by the War Office or theatre concerned with each requisition; but the arrival
of officers from the Tn. Directorate at the War Office and from Middle East
equipped with up-to-date operational backgrounds and aided by the accumu-
lating logistical data enabled stores demands to be supported by more adequate
detailed justification. Some difficulty was found at first in persuading the
War Office and overseas commands to give the whole story.
sufficient to state that a particular type of equipment was necessary unless
sound reasons could be given, and the presentation of a planning figure by
itself was not accepted by the Americans unless the method of calculation was
The advantage of Tn. l's contact with J.S.M. through "Q"
(Ops.), was that their knowledge of high level planning and Combined Chiefs
of Staff decisions could be used immediately to strengthen the British case.
By these means Tn. 1 was able to render considerable assistance, particularly
towards the preparation and submission of the 1945 British requirements at
The provision of operational briefs in support of stores
demands was often supplemented by the attendance of a Tn. 1 representative
at the assignment meetings of the Mutual Aid Committee (Ground), which
ensured that unforeseen operational questions could be answered on the spot.
The application of transportation planning to stores procurement was further
improved by the formation of such co-ordinating committees as the Joint Port
Facilities Committee and the Railway Facilities Committee.
As the demands for purely American theatres became more pressing, the
acceptance by the American War Department of any British plan or require-
ment became increasingly difficult to obtain.
The implementation of any
British plan usually depended to some extent on American material resources
and, however well justified that plan might be, its approval by the United
States through the Combined Chiefs of Staff was often qualified by the priority
of over-riding
American
commitments.
The American War Department
became more reliant on the opinion of their representative on the spot and less
convinced by the British arguments in Washington.
This made it essential
for identical data and arguments to be put forward by the B.A.S. and by the
British commander concerned, and the success of British procurement in
Washington thus depended more and more on the measure of Allied agreement
in the theatre and on the support that the American representative there was
persuaded to give to the British proposals.
In view of the various and complicated methods of procuring port equipment
27
WO 277/26
28
