two or more were grouped into a railway operating group, with a H.Q. com-
manded by a lieutenant-colonel.
There were initially two groups: No. I was
allocated to the south of England and No. 2 to the north.
But as the field force
units were gradually withdrawn for service in the Middle East and elsewhere
overseas, it became necessary to set up a static organization for the United
Kingdom, and in May, 1942 a new unit, known as No. 1 Railway Detachments
(Home) R.E., was formed and began to take over the operating of home depots
from the railway operating groups.
This process was completed by November,
1942, and thereafter the static organization, successively renamed No. 1 Railway
(W.D. Depots) Operating and Maintenance Group, and No. 1 Railway (Home)
Group, was responsible for the operating of all home depots under the direct
control of Tn. 3 and D.D.Tn.(R).
The number of depots worked by the
Group rose from ten in 1942 to thirty-nine in 1945, involving some 600 miles
of railway track, 200 locomotives and an establishment of 2,400 all ranks.
Railway construction troops stationed in the United Kingdom on the other
hand retained their field force organization until much later in the war.
this organization, railway
construction and railway survey companies, in
numbers varying with availability and tasks to be performed, were formed
into railway construction and maintenance groups, each with a headquarters
under a lieutenant-colonel, who was known as the R.C.E. (Railway Construc-
Six groups were gradually formed-one in each command-
and one of the functions of the R.C.E. was to act as representative of the Director
of Transportation in his command.
Although the boundaries of group areas
coincided in the main with those of commands, minor variations were made
from time to time in order to facilitate dealings with local railway officials or
to permit of more effective supervision of works.
R.C.E.s worked under the
direct control of Tn. 4 and D.D.Tn.(R), and it became the custom to hold
monthly R.C.E. conferences at the War Office, under the chairmanship of
D.D.Tn. (R), at which matters of general interest were discussed, and allocation
of units and tasks agreed.
It may be mentioned here that this system of monthly
conferences was adopted by other branches of the Directorate, e.g. training,
port operating and stores, and provided a very valuable opportunity for the
ventilation of administrative and other difficulties and for the maintenance of
close contact between unit commanders and the War Office staff.
until the six railway construction and maintenance groups were preparing to go
overseas in 1944 that a static railway construction organization was set up in
the United Kingdom, consisting of two group H.Q. which divided between
them the responsibility for such railway construction work as remained to be
done.
In addition to their responsibility for the construction, operation and main-
tenance of depot railways, the Railway branches of the Tn. Directorate carried
out a variety of other duties in connection with home defence and with prepara-
tion for overseas operations.
Tn. 3 was responsible, as already stated, for regulating the commercial
aspect of all W.D. depot railways, requisitioned sidings, etc., and entered into
agreements with the Railway Companies and others concerned for the working
and maintenance of such sidings as were not directly operated by the Army.
They arranged terms of hire to the Railway Companies of War Department
locomotives and wagons not immediately required for military use; controlled
the distribution of internal user wagons (i.e. wagons reserved for internal
depot use and not allowed to go into general circulation) and of such foreign
WO 277/21
WO 2772
28
owned Continental Ferry wagons as were in this country when the service was
broken off; and dealt, in conjunction with the Finance branches, with claims
for demurrage on Railway Companies' wagons detained in W.D. depots.
They were intimately concerned with the design, control while at home, and
despatch overseas, of ambulance trains, breakdown trains and lorries and
railway mobile workshops, and with the assembly for shipment overseas of
wagons received from America in sections.
From July, 1942 onwards, a considerable amount of railway construction
work was required on depots for the American forces then beginning to arrive
The planning and construction of the railways in
these depots were carried out by Tn. 4 and by British railway construction
troops, working in close touch with American Army H.Q. (E.T.O.U.S.A.).
In connection with planning for overseas operations Tn. 4 worked in
consultation with the planning staffs, giving technical advice on the railway
constructional requirements for each operation and preparing phased pro-
grammes for the despatch overseas of units, plants, bridging, etc.
As D-Day approached, military railway construction work was required
for the improvement of facilities at ports of embarkation and at rail served
transit depots, and for stabling rolling stock awaiting shipment across the
No account of railway construction work at home during the war would be
complete without a reference to the work done by mechanical equipment (Tn.)
They were equipped with American scrapers, bull-dozers and other
earth-shifting machines and carried out most of the heavy earthwork on these
A varying number of companies and sections was employed until, in prepara-
tion for the invasion of the Continent, three companies were organized into an
independent group, under their own Group H.Q.
still allocated to jobs by companies, or more often by sections, which worked
under the direct control of the R.C.E. in charge of the job.
A few statistics of railway construction projects carried out by military
labour in the United Kingdom are of interest.
were laid, including 183 miles laid in American depots with some assistance
from American troops.
The total cost of permanent way materials and ballast
was £5,810,000, of which £1,820,000 went into American services as "Reverse
Some 1,360,000 tons of ashes for ballast were purchased from
Jobs varied from laying a few yards of track at a wayside
station to fit it to act as a railhead to laying over 80 miles of track capable of
dealing with 300 wagons a day in each direction at large depots.
Earthwork done by mechanical equipment (In.) companies on railway
formations, drainage ditches, etc., exceeded six million cubic yards.
per mile of track constructed varied greatly with the time of year and the type
In some cases the figure was as high as 46,000 and in others as low as
In badly drained clay a spell of wet weather would double the dry
Great advances were made during the war in the design of standardized
railway bridging for use on rapid construction and repair work overseas.
1938 the War Office Tn. branch had secured the part-time services of Mr. W. T.
Everall, an engineer with wide experience in India, for the purpose of designing
a number of standard span railway bridges and standardized steel trestling
Shortly before the war, general responsibility for design and
