224
ASSAULT DIVISION
home pasture: they took great exception to the dense and
pungent smoke-screen generated by the Pioneers continuously
all along the river.
Most men found the smoke difficult to work
in, but the only alternative was to work in full view of the
enemy. Not that the enemy seemed to take advantage of any
break in the screen : they lay subdued, though they were para-
troops whom the Division had met in Heather, and they knew
how to fight.
The Germans were delighted to think their livestock was
being removed to a safe area-that is, until they heard it was
being driven still farther back as a first payment for the beas
they had looted from the Low Countries over five years.
One of the contrasts that first struck the Division on enterns
Gerinany was that between the poverty or umourg and the rich
ness of the Rhineland, with its fat pastures and every cellar stufied.
with hams, cheeses and preserves. After the cattle
driven away there were still plenty of pigs, ducks and hens left.
the was tores commanue, writing of his experiences wu w
remeal, notes: 1 suggested to company commanders thar
with a little prompting, the troops might appreciate the advan-
se of an egs a day over one meal ( chicken, but - was hardly
prepared for the enthusiasm with which the whole battalion took
up poultry farming ! "
At Battalion and Field Regimental H.Q. the Intelligence
staffs were busy collating information from the O.P.s and passing
it back to Brigade H. Q.s, who in turn sent it back to the Divisional
"I" Staff, and so on. St. John Mann,
the GIII (I), and his
staff at Div. H. L. were equally busy keeping all units abreast
of the news from the American front in the Saar Basin,
grand tactical co-operation " between General Bradley's 12th
about a destruction of German forces " on the Tunisian scale."
Group and General Devers' 6th Army
Mann's Intelligence Summaries, circulated to the whole Division,
kept up the high standard set by Rowntree.
At this stage in his
Supreme Commander first indulges in
" Under these conditions the success of our operations appeared
certain, a conviction I felt was undoubtedly shared by the German
- Div. .. were established in the ancient schloss Moyland, which had been damaged
by nineteenth-century restorers as well as by twentieth-century gunners.
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
225
General Staff?" I gather from M. Bertrand de Jouvenel that
mimed opinion in France-to go no further abroad -is con-
inced that the success of our operations was certain, and antici-
pated by the German
General Staff,
before 6 June,
Whatever the German General Staff may have thought individu-
ely cannot easily be proved, since Hitler would not have liked
i Generals to anticipate deleat, and they would not, therefore,
commit any such apprehensions to writing,
but there is plenty
a edence to show that the Supreme Allied Commander, though
optimistic as any Commander should be before embarking on
such an operation,
did not regard victory as inevitable.
undeniablé piece of evidence may be found in the footnote on
But now there was no question: " the war was won" and
the results of this certainty were apparent in
visitors (both senior and junior) to
the behaviour of
the Division's O.P.s, who,
gardless of whether or not they were screened by smoke, flashed
their tal-covered map-boards in
general
the sun
like heliographs and
an O.P."
gave a
model demonstration " how not to occupy
Perhaps the most exact indication of the state of affairs
was that such
appeared to be incapable of reaction.
went unrewarded
and the enemy
Now our bombers roamed all over the Reich, paralysing its
communications.
In addition, for the seventy-two hours preceding
the Rhine crossing, intense and sustained air attacks were made
enemy-defended localities
spotted by the Division's O.P.s to one further back believed to be
of the German 25th Army):
The moral effect on the
enemy, added to their casualties,
is the Supreme Commander's
for writing: " After enduring three
days of unremitting
the enemy was in
no condition
Paratroops were to
(incomplete) Divisions of them in the north, and they opposed
the Highlanders' landing at Rees.
climax of all the
on Friday,
March, another fine warm day, like early summer.
All the High-
land Division had moved into the assembly areas got ready for
them by the grd Division.
They had been given every detail of
