ASSAULT DIVISION
since winter had adorned the transport of all units (notably
Field Regiments) on the move, so that they had come to resemble
something in Sidings and Suchlike drawn by the Punch artist Emett.
Since the Division's next operational role was likely to be a very
mobile one, 9 Brigade Workshops were grounded at this stage so
as to release twenty-five 3-ton lorries and a transporter converted
to carry 30 tons of ammunition in anticipation of the strin that
would be placed on the R.A.S.C. Transport Companies.
These Transport Companies had an extremely heavy dumping
programme on the four nights previous to the Rhine crossing,
In that time 18,000 rounds of H.E. and 4,800 rounds of white
smoke were dumped for the 25-pounders of the Field Regimens,
and 900,000 rounds of Mark VIIIz and 12,000 bombs were
dumped for the machine-guns and mortars of the and Midalesex.
C.R.A.S.C. pays tribute to the sureness of the guides supplica.
by the Regiments, whose co-operation with the drivers again
made a complete success of a difficult programme.
All this
ammunition indicated business
for the artillery and support
weapons. The C.R.A. would control a gigantic Pepperpot ou
the evening of the assault, peppering the enemy bank with three.
Machine-gun Battalions, a Tank Battalion, two Anti-Tank Gunner
Regiments, and three Light Ack-Ack Regiments. These included
the and Middlesex, 20th Anti-Tank Regiment, and gand Light
Ack-Ack Regiment.
would fire in support of the
In addition, the Divisional Field Regiments
period of their assault.
Highland Division throughout the
Finally, all casualties that occured on the Highland Division's
front during their assault and the follow-through by the 4grd
letessex Division on the right and a Canadian Brigade on the
left would be received by the Medical Units of the grd Division.
It may be believed, then, that between their arrival on the Rhine
bank on iath March and the assault by the Highlanders on the
23rd all units of the Division were very actively engaged in their
various preparations.
throughout the entire Allied Expeditionary Force.
Spirits were wonderfully high, as they were
had had all their casualties replaced the moment Operation
Heather ended: rentorcements were mostly nineteen-year-olds,
and impressed one Commanding Officer as " raw enough,
dead keen."
The Division displayed more than ever
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE
surance and a competence that had grown out of experience
both of the assault landing and of holding a river line, and that
only increased in the remaining actions of the campaign.
Ifholding the Rhine bank was to be their job, it was one they
«ney well: when the time came, they did everything they could
to give the Highlanders.
a leg across, watching their progress
with as much concern as if their own units were engaged.
General Tom Rennie had recovered from the effects of his unlucky
vsit to Cambes wood in the Normandy beachhead days, and now
commanded the 51st (Highland) Division with all the mastery
of the complications of amphibious assault that he had achieved
in command of the grd Division:
Two other commanders in the
Rhine crossing whom the Division looked upon
as their own
distinguished representatives were the
Commanders of the 6th
Airborne Division and, within that Division, the 6th Air Landing
Brigade : Major-General Eric Bols and Brigadier Hugh Bellamy
had fought from the Caen Canal to the Molen Beek with the
Division, and doubtless Brig.
conferences at 6th Airborne
Bellamy enlivened his G.O.C.'s
Headquarters with the persistence
that was expected of Col. Bellamy at the daily conferences at
18g Brigade Headquarters.
The Division spent that fortnight beside the Rhine in con-
ditions that contrasted completely, and very happily,
winter vigil down by the Maas.
The riverside villages were
undamaged. Fields that had been flooded were drying
stronger sun. The nights were shorter, and each morning found
new buds on the fruit-trees in gardens where snowdrops grew.
In this rural life was a fantastic
illusion of peace.
Though all
battalions were forward in the river-line, each providing an average
every night and manning
battalion areas were very much tighter than they had been in
the winter months, and large numbers of the men found themselves
employed as bailiffs and herdsmen and house-agents.
ings had to be emptied of their inhabitants and firmness shown to
protesting, disgruntled females.
They and the cattle had to
sent back west of the Cleve-Calcar-Xanten road.
The demeanour
of most of the civilians was one of servility and tractability, and
there was little difficulty in handling them.
few German herdsmen, and cattle tended to wander back to their
