ASSAULT DIVISION
advantage with their apparently unlimited cigarettes and bon-
though it was the experience of the Division
popularity of the British soldier survived any such materia.
disadvantages. It was no luxury trip, however: the Divison
had been reinforced to 1o per cent over established strength
and no troop-carriers were available.
The second-line transport
had to ferry the surplus loads, and nobody was left behind in
On approaching the Seine from Louviers, the first sight of the
long islands of poplars, the familiar picture of the chalk dits,
romance of our Richard the Lion
Heart's great Chateau
Gaillard standing on guard above Les Andelys, and, not least, the
nearness of Paris, must have lightened hearts that were already
lighter than they had been for a very long time. And so the shor
sojourn by the Seine was carefree and happy.
The Div Club,
how an institution, moved into an hotel in Les Andelys that had
been used by the
There were several dances given,
much to the delight of the demoiselles.
In Les Andelys the entente
as exceedingly cordial. For two or three days all units sent a few
lucky troops into Paris for the day, but this excellent scheme had
British troops.
to be abandoned when faris was placed out of bounds to all
The main employment of the Division was training,
to say, and the general overhauling of equipment.
Commanders and Staft were studying river-crossilly and
counter-mortar problems.
sorts of exercises.
There were signals courses and all
There were three indications that the campaign
was still being prosecuted-four if the B.B.C. news is countea:
Twas cellay astened to with intelligent, professional interest.
The other three were the despatch of a Squadron of 3rd Recce
Regiment to Amiens to clear a wood from which a 2nd Army
column had been shot at ;
the move on the gth of the Divisional
Engineers to the area of Brussels (freed on the 3ra), where they,
were temporarily
under direct command of and Army ;
thirdly, the magnificent work of the Division's Transport Platoons.
The Division was at this time providing fourteen
Platoons (including six first-line Platoons) for third-line duties.
These duties included the maintenance of VIII Corps Troops
numbering 7 to 8,000, as well as the
THE ADVANGE INTO THE LIMBURG LOWLANDS
temporarily over-strong Division. (VIII Corps were moving a
daly pack of 120,000 gallons of petrol, oil and lubricants from
the Maintenance Area at Bayeux to No. 3 Army Cushion at
Amas, The roadhead was by no means fixed at Arras but grew
ever more distant. Unfortunately, the records of the mileages
covered do not exist, but some idea of the strain on the drivers
(no in each lorry) may be gathered from the fact that they kept
up the job non-stop for three weeks. During the period they only
sustained one major traffic accident.
"At each end of the
journey, though thoroughly tired, the drivers simply said : " This
i what we came over here to do,' and started off again," recorded
C.R.A.S.C., Lieutenant-Colonel A. K. Yapp.
Of the administrative staff of Divisional Headquarters, the
Heads of the Services saw thout upaign right through from the
planning in Scotland to the military occupation of Germany. At
Les Andelys Lieutenant-Colonel Hugh Hinton succeeded Lieuten-
ant-Colonel Rea as AQ;
a few days earlier Major Val Lloyd
had succeeded Major Watt, and Major John Baines came as
DAQG in succession to Major Woodrow Wyatt, and then the
AQ's team was to work together with hardly any change for the
rest of the campaign.
The first job that confronted them came
in the form of
another warning order on loth September :
the Division must
stand by to make a very long move.
Every platoon of trucks was
out on what the drivers called " the Bayeux Bash,
" and there was
" a first-class petrol crisis, the sum total avallable being about
Accordingly,
'Gadforce'
was mobilised under
command of Captain Gadsby of 48 Div. Troops Company,
to
make the quickest possible run to
Bayeux and back to collect
' Gadforce consisted of a
platoon of very strange
" Office-lorries were stripped,
, Quartermasters®
stores
vehicles and workshop trucks emptied, captured German vehicles
made roadworthy.
Each vehicle had a trailer, of no very orthodox
Drivers were office clerks, batmen, sanitary men,
The result of the ' Gadforce foray
was
40,000 gallons of petrol inside 24 hours, and not a single accident
Following this episode, many clerks, sanitary men
and issuers applied to become " drivers i/c' ! "1
1 Colonel Yapp's account.
