ASSAULT DIVISION
On Sunday afternoon, when the Invasion fleet might have been
on its way, another meeting was being held at Southwick Park.
Since the early morning meeting the meteorological experts had
predicted the weather for June 6th. " The wind would back to
the west and south-west and decrease to force 3 to 4 (7 to I5
knots). The waves in mid-Channel would decrease from a height
of 6 feet. The further outlook was unsettled, but some breakdown
in the westerly weather conditions could be expected." This
was more optimistic, and General Eisenhower said :
sail to-morrow": D-day for Operation Overlord was to
Meanwhile, on board their various types of landing-crait,
the Division spent a squally night and rose from the deck on
Monday morning to find no sign of change for better or worse.
The fall of Rome was announced that morning on the eight
o'clock news, and only helped to aggravate the feeling that this
should have been D-day, the disappointment that the announce-
ment of the Invasion of France had not coincided, as had obviously
been intended, with the capture of Rome.
But the morning
passed and no further postponement order was received. One
by one crait slipped away from their moorings, on past the
gallant old Victory, with its inspiration, and some of the troops
saw Mr. Churchill and General Smuts watching them from a
And as they sailed out of Spithead they saw their
Commanders, Rear-Admiral Talbot and Major-General Rennie,
standing together on their Headquarters Ship,
H.M.S. Largs.
The Admiral hoisted a signal to wish them Good Luck.
Chapter Two
INVASION
THE ASSAULT
O, do but think
You stand upon the rivage,
and behold
A city on th' inconstant billows dancing ;
For so appears this fleet majestical,
Holding due course to Ouistreham.
Follow, follow !
Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy,
And leave your England, as dead midnight still ;
For who is he whose chin is but enrich'd
With one appearing hair, that will not follow
These cull'd
and choice-drawn cavaliers to France!
. the nimble gunner
With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,
And down goes all before them.
Still be kind,
And eke out our performance with your mind.
(Prologue to Act III of King Henry V)
As SOON as they were clear of the sheltering shores all men
in the Force had let go all hope of a steady crossing.
Unfalteringly
the flotillas had moved to their.
battle-stations at the great
forming-up area known as " Piccadilly Circus to the south-east
of the Isle of Wight, and already the unnerving heave and rock,
the sensations of a high sea, were recognised.
Men began to cast
oblique glances at one anothald id to perceive that they were
not alone in their misgivings: the eliciency of those tablets was
already in doubt.
At first they were all occupied: the sealed
ackages were broken open, and operational orders, maps ana
traces were scanned. do! last the names " in clear" !
So Poland
was Caen, Portugal was the Caen Canal, and they'd probably be
ia Caen this time to-morrow !
Of course they might
pected to land near the inter-section of four I : 50,000 maps,
61
