AYERSON UHILERSITY LIARARY
206
ASSAULT DIVISION
Division was part of a general regrouping
in the north for
Operation Blockbuster,
in which II Canadian Corps on the lett
was to break through the enemy defences between Calcar and
Udem, smash the Hochwald Line and exploit to Xanten, while
XXX Corps advanced
and swung round on the right of the
Canadian Corps.
Across the Maas and past Gennep the Division entered the
enemy's country and drove thoughtfully along the southern edge
of the Reichswald.
At least the Germans who lived here knew
now the pleasures of total war. Any house that had been missed
by the bombs and shells was liable to be blown down by the
Sappers and bulldozed into a military road. They also knew
But to know fear and the horror of war was not likely to
be enough. They also needed to be taught the rudiments of
self-confidence and the point of peace. That must wait.
Through
compete devastation the Division made its way until the sound
of guns reached their ears. At a distance it was a continuous
reverberation, and as they approached the rubble that was
heaped on the site of the town of Goch they came right in amongst.
the perpetual bang and crack of the gun-areas.
Goch was still
being mentioned in B.B.C. news bulletins.
The 15th (Scottish) Division held the line of the main Goch-
Calcar road a mile or two to the east of Goch.
In the past
fourteen days they had borne untold privations, advancing
waist-deep in mud and water, with five miles of their main
supply-route submerged at one point near Kranenburg.
Then
3rd Division relieved on the 24th and 25th February,
thickly wooded country. 9 Brigade took over from the Brigade
holding the lateral Goch-Calcar road.
Forward and slightly
right of them 8 Brigade, with a squadron of the 3rd Recce Regi-
lateral Goch-Xanten railway branch-line.
ment, refleved two brigab-noshe wooas, as lar forward as the
On their right flank
8 Brigade had the River Niers, that flowed from Geldern in the
outh-east up through Wetten, Kevelaer and Weeze to Goch and
the littie town of Udem stood away to their leit.
Despite the general north-west, south-east tendency of the roads
and physical features of this part of the Rhineland, the only two
roads in the area through which the Division was to advance
south-eastwards ran from Udem diagonally across their front: the
RHINELAND OFFENSIVE
fist went south-west to Weeze, the second south to Kervenheim
and Winnekendonk. Kervenheim was the 3rd Division's objective.
To reach it the Udem-Weeze road had to be crossed.
Division's axes of advance were two soft, saturated sandy tracks
leading south-east through the woods.
General Whistler's plan for this operation, known
Heather, was for g Brigade to advance through the woods on the
let to secure the left (Udem) half of the Udem-Weeze road,
for & Brigade to advance on the right to secure the Weeze end of
the road, and for 185 Brigade,
at present in reserve, to advance
then through g Brigade's positions
and capture Kervenheim.
Heather was to begin at 7 a.m. on the 27th.
Ith Armoured
division, the right-hand formation of ll Canadian ory, would
be operating on 9 Brigade's left; and on 8 Brigade's right, just
across the Niers,
the 53rd (Welsh) Division would be attacking
Neeze. 53rd Division's operation closely concerned & Brigade,
whose objectives on the Udem-Weeze road included a
bridge. This was where the road crossed the Mühlen Fleuth before
entering the town of Weeze.
The Fleuth, a narrow tributary of
the Niers, assumed a significance comparable with that of the
Molen Beck in the battle for Venraj.
If 8 Brigade could take the
bridge intact, the 53 Recce Kegiment would cross it on the zoth,
the morning of 53rd Division's attack on Weeze, and lake the
The Commander-in-Chief remarks in his despatch that the
enemy had built up to about the equivalent of eleven,
" in particular their paratroops fought magnihcently." In front
of the grd Division, but not exactly facing them, were all three
battalions of 7th Para Regiment, fighting under command of the
They were facing
expecting The
3ra Division to come bowling down the Udem-Weeze road.
attack through the woods caught them off guard.
recovered, and seemed to bear in mind the final exhortation of
Von Rundstedt, C-in-C West, who addressed them as " My valiant
fellow-combatants," and went on: " Through your perseverance
the general attack of the enemy must be shattered.
shakable confidence we gather round our Führer to guard our
People and our State from a destiny of horror."
The amazing
Germans persevered all right.
It was a good thing they did.
