ASSAULT DIVISION
by a sudden heavy snowstorm.
But only twenty prisoners
According to them the main body had made
as they heard
approaching from Venraij.
That was the end of an episode
was given much prominence in German
but which had not the least
tactical significance: it was an
effective nuisance.
For another two and a half weeks the banks of the Maas lay
deep in snow, and men led an Eskimo existence.
27 degrees of frost were recorded. The same day white camoufage
snow-suits were
men on patrol.
The infantry were
helped out with their patrols between Wanssum and Geisteren by
the Middlesex. The gend Light Ack-Ack Regiment supplied a
garrison for Groeningen.
In the northern sector the grd Recce
Regiment had relieved the Royals and had two Dutch Resistance
Companies under command. Though untrained and still suffer-
ing the
effects of undernourishment, these. Dutchmen were
tremendously keen, and their No. 2 Company drew the hrst blood
in the Recce Regiment's area, shooting up a patrol of four in
Vortum and taking one prisoner.
Since the beginning &f December each Brigade had had twelve
light assault boats in which reserve battalions coula practise as
On January 26th the 3rd Division went over to
offensive patrolling on the German side of the Maas.
Yorks had the honour of providing the first reconnaissance patrol,
which though it suffered some casualties when an enemy patrol
Was bumped on the near bank, crossed over safely and returned
with the information that was required. On the 2oth, in the early
hours, the grd Recce Regiment sent over a recce patrol supported
fighting patrol
opposite Sambeek.
Lieutenant Hodgetts,
The former,
killed two Germans between the river and
the Afferden lateral road, while the latter inflicted a number of
casualties on the
who approached them near the lock-
gates, and brought back a prisoner for interrogation.
ing Lieutenant Uray with two others from the Suffolks crossed on
safely with their
though under fire most of the time. The last patrol to make con-
tact with the enemy in January crossed under Lieutenant Moon
of the South Lancs and captured two prisoners with no loss to
WINTER: THE MAAS RIVER LINE
199
themselves.
Throughout the period Dutch civilians,
including
women and children, were making this perilous crossing to get
away from the Germans.
One night the burgomaster of Well
rought over a whole boatload.
Another night two Dutchmen
count over a Major of the U.S. Eighth Air Force who had spent
our months without detection behind the German lines.
Some
nean, noredible as it may sound, swam the icy floods and reached
the British lines safely.
paned that when the great drive began down from Nijmegen
through Cleve and the
Reichswald (Operation Veritable),,
3d ivision should assault across the Maas and take the Veritable
This would be Operation Ventilate. Planning
for it began on the goth under Major-General A. Galloway,
C.B.E., D.S.O., M.C., who was commanding the Division during
the temporary absence of General Whistler on a few days' hard-
camed leave in England. This planning was slightly complicated
by the fact that on the gist January there was a wecome rise in
temperature and the thaw set in : visitors at first had no difficulty
i splashing through the slushy roads and dirty yelow lanes that
the white monotonous marsh to Divisional Head-
But soon these approaches became rivers of mud, and
their edges and middles collapsed under a strain for which they
were not designed
During the third co-ordinating conference for Ventilate, which
was being held in Horst on February 3rd, a D.R. arrived with
orders that the Division was to be relieved by the 52nd (Lowland)
Division and to move into reserve in the area of Louvain, except-
ing 185 Brigade,
who would move to G Trials Wing of the 79th
Armoured Division
near Maastricht to assist 33rd Armoured
Brigade in perfecting
the technique of assault river crossings.
Advance parties from the Lowland Division would arrive on the
Meanwhile the Suffolks sent another patrol across the river.
Cray went again,
with Captain
Harris and six others.
crossed as a fighting patrol opposite Geisteren.
They wirelessed
back full reports on the ground and on two enemy encounters.
