1D A16500Б0
262
ASSAULT DIVISION
in the Company locality : so that had the position been assaulted
frontally serious opposition would have been met."
Five officers and 128 other ranks was the Ulster Rifles' fina!
haul of prisoners : they boggled at the Schwimm-Panzer in astonish-
One of their fatuous officers solemnly complimented the
Ulster Rifles on " the finest tactical manœuvre he had seen per-
formed by British troops in the whole campaign !"
standing this, it was an extremely fine and successful action, and
the Commanding Officer,
Lieutenant-Colonel Drummond, was
most fittingly awarded the D.S.O.
The K.O.S.B.s followed through the Ulster Rifles, and by
II.30 that morning they had consolidated in the area of the
important road junction
mile beyond the Kattenturm bridge.
was A Company, who were disposed near another cross-roads,
where the main road from Habenhausen led in from the right.
here a strange and, at one time, dangerous situation
largely out of the coincidence of the Norfolk attack on Haben-
hausen, which, in the early
German troops into this area.
Platoon commander, who was most intimately involved in it all,
has written up a personal account of the episode, Irom wich
he has allowed me to quote
arrival of the company in position soon alter I 1.30 that morning •
em anin a short time we had reached our objective. very
easy going, and not at all as I had imagined! Here we were
barracks that lay somewhere ahead.
uncolns passed ionrough us and took the
M sile the platoon was digging in, I took a section forward
to examine a large building which looked down on top of us.
1also wanted to improve, it po sible, my given position, as it
in frvery near a cross-roads and had a very poor field of view
in front.
We reached this building and cleared the first room.
As we moved through a ser sem arms I became aware that
it was Part of a block of I am sy which stretched out for
some way and surrounded a square.
barracks!
It was obviously the
As quickly as we could we cleared the first series
of rooms and then lay and observed. The barracks had been
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
263
badly damaged by shelling, and probably by our low-flying
It was possible that it did not contain any enemy.
could not observe anything in the square. We pushed through
the first part of the block fairly quickly, and I then decided
to move into the open. It was an unwise risk to take, I suppose,
and it was not really our job at all.
The whole place seemed
empty! There was only one small incident, which occurred
when one of the men observed some movement outside in the
We investigated and found two German soldiers
hiding in a shelter together with a girl.
They were dirty and
unshaven and very willing to give themselves up.
They said
the SS Troops had withdrawn
from the area.
I sent them
back to Company H.Q. with a message to the effect that we
had reached the
Lincolns' objective and found it devoid of
enemy, as far as we could judge.
We all felt rather pleased
with the success of our ' recce,' and felt that we might save
a Battalion attack on a worthless objective. Apparently this
is exactly what it did.
" I was not very satisfied with the situation, however. I
felt that I would like to move farther forward, or at least have
some sort of O.P. out in front.
The presence of a large building
cominating the platoon position did not seem to me at all the
ideal; particularly when we were so blinded out in front owing
to the peculiar nature of the ground.
Yet for some tactical
consideration or other we were not allowed to move.
no stray sniper would sneak back into that building.
" I sent Sergeant H. out to see if there was a place suitable
for an O.P., and he came back leading a prisoner.
said that he had some friends who were ready to give themselves
up, so H. set off again to see if he could bring them in.
had not been gone long before I heard firing out in front and
fairly hurriedly with his patrol.
the enemy, who were supposed to be ready to surrender, had
opened fire and proved to be in greater numbers than we were
led to believe.
H. had returned fire and got away.
" He was all for taking a larger body of men out to " get '
this small pocket,
and, as he was obviously in the right mood,
I did not think that there was much possibility
of any large body of enemy. I was wrong.
The patrol came
