ASSAULT DIVISION
five Armoured Vehicles R.E.: they came to grips
enemy and fought until they were all finally knocked out by
88 mm.s firing from La Bijude. As the Battalion consolidated,
the Germans subjected the position to five hours of a most vicious
mortaring and shelling. During this time Major Brooke, com-
mander of the Battery of the 33rd Field Regiment that had
supported the Battalion through all the period of training
together, was killed. The day was a black one for the 33rd Field
Their Colonel,
Tom Hussey,
was killed by an
8ó mm. firing over open sights, and one of their F.O.O.s, Captain
Roose, was killed as he entered the village in his tank. Captain
Cobley's O.P. party were all wounded.
The Colonel of the
Suffolks, Dick Goodwin, was also wounded while on a recon-
naissance in Cambes, and had to be evacuated.
While all the fire in hell seemed to be coming down in Cambes
wood, and in particular on to the orchard at the approach to
the wood, it was just as exciting running the gauntlet down the
open road into the wood under " cover" of which at least you
no longer presented a personal target to the enemy. The intensity
of enemy fire in the wood from about four o'clock till dusk was
as withering
as anything experienced during the whole cam-
Major Passy and Captain McDowell and C.S.M. Bell of
the Middlesex died there.
Sergeant Davis continually tended
the wounded and ran with messages up and down the wooa.
Maplain Neve sat out in the open directing fire on to the
enemy. The Germans failed to mount a counter-attack, and as
the evening turned to dusk the K.O.S.B.s came to reinforce the
Ulster Rifles.
There was little doubt after this that the Germans would hold
Caen at all costs,
that they had sited their tanks and Panzer
Grenadiers accordingly. A general reflection may be made now
that in those days savoured of " sour grapes" : it is simply that,
had Caen and all the other objectives been swiftly overcome on
D-day, Hitler might possibly have been dissuaded from issuing
the fatal order that Rommel must contain the Allies in the bridge-
head until he saw an opportunity to dislodge them and push them
back into the sea.! That order was to cost him at the very least
Any decide bye in or day the he la Ping near i Rene onsienti
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF CAEN
IOI
fifteen divisions: had he lured us on to the Seine those divisions
would have served him better. Even when the jaws of the Falaise
when Rommel himself realised the
dereat that his mistakes were bringing down on him, Hitler
ordered that not a single man should be withdrawn without
personal reference to him. That Montgomery sensed the German
predicament and exploited it has been somehow overlooked
Dy critics of the Ralph Ingersoll type, who in this first year
alter the war speak of England's anxiety to conserve the lives
of her men-rash from an American in view of the respective
proportions of Americans and Britons who lost their lives.
this, as General Whistler points out, is to " flog a dead horse."
Eisenhower is not the man to withhold praise where it is due,
and simply says :
"F.-M. Montgomery's tactical handling of
this situation was masterly."
What we have to bear in mind from now until the end of
Chapter Four is the gradual operation of the Commander-in-
Chie's plan that " the enemy should batter himself against a
strongly held pivot in the Caen area on the left" while the rest
o the Allied Expeditionary Force broke out, if possible bagging
dose Germans who were intent on " battering themselves" (it
plan really !) against the
Though the port
facilities in Caen might have been useful, it mattered not a German
mari whether the actual pivot was Biéville just north of Caen
or the faubourg de Vaucelles, the southern part of Caen across
the river: and if the operation seemed too gradual it was wonder-
tal fruitful in the end, despite the weather that, in the mid-June
gale, came near to marring the crop.
The worst collaborateur was
the weather throughout the campaign.
Now that Eisenhower nas presented his full report to the
Combined Chiets of Staft, and so to the world, there is no need
to waste time refuting the imputations of an Ingersoll :
was one of the world's great battles and everyone
it was won to a very large extent on the will-power and steadfast-
e chief danger in the area so far invaded, and took steps to commit its strongest
and most readily available reserves in that sector.
Little was known of the strength
it objectives of the American landings, and the uperator a the coenut won
nued to be regarded simply as a diversionary enort wit casty be dealt
the ensuing days."
This estimate of the situation dominated the enemy's policy, with fatal results, during
