PROPERTY OF
to the nearest house.
There was only one anxious moment
when a gun opened up at us in the middle of the field. We
kept going.
The usual routine of fire and movement on a Company
basis and we
cleared the
The following Company
passed through us on their way in to the attack on the main
enemy position. By this time the Artillery barrage was coming
M. joined us later, with only a few minor casualties.
His information on the enemy had helped to pin-point the
Artillery fire.
We dug in and rounded up some prisoners.
whole Company of them! They had been badly shaken by
the barrage
and the German Company Commander was
weeping slightly over the disgrace, and the condition of his
men ... One of the officers—a typical young Nazi-had been
badly wounded. His hand was smashed, and he had been hit
I entered a house
He looked green, and kept yelling for morphia.
full of terrified civilians (one girl was
hysterical), and had great difficulty in pacifying them,
cellars lay a small baby with its foot blown off. •
D and C Companies and a troop of tanks attacked the main
position at 4.30 p.m. They held the village by 5.15, also 66 officers
and 118 other-rank prisoners and 12 Flak guns.
They were pre-
paring to move on Bramsche when startling orders were received
for the switch of the Division from the XXX to the XII Corps
The same evening, while the K.O.S.B.s were fighting for
role astringen Rottum, the Warwicks put in a model attack on
the village of Mundersum.
very graphic account.
They, too, may best give their own
" When the assault went in we weck hot at all sure what we
were up against.
A civilian had come in shortly before,
said the town was held by twenty Volksturm. However, we had
heard stories like that before and were taking no chances.
tanks were drawing
sounded like 20-mm. A-A guns.
On Zero Hour our fire switched off to the flank and the
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
243
attacking Companies went in. There is no doubt the enemy
were completely "foxed." The fire of the tanks and MMGs
had all their attention. Our wide flanking movement brought
us in from almost behind them.
In a very short space of time
we had close on a hundred prisoners plus some fifteen dead
on the ground.
Our own casualties were one killed and six
wounded. Our only trouble came from the 20-mm. AA guns.
of which there were no less than eleven, six of them being 4-
barrelled affairs.
These were sited farther forward of the
village, and when they saw what had happened they swung
them round on to our troops in the village.
A troop of
Crocodiles was just being sent to deal with them when Major
F. Bell, M.C., M.M., commanding D Company, managed to
get his 6-pr anti-tank gun into
action against them at short
range. This was enough for them and the crews started to
Carriers rushed after them and rounded most of them
up. During the course of this we had only one fatal casualty,
Sergeant W. Groves : he was shot by a German who remained
in a trench from which three others had already surrendered.
After more " mopping-up,"
the Battalion settled down for
the night in the charred remains of its captured village."
During the night they received the surprising orders for the
Division's
transfer to XII Corps, who had broken clean away
on the right and were speeding eastwards.
It was in the north
that resistance was gathering.
The Division
therefore left the
Guards and XXX Corps on the 8th, travelled fast and far, and
by the end of that second week in April they were near the deep,
wide lower Weser.
Astride of the river stood Bremen,
Germany's
second biggest port.
As they began to close in from the south,
the 3rd Division met the most bitter opposition from units of
Hitler's
crack
and
now cracked)
troops-poor, desperate,
frenzied men, bestial, with no decency left in them.
From Lingen g Brigade had gone first,
thinking to harbour
north of Osnabrück,
"but once we were on the move, the wheels
did not stop rolling till we had passed some 50 miles beyond."
185 Brigade followed to take up temporary positions covering
the northern approaches to Osnabrück and a long stretch of XII
Corps northern
flank along the Bremen road.
Then, on the
