OROUST
ASSAULT DIVISION
That winter we spent on realistic large-scale amphibious
I learnt that General Montgomery, about to take
charge of all the land forces involved in the assault on turope,
had in the first year of war been the 3rd Division's commander
and was still very clearly remembered as a dedicated promoter
of large-scale and very testing Exercises.
As soon as we got into
action we had reason to be deeply glad of such experience.
As gunners, for instance, we had to know how to fit, into a
long Tank Landing Craft that was barely the width of two
Sherman tanks side-by-side, four of our guns, which were each
mounted on the chassis and tracks of a Sherman tank.
was not enough, these had to be parked on the landing-craft
around a full-scale Sherman Tank from which, once we were
ashore, the guns were commanded: (aboard, we used the ship's
bridge for Fire Orders).
In addition, we had to load, on to our
LCT deck, heavy half-tracked vehicles full of ammunition, for
our guns fired 105mm shells, weighing about 33lbs. These
tracked vehicles all had to be reversed on to the landing-craft so
that the guns could he fired over the
bows as we ran ashore
from something over 10,000 yards out at sea.
As we ran in, we
lowered our sights to keep the beach-defenders' heads down
until the Commandos and the ist Suffolks went ashore with the
FOOs (Forward Observers for the guns) who could observe and
correct our fire.
Rehearsing all this in the Moray Firth, we used often to
imagine it was the 'real thing'.
Early in May 1944 we had
moved down to Sussex and Hampshire, and we took part in
Exercise Fabius: it was so realistic that we sailed far out towards
the French coast before turning about and 'performing' our
assault landing on the beach at Littlehampton.
As we sailed
south in Exercise Fabius, some of us wondered, briefly, if this
could be 'the Day'.
It seemed uncanny to be heading for
France and not to be challenged by the Luftwaffe or by German
gunboats: it seemed as if they had been deliberately deflected
from us.
sea choppy.
On 1 June, the blissful weather turned grey and the
When we finally set sail on the 5th, we had no
doubt it was the real thing: we unsealed our secret orders and
discovered where we were really going.
be Caen.
'Poland' turned out to
NEW PREFACE AND INTRODUCTION
Firing hard for these last miles of the run-in, and then firing
most of the morning from the beach, we fortunately had little
time for fear.
(Another distraction
from fear, perhaps
fortunately, was the seasickness and general queasiness which
seemed to affect almost all of us on those nineteen hours of a
fairly uneasy crossing: the arrival on a rather dangerous beach
at least offered relief from that endless rolling effect of the sea-
swell on a flat-bottom landing-craft.) A gunner is liable to under-
estimate the nervous strain put on infantrymen who are for so
much of the time closer up against the enemy.
It was very
salutary for me to read, in a frank history of 2 KSLI, a battalion
that contributed not only to D-Day's fighting but to the whole
campaign with admirable distinction: 'So began the battle [on
D-Day] which we all hope will be the most terrifying we have
undergone. Later battles were worse, but none had - to the
majority - the horror of the unknown, nor had any started with
so great an expectation of heavy casualties'
I remember our own Brigade Commander, after a final
briefing in May, telling his officers that we should be prepared
for up to eighty-per-cent casualties as leaders in the Assault
I suppose he had been instructed to say that, and 1
suppose we were as prepared as possible for such a calamity.
But seeing how few of our landing-craft were hit, let alone sunk,
and then how comparatively few casualties we sustained as we
fired four very prominent self-propelled 105mm guns from the
Norman tide-line all morning,
from about 08.25 (I remember
thinking of breakfast at home). I remained confident, and of
course very heavily occupied.
The beach seemed to be under
sporadic small arms fire from the windows of the increasingly
unattractive boarding-houses facing the sea: we very quickly put
a stop to that. But there was the more troublesome random fire
from long-range guns on our left flank,
from the direction of
Honfleur and Le Havre.
As they were firing straight along a
beach full of invaders, our flanks rather exposed, it is surprising
how little damage they achieved before they were reduced to
silence by the Navy and the RAF.
supporting were making their way steadily inland until the
Suffolks were held up by an unexpectedly formidable concrete
blockhouse called Hillman (see the last page of the plate section).
