PROPERTY OF
ASSAULT DIVISION
night of the 1oth, 8 Brigade leap-frogged across the whole
An all-night move, a total journey of as much as 18o
miles, over strange country roads often crowded with refugees,
was a tiring job for drivers of the long lines of lorries and gun-
tractors and carriers, of tanks and S-Ps.
Daylight revealed
thousands of tramping folk, the slave-workers from occupied
countries about whom most people had read without grasping
the meaning, streaming westwards along the roads, their total
belongings on their backs or in the assorted hand-carts and
perambulators they had acquired.
8 Brigade found themselves established across the main line
of escape for the German First Para Army,
as the remains of
that force was driven back from Lingen by XXX Corps. They
took over from a Brigade of the 7th Armoured Division, who had
been leading the XII Corps advance. On April tIth the Suffolks
held Bassum, the East Yorks Harpstedt, and the South Lancs
Wildeshausen. Each of these three little towns controlled a road
leading north-east into Bremen-between fifteen and twenty-five
The possession of Wildeshausen was the most sig-
nificant: it controlled the passage of the main Lingen-Bremen
road at the crossing of the River Hunte.
arrived at hot midday :
There the South Lancs
and despite the rude interruption of
some enemy S-Ps and a small body of Infantry who managed to
penetrate the south-west corner of the town,
"all Companies were
in close contact round the town perimeter" by early evening.
Shortly belore nightfall the Germans cut the lateral marpstedt-
Wildeshausen road just w. ut pat: South Lancs only supply road
led in from wistringen in the south-east, and one or a troop
-I anu-lank guns that were sent down the road was anucatu
out by a bazooka.
Later that night 185 Brigade came up on the east of 8 Brigade
ho take over from a Brigade of the 52nd (Lowland) Division that
had been temporarily
The Norfolks took over Barrien,
command of the yth Armoured
into Syke, and two days later the K.S.L.I. relieved the
the Warwicks went
the twin villages of Kirchweyhe and
8 Brigade touched in to the right on the 12th, the
South Lancs not being sorry to be relieved in Wildeshausen by
the K. O.s.B.s of 9 brigade and taking up a position in rear of
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
245
the Suffolks at Bassum. The K.O.S.B.s passed forty-eight unquiet
hours and beat off several local counter-attacks before
exitement died down and they were relieved by a battalion of
the fIst (Highland) Division which now came up on the left.
Bob Moberly, writing of one of the counter-attacks directed by
a company of parachutists against Wildeshausen station, which
nas defended by a Middlesex M.G. section as well as K.O.S.B.s,
describes how " the German offcer,
leading the attack was
wounded and fell six yards in front of the guns.
He was brought
il, and stated that he had been ordered to capture the station
and to hoist a Nazi flag on the roof as a success signal, for the
rest of his battalion to
come in and mop up Wildeshausen.
& Platoon collected the flag that night, and the C.O. sent it to
the Mayoress of Finchley as one of the Battalion's trophies of
At Sudweyhe,
185 Brigade were only two miles from the
River Weser, and only six from Bremen.
On 13th April, 9
Brigade occupied the positions of 8 Brigade, who set off up the
main road from Bassum to Brinkum, the last small town before
the marshes and floods that protected Bremen from the south.
The grd Division were set to capture all of the great city west of
