2noV
20
ASSAULT DIVISION
me from other duties and allowing me to get on with the job,
and also for his careful reading of the MS. The proofs have
been read by my friend, Jack Simmons, and I am most
grateful for the benefits of his judgment.
was a Gunner Officer with one of the Division's Field Regiments
throughout the campaign.
look out for Gunner prejudice, and I would not discourage them.
But I fear I am less likely to be charged with that than to come
in for a " stonking" from the Gunners themselves for not making
better use of my opportunity !
My last point.
When I returned from Palestine in March,
1946, to start work on the files at the Cabinet Offices, one of the
first persons I met was a youthful corporal of the ist Suffolks,
whose name was Catchpole, and who was one of the handful of
survivors with the battalion, and indeed with the same company,
from the D-day assault right through to the end. He had just
arrived back for a course in this country and was warm with
indignation: he described to me his shock at meeting a young
girl in a pub who had asked him " what that Triangular thing
Was on his arm," who, furthermore, had never heard of the grd
Division. Considering all that fellow had gone through I found
it hard to explain to him that there were a great many people
at home who could not be expected to care very much about
At the same time I determined
that this history should be made intelligible to the civilian public
as well as to those surviving members of the Division to whom
like those
that
"Souls that have toil'd, and wrought, and thought with me-
That ever with a frolic welcome took
The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed
Free hearts, free foreheads-
Felixstowe, Suffolk,
New Year's Day, 1947.
NORMAN SCARFE.
Introduction
THE DIVISION
FOR MANY PEOPLE an Infantry Division remains an abstract
military term for a collection of arms and men; and a soldier
is just as apt to have an inaccurate idea of a Division as a civilian.
The soldier sees a military formation from his own angle and gets
a lopsided view, while the civilian sees it as a whole from outside,
but how far outside! It will be easier to watch the 3rd Division
in action if we know more of its physical shape and its spirit.
The size and shape, the strength of the Infantry Division,
are fixed by the Adjutant-General's branch of the War Office.
On war establishment it was, at this time, roughly 17,000 strong.
Of this number less than half are Infantrymen, and only one-
quarter are officers and men of the rifle companies, the cutting-
edge of the Division: the remainder support them and serve
them with the means to fight.
Readily enough the men of that
spring into mind, and the Division is thought of in
terms of its Infantry Battalions.
This may seem unfair, but it is
right, because the Division wins its reputation on the achieve-
ments of the
and, more important perhaps, trom
them comes the spirit of the Division.
No need to labour this difference between front and rear :
the story of the Division involves all component units.
was a tendency in the Press to give the impression that because
L-of-C troops were doing their job well they might be equated
with any other trained troops who simply " did their duty."
It
must be admitted that upon Lines of Communication major
considerations of strategy depend. But the same may be said of
those
civilians who were not employed in
work of national
unimportance: they also served, and often under no less dangerous
conditions than L-of-C troops: nor were they given campaign
While it is true, then, that the Divisional Services kept the
front-line supplied and were invaluable, much of their fine spirit
