ASSAULT DIVISION
and Middelaar halt on the Nijmegen railway, 8 and 185 Brigades
and the 4th Tank Coldstream Guards arrived in pouring rain.
9 Brigade, the 33rd Field Regiment and 3rd Recce Regimen,
stayed west of the Maas in the area of Haps, and just across the
river had remarkably good flank observation of the least German
movement-to the special satisfaction of 33rd Field Regiment
East of the Maas the 82nd Airborne Division were attacking
next day in the low ground alongside the river from Mook south
to Middelaar and Riethorst. All that day the Divisional Artillery
fired in support of this very determined attack, which was costly
but completely successful, and the Germans who were routed
from this area found it costher. The Division's gunnery was
appreciated. 1
Now Operation Gatwick was contemplated.
It was intended
that the Division should clear the Reichswald with the 15th
(Scottish) Division on the right and 43rd (Wessex) Division on
the left. On the grd, VIII Corps Commander visited Div. H.Q,
and General Whistler told him he reckoned the wood on the slope
at Kickberg would be his chief problem, capable of absorbing a
brigade by itself. He thought he would have to put a brigade
straight at this with a second brigade at Grafwegen on
out the western up of the Keichswald, and the thira brigau
would then be put on to st. Jansberg, the wooded ground over-
looking the Corps bridges that would have to be built before the
operation could succeed. That afternoon and early next morning
185 Brigade relieved the American Glider Troops,
interference from a watchful enemy at Heikant.
was ordered.
full programme of complicated reliefs
in the close
limited capacity of the roads were reminiscent of the conditions
in the Normandy lodgment area.
On the 7th, after
sideration, the Army Commander decided that the
would absorb too many troops in view of the current operations
farther west to clear the Antwerp approaches.
Operation Gatwick
was therefore postponed and the grd Division was ordered to
2 The Ops log at H.Q., R.A., recorded on Oct. and that 454 Battery of the y6ch
Field Regiment had fired the first of the Division's shells on to Germany.
inaccurate : reference to the War Diary
B 4 gun of 41 Battery fired a round into Germany at 4.10 p.m. on Oct. Ist.
of 2oth Anti-Tank Regiment reveals that
yet seventeen weeks since the first was fired
German beach defences.
THE ADVANCE INTO THE LIMBURG LOWLANDS
recross the Maas to take part in the elimination of the enemy
pocket west of the river.
Clearing the Reichswald was a job most men had regarded
with more foreboding than relish. It was one of the least attractive
stetches of the Siegfried Line. The Division was on the very
site of the catastrophe of Mook Heide where an earlier Dutch
Liberation Army of fifteen thousand men had been caught and
outmanoeuvred by a Spanish force. It was from this rout that
the leader of the resistance movement, William the Silent, had
received that worst-of-all news of his gallant brothers: missing,
believed killed. The line was handed over to the 43rd Division
together with detailed reconnaissance information that had been
obtained by vigorous patrol activity over
the last two thousand
yards to the frontier.
The cost to the Division of this information
was ten officers and eighty other ranks during the first week of
"the GOC's famous description of the keichward is appear but trade.
