78
ASSAULT DIVISION
(ії)
THE FOLLOW-THROUGH
Three large landing-craft of 185, the Intermediate Brigae,
were hit before disembarkation, and there
were casualties
between the beach and the Brigade Assembly Area north oi
Hermanville.
The laden men struggled ashore in four feet of
water, clinging to ropes run out to the beach by the Navy.
by It o'clock the three infantry battalions were assembled inland.
and ready, and Brigade H.Q. was established in Hermanville
The King's Shropshire Light Infantry were in the middle, with
the Royal Norfolks on the left and the Royal Warwicks on the
night. The K.S.L.I. were to mount the tanks of the Staffordshire
yeomanry, from 27 Armhouoy amrigade, and advance along the
main axis to secure Caen as quickly as possible.
The Norfolks
on the left and Warwicks on the right were to mop up and secure
objectives captured by the mobile column.
But there was no
gh of the Staffordshire Yeomanry, who were caught on the
beach, which, so far from being cleared, was becoming more
tightly congested as the tide came in. And in the Assembly Area
the two most westerly companies of the Warwicks came under
culate mdeme Sun de trom terman positions towards Lion
and Cresserons.
Lieutenant-Colonel H. O. S. Herdon, their Con-
mander, prepared a plan for attacking these positions, subject to
Smith, O.B.E.
approval of the Brigade Commander,
Brigadier K. P.
The Brigadier was in an unhappy dilemma :
launch the assault on foot or wait for the tanks.
whether to
The General's
order was that " this advance will be carried out with speed and
boldness so that the
enemy's local reserves can be overcome
quickly and the Brigade established on its objective ready to
meet counter-attacks by reserve formations which may develop
towards evening on D-day."
The question was whether more
speed might not be attained by waiting for the tanks than by
committing the troops to an attack on foot. Available intelligence
was that on the left the East Yorks were still moving across the
open marshy ground under observation and mortar-fire, in their
INVASION: THE
FOLLOW-THROUGH
79
advance on the enemy position Sole behind Riva Bella, that the
Suffolks had cleared Colleville without much trouble,
as the
Commandos had just done some of the work on their way through
to the bridges.
But the Suffolks had still to attack Morris and
filman, which stood right in the way of the Norfolk advance.
At midday Lieutenant-Colonel F. J. Maurice,
commanding
the K.S. L.I., reported to Brigadier Smith that only about one and
a half squadrons of the Stafford Yeomanry were clear of the
beaches, and that a large minefield apparently covered the right
Rank of Hermanville across the axis of advance originally planned
for the tanks. They could not leave the road on account of the
bog and were consequently nose to tail and all stationary whenever
there was a hold-up ahead.
Brigadier Smith therefore ordered
the K.S.I.I. to advance on foot along the main axis, Hermanville-
Bewille-Caen, immediately, the Stafford Yeomanry to " marry-
up" as soon as possible.
The Norfolks were to wait in Colleville,
to pass through the Suffolks as soon as Morris and Hillman were
Lieutenant-Colonel N. P. H. Tapp, R.A., was at this " Order
Group."
He had been watching his regiment,
the 7th Field
Regiment, as, shortly after beaching, they roared past Herman-
ville cross-roads to deploy just to the south in the open fields,
and just in front of the South Lancs, the southernmost infantry
in the area.
The infantry, feeling the strain and reaction from
their first attacks on the beach positions, were surprised, relieved,
and greatly cheered at this spectacle.
In the Colonel's words :
"I do not know if the Gunners knew they were the foremost
troops at that time.
They were probably better disposed to enjoy
the honour in retrospect! I grew more and more cheertul as I
counted the guns and vehicles going
past,' and by 12 o'clock
was able to say to the Brigadier: • The 7th Field Regiment 1s
in action with all its assault vehicles and ready to support its
athiliated tanks and infantry. "
At
12.15 Brigadier Smith
received intelligence of enemy
" Explaining how with one or two very ne prul Miltary roncemen and an theres
Coly hoarse voice " the congestion difficulties had been overcome, the Seconan-
Command of the Regiment said
" There was a natural and very correct reluctance
to leave the track because of the danger of mines,
But from my previous observations,
I was able to direct the guns in Infantry tracks through slown
Although this
caused words with a Sapper officer, none of the guns was blown up and they got
through much more quickly."
