Chapter Six
OVERLOON AND VENRAIJ
" This ill-digested vomit of the sea...
ANDREW MARVELL, on the Netherlands
THe BULK of the German force that fled from Normandy withdrew
behind the Siegfried Line. But as they saw an opportunity to
establish outposts they emerged and quickly prepared a forwar
line, a line whose farthest positions protected a bridgehead west oi
the Maas. This was where the river wormed its way northwards
and westwards in poor imitation of the snake-like progress of the
Rhine round into the North Sea.
They meandered together in
land that lay level with the sea and seldom rose to the eminence
of 30 metres.
The Germans on our side of thee Maas hela a
fusition that in the south, opposite Venio, made full detensive
Wanof the waterlogged Peel areas through which ran the Deurne
canal. The northern part of their bridgehead, in the area of
of natural protection.
and Venraij, gave them not quite the same degree
It is true that here their front was covered
by the Molen Beek, a stream that was an effective obstacle to any
vehicle, and by the morasses of the Vertingsbeeksche Heide and
Overloonsche Heide; but in addition to the road running
Oploo, there were subsidiary farm-tracks that, unnavigable as
they became in wet weather, did connect Oploo with the village
of Overloon and
the town of Venraij.
The Germans were
clined to hold these last two places, and thereiore surrounded
them with mines.
Up to the gth October, when the Division began to concentrate
in the neighbourhood of St. Anthonis and Oploo, and the U.S,
7th Armoured Division was relieved, the Germans had held out
successfully.
The " After Action Re brt " of the U.S. Armoured
Division reads: " After nearly a month's pounding against the
fortress of Metz, 7th Armoured Division went north to aid in an
end run play around the Siegfried Line in the vicinity of Holland.
OVERLOON AND VENRAIJ
The Division was given the mission of clearing the enemy
ressance in the PEEL SWAMP region (sic) ... The OVER-
LOON battle was a costly one, and during the first six days of
Division suffered 452 battle casualties (killed,
wounded and missing), also
35 tanks and 43 other vehicles."
The grd British Infantry Division watched unappreciatively as
the Americans pulled out and drove away to the south.
misgivings were justified : in the seven days between the 12th
and i8th October their own casualties in men were almost three
ames as many as those the Americans had suffered. But by the
18th they had taken Overloon and Venraij.
The VIII Corps plan (Operation Constellation) was to clear,
in four phases, all the enemy from their Maas bridgehead.
plan for the first phase (Castor) was for the 3rd Division to attack
couth-east on to Venraij and draw the largest possible force of
three other Divisions would strike east Pollur,,
enemy to meet them. Then, when the enemy was fully engaged,
Sirius and Vega),
trom rexem and Weert to Roermond and Venlo, cutting off
the enemy's retreat at those two crossing-places.
Every effort
was to be made to mislead the enemy into thinking that operations
were limited to the Venraij area !
The Division's part was planned at Headquarters on the roth
and orders given out that afternoon. Operation Aintree (Division
tavoured this more terrestria reuenlame: the stars were all very
well for higher formations) was to begin next day.
soaking drizzle had been descending all day, and in the evening
the operation
was postponed 24
nantry and their supporters had the whore of the lith ill which
to consider the battle that lay ahead.
There would be two phases in the operation: the first the
capture of Overloon, the second the capture of Venraij. 8 Brigade
would complete the first, securing Overloon, opening up the road
in from Oploo, and exploiting a mile forward down the Overloon-
Venraij road. 9 Brigade would be prepared to carry out the
second, clearing the Laag Heide woods to the right (south-west)
of Overloon, then advancing over the Molen Beek into
185 Brigade would be ready to assist in either phase and exploit
the success of the second.
It was obvious that this onslaught
through mines and mud against a strong force of Germans would
