10 A101006e
ASSAULT DIVISION
bridge collapsed back down the road on the other side of
At i1 p.m. the K.S.L.I. were ordered to cross and attack at
2.30, and once across the Dortmund-Ems Canal to turn south,
securing Lingen and extending the bridgehead to allow bridges
to be built on the main road leading into the town from the
west. If this had not been achieved the Warwicks were to pass
through them at 7 a.m.
The K.S.L.I. were marching north to
the bridge along difficult tracks across the Lohner-Sand.
barren region of dunes' similar to the approach to Went
seven months before.
"These tracks seemed to go on for ever,"
Ian Rae, the Battery Commander with
the K.S.L.I.,
" and as time dragged on it was becoming touch-and-go whether
the hrst stage of the attack would take place in darkness at all."
The following-up units found the axis even more difficult than
the marching troops. It was slow going in a jeep by day; the
drivers of troop-carrying 3-ton lorries that crossed to the bridge
by night performed a tremendous feat.
It was 4•3 a.m. when the lea ing companies of the K.S.L.l.
reached the bridge.
Silently they crossed the river and formed
up for the advance through Altenlingen to the
canal, which
was slightly more than a mile from the river at this point.
5.30 they had reached the Canal with scarcely any opposition.
The boats were brought forward at once, and at 6.35 the Cothe
panies began to cross.
so far there was no sign of life Irom the
other side,
and according to Major Rae,
scene resembled a regatta more than anything else."
as Guy Radcliffe records,
two early-rising German soldiers were
to come out of their house to inspect the weather.
at once started to fire,
at which the Germans started to run out
of all their houses to their positions."
forced them to take
The fise of the K.S.L.I.
cover before they could reach the multiple
the crossing-place,
though one or two
1 This is the Geestland of the geography books.
Owing to a cement of iron oxide
nette susand to te central German lowland, as of folland and judallu
is heath, or marsh, or peat-moss.
The typical example is the Lineburge Heide where
he C-in-C had his Tactical Headquarters at the time of the German surren.
Before the war it was observed that there was much to be done before the German's
Geestland was as far reclaimed and tilled as that of Denmark and Holland, and a
result of their policy of exploiting the occupica countries has been their failure to
agricultural defects.
BEYOND THE
RHINE AND THE EMS
made the crossing unpleasant." Corporal Coles, who was
commanding one of the sections at this moment, at once directed
i boat away from the landing-place, drawing the enemy's fire.
In fill view of the enemy he landed his section, set his Bren into
action, and then led his section in a charge on the farm held by
the enemy, all of whom were either killed or wounded." He
tis clear that the enemy had been deluded into thinking that
the attack would come
from the south.
To that purpose the
Jivisional Artillery had been deceitfully firing on targets to the
south of Lingen.
The enemy's artillery and mortars meanwhile
nad been directed on to the bridge, following the appearance of
two Messerschmidts over the scene of activities.
But by 10.30 a.M.
Sappers of 17 Field Company had built a Class 9 Bridge, to take
the infantry close-support weapons.
The Warwicks crossed into
the bridgehead of the K.S.L..I. (who now had about fifty prisoners),
and turned south.
They had been pushing slowly forward in the
lorries since 3 o'clock the previous
It had been
impossible to prepare an evening meal, and now they were going
"to attack before they had had time to eat a proper breakfast.
"The Troops were quite magnificent,
as cheerful as could be."
went in with two Companies
a bound behind to do the mopping-up.
" I think we must have
caught the enemy by surprise ;
we came in right on his Battalion
Headquarters. • amongst the urst bunca or prisoner were the
Commanding Officer, Adjutant,
I.O. and M.O. of III Battalion,
Grossdeutschland Brandenburg Training Regiment ... We were
behind the artillery fire,
and soon reached our
objective ... the Battalion captured 170 prisoners in the day's
fighting."
With a quarter of the town in the hands of the Warwicks,
Norfolks passed through at midday to deal with the rest.
in the south that the attack had been expected : Lingen was
a
garrison town, and there were still some hundreds of. troops
to
account for, mainly paratroops of II Para Corps.
The Norfolks
started their street fighting with two Companies up and made
good progress,
but soon they perceived that the
Germans were
infiltrating between them, and filled the gap with the other two
Companies.
The stiffest opposition came just beyond the main
