CF
APPENDIX C
Iwo critics of the 3rd Division's performance in the battle for Caen
Justice and truth seem not to have been near the foretront
of David Belchem's mind in 1980 when his book Victory in
Normandy appeared.
While the late Eric Lummis was at work
on an account of the ist Suffolk's undaunted D-Day assault on
Falman was able to show him the corresandence 1 nad 0a0
with Carlo D'Este when he was writing Decision in Normandy, the
first serious description of the whole Normandy campaign which
revealed a true understanding of the 3rd Divisions's actions on
that day. We agreed that none of the neighbouring assault
divisions
confronted by
a headquarters
formidably strong and well-sited as Hillman, which the Suffolks
had overcome by the end of that day.
Nor did the other assault
divisions meet a Panzer attack
threatening as 21 Panzer
Division's, which Bill Eadie's Staffordshire Yeomanry and the
other 3 Div support units so decisively drove off.
Then, when
we examined the speed of advance orton stuanadian Div and
50 Div Ironts, we lounld thelr periormance ciosely cumparabie
with ours. So Lord Lovat's sneer at 8 Brigade's achievement in
nis Complacenlt accoudl Ot Mls own (with its revealing uue, mmulur
Past, 1978, P3II) was ill-informed and ill-judged.
The officia
verdict (Victon in the West, I, 1962, p213) was properly appreciative
of the two British and one Canadian seaborne assaults on that
stortly sea-shore. o nave swept away all Dut a tew isolaied
fragments of Hitler's Atlantic Wall and to have fought their war
inland for an average depth of four to six miles on most of a
twenty-lour miles front was surely a notable feat of arms'.
Michael Howard has
persuasively suggested that 3 Divs
D-Day plan to capture Caen, nine miles inland and with vital
river-crossings, was in the nature of things 'aspirational'.
This
was aemonstrated about an hour after midday, when 9 Brigade.
uur neserve Diigade, 105t 1s commander, intelligence omicer dnu
274
APPENDIX C
iner staff, soon after coming ashore; all seriously injured, and
one killed, by one
the corps
Commander, Lieut-General Crocker, changed g Brigade's plan,
and with it the whole division's.
Instead of heading boldly for
Carpiquet airfield alongside 3 Canadian Div, 9 Brigade was
suiched to shield our left flank along the Orne and Caen Canal.
That was the end of any hope of taking Caen on D-Day.
nothing whatever to do with slow advances that afternoon
alleged by Wilmot, Belchem, et al.
Clearly, the Corps Commander was not determined to take
Caen at all costs on D-Day, and was anxious adout the acuive
presence of 21 Panzer Division.
As the days passed, there was
à curious silence in the national press about the presence of 3
Div in Normandy.
Divisions that had led the assault were not
Pleased to see those that had made their name in N Africa and
up understandably
performances
continuing to get 'star' treatment in the newspapers.
naturally felt indignant and wondered what their families would
Ill-informed journalists followed Wilmot's lead and
slowness on D-Day,
and at their
Brigadier's and their Div Commander's lack of driving-power,
for nọt being in Caen that night.
If this book has done nothing
else, it will I hope have nailed that journalism as unpardonable
calumny.
275
