ASSAULT DIVISION
logged ground.
The road from Overloon and the few tracks
along to the right that led up to it had been broken up and
cratered by the Germans, who had also sown the whole area with
mines—even the bottom of the beek where it was shallow enough
for wading.
185 Brigade were to cross in the area of the main
road and advance into the northern part of Venraij, whie
° Brigade were to pass down through 9 Brigade in Laag Herde
wood, cross the beek and enter Venraij from the west to clear the
southern part of the town.
the size of a typical
English market-town, as it might be in the Fenland.
shiets ran north and south. Its northern " parish," 185 Brigades
objective, was called Brabander.
success depended first on ability to bridge the beek. This
Ros one of the responsibilities of the C.R.E., Lieutenant-Colonel
R. W. (" Tiger") Urquhart. He had under command 617
Assault Squadron as well as the Divisional Companies. To estab-
lish two tank crossings 617 Squadron mounted two Small Box
Girder Bridges on Churchill A.V.R.E.s and rushed them up
ready for use the following day. For the Infantry crossings, 210
feet of kapok (floating) bridging was obtained sufficient for four
bridges on each of the four battalion fronts.
The battalions chosen
assault were the Suffolks,
East Yorks, Warwicks and
The 4th Tank Grenadier Guards were to support
8 Brigade, the 4th Tank Coldstream Guards 185 Brigade.
largest force of bombers the Division had ever seen filled the sky
that evening on its way i ses surermany to destroy more of the
enemy's sources of armament, and the sight did much to cheer
up the tired soldiers, who had personally very little to
forward to in the coming day's battle.
worse that night.
The weather grew
Few men slept. Ammunition had to be got
to the guns; tanks and bridging equipment had to be got right
forward along defective roads in pitch darkness.
orders after dark," recorded the Norfolks,
" We got our
streaming rain the unhappy
"and in the usual
Commanders made
their plans while, with hooded torches, we struggled to read
-through no fault of the
The Infantry kapok bridges were a success : the tank bridges
praise — were with one exception a failure. The last consignments
OVERLOON AND VENRAIJ
i apol were received by the Infantry at 4.20 a.m. The assault-
a troops carried it forward to the beek and launched it with the
aid of the Sappers.
185 Brigade crossed first, silently, and by
jo dock the Norfolks had two Companies across beside the
renoon- Venraij road, the Warwicks two Companies across
half a mile along to the right.
A small counter-attack against
Company of the Warwicks was beaten off after a hand-to-hand
git. Otherwise there seemed to be little opposition. Work was
mediately begun on the banks in preparation for the heavier
migs, while the Infantry formed up on the Start-Line across
die e for their advance to the Brabander outskirts of Venraij.
The fist two attempts by 617 Squadron, R.E., to approach the
war trough the quagmire and lay bridges across in the Norfolk
arca both came to grief.
By this time the enemy had guessed
what was going on, and brought down heavy
fire along the
At the Warwick crossing on the right, Sergeant
Fan of 617 Squadron drove his A.V.R. E. with its girder bridge
tad out in front like a great, ill-balanced fire-escape, down the
tack through the minefield to the cratered edge of the stream.
On dismounting, he saw that the release cables for his bridge
Under intense fire his demolition N.C.O. climbed
on to his shoulders and released the bridge, which dropped well.
This was the only tank bridge across the Molen beek for the next
4th Tank Coldstream Guards got two troops over it
1o help the Warwicks, when it, too, began to break down.
strenuous efforts to repair it with logs the squadron was eventually
li the Sappers were not lucky, the Norfolks certainly Were
They began by advancing straight across a minefield, without
icalising it, and miraculously without a single detonations
accumulating casualties.
Then the Warwicks'
A and
panies crossed the beek and both Battalions advanced.
This was
at 7.30, and the Divisional Artillery laid down a barrage for
them.
The German guns and mortars were already
fast as they could reload.
Though a
Tiger tank was giving
trouble, the German Infantry were now feeling the effect of the
barrage.
Under it the Warwick advance was as exemplary as
