30 A1630030
250
ASSAULT DIVISION
yards' range, ran to a flank, and got himself into a position from
which he could engage the enemy.
" Thanks to him the
remainder of the patrol were able to assault and overcome the
position."
As C Company were
getting a 6-pounder through
mines and demolitions for use in Erichshof, the Suffolks over on
the left moved against the cross-roads.
They moved against stubborn troops, who knew which way
they were coming.
They came under dense fire from enemy
artillery and small arms, especially from snipers in most of the
houses.
Though the supporting tanks engaged these places
unceasingly, they were unable to silence the fire from them, and
the advance was painfully slow ; in some places it was held.
At
5.30 the tanks were relieved to replenish ammunition by four
S-Ps, and shortly afterwards a platoon of D Company reached
the lateral road away to the right of the cross-roads,
involved in a confused hand-to-hand fight.
Then two troops of
Crocodiles arrived. They were sent up, with a Company following,
to this right section of the lateral road; to come at the cross-
roads from the right, up the road from Leeste instead of the
main Bassum-Brinkum road. " At about 8.15, as it grew dark,
the Crocodiles went into achon, yurung name into every house
and trench they approached.
They went straight across the
cross-roads. The enemy left their trenches and ran. The Battalion
was wild with elaton at the sudden change from deadlock lo
But the cost had been high... " Later a single enemy
three bombs
causing no casualties.
At r.30 in the morning A Company sent
a patrol forward to within 100 yards of the level-crossing at
"At first lighhoue Company moved up to the edge
of Brinkum. Light opposition was encountered, but the Company
was ordered not to move any farther forward as 105 brigade
were by now in Brinkum, advancing from the east.
The position
was held all day while 12; Brigade fought through Brinkum, and
A company were relev evoy a company of the
After the Warwicks had taken Leeste and Erichshof, the
Norfolks began to go through them at 6 o'clock in the evening
on their way to Brinkum.
Once they had cleared a bridge of
two enormous bombs they bounded forward easily,
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
there were some unlucky casualties from snipers. But when the
outskirts of the compact little town-about 1000 yards square-
were reached, it became obvious that the Germans intended to
make a last stand. Certainly there was no escape for them: the
only road from Brinkum back into Bremen was a causeway across
the foods and an admirable target. By 8 o'clock the Norfolks had
penetrated about 300 yards into the built-up area, and two farms
and several houses were ablaze.
But, like the Lincolns in Lingen,
they found that " you can infiltrate but not fight in a town in
the dark: and this was going to be a fight." The advance con-
tinued at 4 next morning, April 16th, and " the Crocodiles with
A Company under Major Atkinson went really well, frizzling a
lot of Boches."
By 2 p.m. A and C Companies
were on their
objectives and now prisoners were coming in.
" The Artillery
now softened up the last bit of the town before and com-
panies went through, and by 5 o'clock all that remained was a
small housing estate to the north-west of the town.
panies were fully extended, so a Company of the Warwicks came
under command and helped us to finish the job.
counted some 60 dead, and took 5 officers and 203 other ranks
prisoner. Our own losses were 3 killed and i2 wounded,
had been a model battle for co-operation of all arms." It had,
indeed, and the losses were astonishingly light in view of the
fanaticism of the Germans,
particularly
SS N.C.O.s.
Cases were reported of their deliberately blowing themselves up
with a grenade in order to wound their captors.
The Warwicks
mention one German who did this, although he was so
wounded that he hardly had strength to draw the pin from the
That day, the I6th, while the Suffolks were at the approach
the rest of 8 Brigade were opening out the left flank
towards Delmenhorst.
The South Lancs sent out some very
aggressive patrols,
East Yorks attacked and captured
of Heiligenrode and Mackenstedt.
artillery concentrations were
Heiligenrode bridge,
then on to Gross Mackenstedt and the road leading east.
the morning General Whistler called in at the East Yorks' H.Q.
to wish them good luck.
" Soon after midday," Colonel Renison has
written, " D
