DIVISION
craft on what bearing they were running.
"I don't know, sir,"
was the reply :
"I'm following the craft ahead."
the craft ahead?" "I don't know, sir, I haven't seen it for
about an hour.". The end of that was a landing well outside the
battle area, which under conditions of real war would have been
But it was precisely to avoid such disasters that
infinite thoroughness was insisted on in all the Combined
This Naval Force, which would be responsible for " the sale
and timely arrival of the assault forces at their beaches, the cover
of their landings, and subsequently the support and maintenance
of their rapid build-up ashore,"
was named Force "S," the
initial letter of the sector upon which the grd Division was
Sword Sector.
Its commander was Rear-Admiral
A. G. Talbot. Every effort was made after the arrival in the
Moray area to embark troops in " their own" craft for each
exercise and for the subsequent operation. All reasons of good
comradeship aside, understanding between soldier and seaman
Was important for the Infantry who had to change craft from
large Infantry Landing
Ship into cockleshell Assault Landing
Craft at the Lowering Position (a most aptly-named point seven
miles from the hostile shore).
It was just as important for tank
crews, whether they had to leave their Tank Landing Craft on
an armed beach or whether (if they were D-D) they proposed
to plunge overboard and " swim" for it.
And it was especially
important for the Field Regiments of the Divisional Artillery who
had to fre over a vows of the but at a range oi 11,000 yaras
before H-hour, firing on the run-in to 4,000 yards, when they
ceased firing and prepared to go into action ashore.
" arms" of the landing troops wanted perfect co-operation with
the Navy, and they achieved it over this period.
Movement Control and the staffs of the camps in the mar-
shalling area profited by all these exercises, which each, in broad
plan, followed the same course, with only slight modifications in
detail arising out of the previous exercise.
intensive preparations.
Beginning in the unit, each exercise involved every man in
One of the most formidable jobs which
confronted drivers of all types of vehicle, from the light James
motor-cycle to the Sherman tank, was waterproofing. True, it
PREPARATION
was not proposed to ride motor-cycles ashore from the craft, but
they were hable to be submerged even when strapped high behind
the turret of a tank. Tanks themselves, and other " A " vehicles,
required the most elaborate modifications : special " hardware "
in the form of funnels or chutes had to be welded over air inlets
and exhaust outlets,
and all joints, valves, " breathers," in fact
most of the engine itself, had to be sealed over with a special
asbestos compound or a plastic substance called Bostrk.
of the work had to be undone as soon as possible after the dry
land had been gained to allow the engines to breathe and keep
cool. But it was imperative that no vehicle should " drown" :
they were all too precious.
To see the roof of a jeep and the driver's head moving across
the water shorewards was not uncommon,
though the shock of
diving into cold water from the ramp of a landing-craft often
caused the driver to raise his foot from the accelerator: to stall
the engine thus was fatal, and the shock had to be withstood. To
achieve the highest standard of waterproofing, courses of instruc-
tion were attended
at Rhyl and other centres,
and R.E.M.E.
Light Aid Detachments and unit teams often had to work 24
hours a day in shifts in order to be ready for the next exercise and
There was no point in being nearly waterproot: you either
drowned your vehicle or drove it ashore.
Units had other equipment problems.
For example,
sets also had to be waterproof as well as faultlessly maintained for
their vital function: there could be no line-communications in
One unit had to net seventy-six out-stations on the
regimental group.
The most untechnically minded can see the
difficulties in devising a procedure for operating such a congested
net, and then keeping normal wireless discipline.
To anticipate,
that particular net was a complete success on D-day.
Lastly, there was the question of personal equipment.
Quartermaster issued every individual with kit according to the
special Assault Scale, which applied to all units in the Assault
Group and was designed to make each invader self-contained for
all his personal needs.
A special assault jerkin was
with pockets and packs all in one piece, to fasten in front with a
toggle that could be released instantaneously:
Over all was worn
lifebelt familiarly styled " Mae
West" and a new light
