ASSAULT DIVISION
lodged and dropped to the bottom. Then,
as more L CT ran
it became impossible to work at the deep obstacles.
Fortunately it had become evident that the obstacles were not
preventing the discharge of craft and that some of the mines
were failing to detonate.
During these early tasks on the beach the casualties to the
fails, A. Vs., R.E., and bulldozers amounted to 50 per cent of the
5 Assault Regiment,
R.E., suffered heavy casualties
amongst their officers, and 629 Field Squadron lost nearly 20
per cent of their men, some of whom were drowned. From among
the Division's own engineers, 246 Field Company, affiliated as
usual to & Brigade, landed one assault demolition team with each
of the assault companies of Infantry and a mine-clearance team
with each of the four reserve companies of those two battalions.
it was one of the platoons of 246 Field Company,
Ive minutes past eight, that made the first exit off White Beach
with a borrowed armoured bulldozer, before proceeding, accord-
ing to plan, to search and clear and mark a forward route to
Hermanville. The East Yorks, supported by the surviving tanks
of B Squadron of I3th/18th Hussars, and the South Lancs sup-
ported by the survivors of A Squadron, both accompanied by their
affiliated F.O.O.s of the 76th Field Regiment and with one F.O.0.
of the 33rd Field Regiment, had begun the advance inland.
The hinterland was not hard to defend.
It is quite easy to
visualise, especially easy for those who saw it then: the wind
was very fresh, and, blowing the clouds fast across the sky, it
uncovered the sun at intervals throughout the day.
was that the prepared, sensitive minds of the men were exposed
to a series of flashlight photographs that were developed on the
spot and printed indelibly.
Behind Red and White Beaches and the houses scattered all
along the front lay a strip of marshland impassable to vehicles.
This extended back some 500 yards and then gave way to an
area covered with orchards,
where the green cornfields were
hedged and the hedges were buttressed by poplars and elms.
These and the apple-trees almost hid Hermanville, a straggling
little village about a mile from the sea.
The one road connecting
it with the coast ran back from the extreme right of White Beach.!
1 See front end-papers and p. 52.
THE ASSAULT
It may be seen, therefore, why every vehicle coming ashore had
i move to the right at the first lateral and then keep to this
main Hermanville road until it was over the marsh-strip. It was
possible to deploy into the orchards and farmyards on either side
of the road once this strip was crossed. Through Hermanville
pased a main lateral road running parallel with the beach.
Following it out to the left from Hermanville, it bent slightly
got into Colleville' and then sloped gradually down through
Si. Aubin-d' Arquenay to the Orne bridges at Bénouville.
this lateral road was the Periers-sur-le-Dan feature, which was
alher a rise than a ridge, although Morris and Hillman, the 10'5
cim. attry and Battalion H.Q. strong-points set into it, dominated
This feature was quite bare, so
that Morris and
Filman relied for concealment on the lie of the land,
nowhere exceeded 6i metres above sea-level.
This " Periers
feature"
was the furthest objective of 8 Brigade.
Beyond lay Caen and the objectives of 185 Brigade.
Over
the Periers ridge the road descended into a gully containing a
mall brook that ran into the Caen Canal at Beauregard.
Tad crossed the brook, followed it through the adjacent villages
i Beville and Biéville, rising steeply into Lebisey Wood.
We
need trace it no further: it crossed to " Hill 64" and fell down
nio Caen, which was not more than about nine miles inland.
trom the sea the Caen Canal and the Orne gradually cut in
acros the Division's front diagonally from the left. A secondary
road ran along the near bank of the canal from Ouistreham
to Caen. Across the Orne valley high ground rose on all sides,
ambois de bavent overlooking the airporne landing area, and
to the south the hills of Normandy.
come.
On the beaches organised German opposition had been over-
There was still promiscuous sniping and often heavy
Beling along the foreshore. But & Brigade's advance inland had
egun, and all the time the landing-craft of " S" Force were
beaching hard.
It was inspiring to watch those skippers navi-
sating, avoiding the mined obstacles if they could, but anywa
driving " tull ahead together sog ahe shore-line; they spared
Originally Colleville-sur-Orne, this fair village has, in Julyi
rechristening itself Colleville-de-Montgomery.
1946, honoured us by
Its former title was not particularly
ppropriate, since it stands two or throte Sumptres from the bank of the river Orne.
