PROPERTY OF
ASSAULT DIVISION
surprised to see us that they hadn't got their white flags reacy
when we arrived." They passed through Roxel, and at nightfall
on the gist were only six miles from Münster.
At II p.m. B
Squadron at last got down to some sleep. "At i we were woken
for an O Group at half-past, ready to move at 2.
take two light cars to Nienberg There we should be sitting astride
trusting to their speed and silence
to take the Boche by surprise.
a main escape-route for the troops still in the city.
then to move on to the far side of Münster to recce the Bridges
over the Dortmund-Ems Canal. . . • By 4-30 the patrols had
reached the beginning of the village, and found nothing to report.
One light car drove through the village and saw nothing.
ten minutes two carrier troops had rushed up the road into the
village, and within half an hour the whole squadron
We started taking prisoners then, and
so for two days.
It was getting light and we settled down to
some breaktast. It was taster sunday. As the inhabitants s
up to go to church they were surprised to find English soldiers
in their streets."
Dut the nnal approach to the city was guarded by the flak
They were no further use as anti-aircraft defence: there
was nothing left to invite an air attack.
guns with some effect.
They were fired as Field
American paratroops came up to dea.
with these guns, and on April end simultaneous attacks went in
from north and west.
the tanks tollowed the paratroops m
" Prisoners came in at a rate phenomenal even for us;
prisoners of all types.
A small boy of eleven told us proudly
that he had given a false age to get into the army: he had said
he was fourteen.
There were old men of the Volksturm, para-
chutists far from their natural home, flak gunners, all sorts.
didn't stay about to watch them :
best twelve hours of the whole week."
we went to bed.
They had carried the
triangular sign fifty miles beyond the Rhine to Münster, helping
to open up a new set of roads to the east,
northern pincer that on April
and to strengthen the
pincer at Lippstadt,
Ist met the 12th Army Group
completing the envelopment of the Ruhr,
the caging of one and a half German Army Groups. They made
3p some of their lost sleep, and then drove norps to rejoin the
3rd Division.
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
233
The three Brigade Groups had set off in the wake of the
Guards, with 8 Brigade Group leading.
They had moved off
it on the day after General Whistler had visited and addressed
them. First they headed north into Holland, through Aalten to
Greenlo. The Dutch reception was delightful after five weeks
among the sullen or obsequious Germans.
The moment a
vehicle pulled up, its occupants were positively embarrassed by
the offers of accommodation.
Sunday morning, 8
In the early hours of that Easter
Brigade Group
established
bipenlo, whose townsfolk had produced the usual glad festoons
of orange and their national tricolour flags.
Bob Moberly
noted: " Some of the houses flew white flags; they were the
nouses of collaborators, some of whom were
being marched
Fool' Day."
we arrived.
Easter Sunday was April Ist, All
But it was only a brief stay in Holland.' Ahead, the Guards
were through Haaksbergen and
town at one end of the Twenthe Canal.
The bridge was blown
behind the first few tanks of the Guards, and so 8 Brigade was
sent forward to clear Enschede on the 2nd.
A few shots were
audible, but otherwise it was a repetition of the Groenlo welcome.
The Guards galloped on,
through Oldenzaal and recrossed the
and 8 Brigade, hard after,
German frontier to enter
the town of Nordhorn on the grd. The fine weather had broken,
and it was raining as they crossed the marshes and low wood-
lands of the frontier zone into the first undamaged German town
Nordhorn was a small modern
textile manu-
town at the junction of the
River Vechte
Almelo Canal. At first the streets seemed innocent of inhabitants,
but later looting got under way.
It was not a simple matter of
understandable :
pistols and cameras,
which would have
been at least
it was a furtive stream of Hausfraus with new
buckets and brooms, sneaked from an unguarded hardware store
in the South Lancs area.
immediately imposed
curfew that was
only lifted for the purchase of food between
certain hours.
Houses were then searched for Gestapo ruffians
1 The Div Club remained in Holland, at Bad Boekelo, near Groenlo.
last stages of the campaign there was no short leave on the Continent, although the
Div Club received those
badly in need of rest.
U.K. leave continued,
men travelling by rail from Gennep to Calais.
