ASSAULT DIVISION
" My dear General,
"I want to send this note to thank you for the magnificent
help that 3 Div. is giving me in this party in caring for the
Not only have you placed your medical resources at
my disposal, but in addition 8 Brigade have furnished a burial
party-never a cheerful job.
"I know that they take this in their stride and that they don't
expect any acknowledgment, but now that Tom Rennie 15 i
longer with us to say " thank you ' I'm taking it upon mysel
Between the 23rd and 2sth, 1,298 wounded, 304 sick and
553 exhaustion cases passed through the Advanced Dresig
Stations of 8 and 223 Field Ambulances, 8 Field Ambulance
being reinforced by a Transfusion Team from g Field Ambulance.
On the 27th the Division, who were now following the batle
across the river with something of the complacency that may be
discerned in the crowd (but rarely in the players) at the Ova,
were suddenly told that g Brigade would cross the Rhine that very
Blackfriars,
Already there were four bridges across near Rees- London,
and Westminster.
That evening
K.O.S.B.s and Ulster Rifles and 45 Battery of the 20th Anti-Tank
Kegiment crossed the Rhine at Hönnopel and passed throug
derelict Rees to take over from units of the Highland Division.
Here, fighting eastwards and northwards, the Highlanders were
still meeung strong resistance from the German paratroops, and
it was the shallowest part of the entire bridgehead.
tarly neat morning 9 brigade were told to be ready to advance
east to capture the little towne soreldern if it had not faden w
the I5th (Scottish) Division, who had landed on the right of the
Highland Division.
At midday XXX Corps confirmed that
i Brigade would attack Haldern, and that the Guards Armoured
Division would then charge through, with the 3rd Division and
the 43rd Division mopping up and clearing the ground respectively
to the right and left of the Guards. Early that evening 9 Brigade's
patrols came in with the information that Haldern
Jairel, so the N.O.s.b.s immediately entered the town while
the Ulster Rifles advanced to occupy the high ground north of
the town, where an autobahn had been under construction. Pushing
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
on, the K.O.S.B.s reached Werth to find the bridge blown and
is everywhere. Roads without bridges were no good to the
Guards Division, and the Lincolns were at once ordered to pass
tie K.O.S.B.s to examine the next water obstacle-the River Aa,
which had bridges at Lensing and Doing.
B Company, under
Major Shaw, set off at 5-30
that morning, and soon reported
Prom B Company Gosling went out with a patrol, found the
bridge at Lensing blown,
took four prisoners, and kept in touch
nih the enemy until nightfall. In a much-quoted Order of the Day,
fied-Marshal Montgomery had just given men to anucipate
cracking about in the plains of Northern Germany •
tar there had not been much cracking about in this part of the
ront, so it was decided to loose a quick full-scale Brigade attack.
H-hour was fixed at I a.m.
In this and other respects, 9.
Brigade
nere reminded of their assault over the Escaut Canal six months
carlier. Forty assault-boats arrived, and at r o'clock the Lincolns
rossed on the right, the Ulster Rifles on the left.
Once they were
across the Aa and clear of the bank resistance diminished.
Ulster Rifles took some extraordinary prisoners.
"Perhaps the
most distinguished was a tall fair-haired youth who claimed to
have lunched with the Führer in Bocholt on the previous day ! "
Major Bird, going round his platoons, ventured to criticise one of
the slit-trenches dug into the a bank.
Upon being informed that
it was a German shit-trench, he examined it more closely and found
that its occupants were also German! by 4 a.m. all objectives
were taken, and both Battalions were up to the next stream, the
Holtwicker Bach.
At 5 o'clock the Sappers had built a
bridge over the Aa :
H-hour for the K.O.S.B.s, who
crossed the bach and consolidated on the main east-west road
without opposition.
At half-past six leading tanks of the Guards
Armoured Division appeared at g Brigade's front.
Slight delay at a road-block, but this was by-passed, and not long
Armour was reported to be well on the way to
At 6.45 that morning the Commander of XXX Corps spoke
with the G.i on the telephone, congratulating g Brigade on
operation, and giving out orders.
The rest of the Division were
now
across the Rhine.
The Division would function
as
three
