10 41030030
ASSAULT DIVISION
propaganda leaflets into the city, giving the burgers twenty-four
hours in which to make up their minds to surrender, or take the
alternative consequences.
Still no sign came from the city, and
on Sunday evening, the 22nd, the bombers arrived to do their
work. It was a spectacle quite different from that earlier one on
a Friday evening in July, just outside Caen.
The sight of these
great shafts and fountains of dust and masonry springing up all
over the distant town, while the earth shuddered under their
feet, stirred little compassion amongst the men of the Division.
The French understood :
not so the Germans.
Next morning the Division enjoyed the story of how the 52nd
(Lowland) Division had just reached Achim (half-way trou
Verden to Bremen) the previous evening about the time of the
expiry of the surrender ultimatum, when the bombers could be
seen approaching ;
and how they found the railway telephone
there still open to Bremen, and got the Bremen stationmaster
on the phone.
He must have been able to near the pompe
Offered to act as inowmealary with the German
sarison commander, the uncompromising veneral Decker, when
down came the first bombs and dislocated the line.
his pacifist zeal !" comments one of the battalion writers.
German civilians in the Divisional area watched the final pre-
parations for the
assault with every
appearance of complete
indifference to the fate of Bremen.
(A.D.O.S.) told the fantastic story of a
At Div. H.Q. Victor Blundell
German farmer who
actually approached him for the loan of troops to work in his
complained
Division all his
that with the
labour had left him, and was much
coming of the
aggrieved about it!
The 23rd was a great day of regrouping and briefing:
following additional troops came under command of the Division
for Operation
Armoured
Brigade (from 79th
Dragoon Guards (with
after the menagerie !) ;
185 Brigade) ;
Brigade); 4th Royal Tanks (Buffaloes, to lift one battalion of g and
22nd Dragoons (with
Brigades respectively) ;
A Squadron of 7th Royal Tanks
Squadron each to 9 and 185 Brigades) ; 12
86th Field Regiment, R.A. ;
198 Anti-Tank Battery
and B troop of 582 Searchlight Battery, R.A.; and 222 Squadron
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
i sault Regiment, R.E. General Whistler himself briefed
i the fiers, a Brigade at a time, again making use of the local
Lutheran Church. He began cheerfully with the remark that
tus might well be the Division's last battle. As divulged above,
tic plan was to assault from the south across the floods, while
tie 5t Division feinted from the west. And from the long recipe
i the beginning of the paragraph, the allocation of the tanks, it
vil have been guessed that 9 and to5 engaues were to lead,
8 Brigade to pass through later.
from the south two roads led into Bremen: the one on the
nght ran fairly parallel with the river from Sudweyhe over a soft
mash to Dreye, past the floods and through the outlying villages
Arsten and Habenhausen, into the suburbs and the stadtwerder
Vorst: the one on the left led across the floods from Brinkum
lo the village of Kattenturm and on into the suburbs, the Neuen-
lander Vorst, past the Airport away on the left, and into
Süder Vorst.
185 Brigade would attack along the general line
of the right road, 9 Brigade along the left.
The left road itself
as badly cratered just north of Brinkum, and in
Kattenturn
it was expected that the bridge would be broken over the Ochtum,
swide stream that ran along the northern edge of the floods.
Division had somehow to get these two roads open.
The 24th was the last day of preparation for the assault troops :
they would advance
The weather was
with showers and sunshine.
Dozens of boats, yards of bridging,
miles of white tape for marking routes, and hundreds of unit and
divisional signs for the
same purpose,
appeared all over
assembly and marshalling areas, just as
they had before
Rhine crossing.
And the same complicated loading tables
to be worked out for those troops who were going to splash into
action on the backs of Buffaloes.
During the afternoon Typhoons
disported themselves in the sky above Bremen,
diving down to
shatter Arsten and Kattenturm with their rockets whenever a
bright interval, a patch of clear sky, gave them the opportunity.
The medium bombers came over again to add the finishing touches
to their earlier work of destruction: the weather was still too
uncertain for the Heavies.
The guns roared all day in harmony
with the rest of the Corps Artillery over the river as the other
Divisions advanced on the doomed city.
