ASSAULT DIVISION
so that all four have to be folded down and accommodated
beneath the talc of a small map-board! There was by now no
doubt at all about the tablets.
Once in formation, each Force took its bearing and pressed
forward in line ahead —in two apparently endless parallel lines
of widely assorted craft-for its Lowering Position about seven
miles off its selected beach.
The Headquarters Ship, H.M.S.
Largs, had done similar service in Torch and Husky, the landings
in North Africa and Sicily.
Now the old veteran was one of five
great nerve-centres in the most vital and intricate operation of
them all, and standing up to the test. The other large craft, the
Infantry Landing
Broadsword, Astrid, Maid of Orleans, Goathland and Locust (advancing
in that order) were all as familiar as the Largs.
Men aboard
them were the fortunate ones: the following sea seemed to roll
tem less than smaller crait particularly L a l-on account of
their size. That is not to say that a number of the men cooped
up below hatches escaped sea-sickness: LS I made only a
comparatively easy crossing.
And then there was the Lowering
Position to face, the unhappy transfer, and ninety minutes in a
tossing little L CA.
Forces and Escorts.
Ahead the Fleet Minesweeping Flotillas
were steadily cutting channels that the Assault Force might
navigate safely: a most difficult sweep, with considerations of
a turning tide, was made with complete success.
The foremost
craft of "S" Force was not conspicuous at the early stage of the
crossing.
It was the midget submarine X 23, whose task was to
mark the limit of the assault area for the oncoming armada.
& 23 had taken up her position just off the beach before mid-
night on June 4th, knowing nothing of the postponement. They
had to remain submerged for nineteen hours on June 5th, with
no air-conditioning plant, lying on the shallow bottom which
they knew to be mined.
leading minesweepers were in sight of France!
Three hours before dusk that day the
That the German coastal defence forces failed to engage
these minesweepers is more than surprising. That they took no
INVASION: THE ASSAULT
waring from their sweeping activities is almost incredible. Yet
the fact remains that the invasion followed as a tactical surprise.
It can only be assumed that the Germans decided that the
minesweeping was another feint, and declined to be drawn.I We
need not put all our success in achieving this surprise down to
German stupidity. We were operating an elaborate cover and
deception plan throughout the period of preparation.
included the temporary sinking of the Mulberry harbour off
Dungeness, the concentration of our bombers upon the Pas de
Calais area prior to D-day, and the assembly of our normal
shipping in north-eastern ports, due, chiefly, to the occupation
of the southern ports by invasion craft (well camouflaged).
illusion that we had designs on Norway was heightened by the
intensification of our mining of the Southern Baltic and the Kiel
Canal and by a series of air attacks on U-boats off the Norwegian
coast shortly before D-day,
aimed simply at preventing their
joining the U-boat squadrons in Brest and the Biscay.
measures, alternate wireless silence and activity, and simulation
schemes, added to the German bewilderment.
In addition their
radar had been dislocated for them by the R.A.F., and we were
making deliberate diversions against the Pas de Calais and Cap
Towards the end of May we went to the length of
sending off to Gibraltar a British actor closely resembling General
The final element of surprise was the weather.
Let it be
admitted that the forces takinepisert (naval as well as military)
mere themselves slightly surprised to be venturing out across a
Channel as rough as that, though it is true that this particular
force had attempted and survived worse in Exercise Grab.
Weather conditions did make invasion
now know that the Chief German Meteorologist, Major Lettau,
reported to the German Commanders that after June 4th con-
ditions would be unfavourable for several days.
wave overlooked completely the weather Iront that was to
pass through the Channel early on June 5th with relatively good
weather tollowing it, and that gave usenhower the opportumly
• This is now confirmed by Major Milton Shulman in his remarkably fine book,
Defeat in the West.
was relatively serene amongst the German formations in France on the evening of
5 June, 1944... The invasion seemed weeks away..."
