I12
British
Canadian
Totals .. ••
ASSAULT DIVISION
Killed
Wounded
2,960
14,299
396
1,516
3,356
15,815
Missing
4,450
I,177
5,627
Total
21,709
3,08g
24,798
3rd British Infantry
Division sustained
over that same
(These last figures refer to casualties among the 17,000 who
formed the Division proper, and do not include those among the
many units under command).
It may be seen from the above official figures that the Third
Division bore one-seventh of the total number of British and
Canadian casualties over the period ot-got June, at the end
of which period there were fifteen British and Canadian divisions
and seven independent brigades in the bridgehead, apart from all
the L-of-C troops.
The figures need no comment.
Had Mitten gone more easily, 9 Brigade with g Canadian
Brigade would have gone ahead with Operation Aberlout,
ambitious attack upon the enemy-defended villages of la Bijude,
Epron, Galmanche, St. Contest,
Authie and Cussy.
Corps Commander saw how the fighting at the chateau had gone
he called Aberlour off. The position remained tense until the th
July: so tense that the battered 21 Panzer Division were taken
back out of the line and replaced by 16 GAF Division fresh from
Then, as resistance stiffened to General Bradley's drive
south, after the fall of Cherbourg, Montgomery said it was time
to put the wind up the enemy by seizing Caen.
Late in the evening of the 7th,
while 9 and 185 Brigades
stood briefed and ready, 450 heavy bombers swarmed like black
dragons over the sky, unloaded their bombs on the old Norman
and as they returned the Division was for a time in total
darkness beneath a great vaulting cloud of ashes.
emerged from their trenches and
breathed freely.
for the first time for weeks
The full support of the Air Force gave them
but the French understood and the men were
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF CAEN
At dawn next morning, with a great rumbling
barrage, with Typhoons rocketing in support,
185 Brigade,
commanded now by Brigadier Eric Bols, went up
In the afternoon they went on and took Hill 64. All
the time they were under intense shelling and mortaring: the
Germans had undisputed observation from the
tall factory
chimneys of Colombelles across the river.
As the light began to
fal, Brigade got into position in the northern approaches to the
At dawn on the gth the
Ulster Rifles sent two strong
patrols in through the rubble and ruin : at 9.30 the main body
and the K.O.S.B.s advanced on their left.
By midday they had
reached the Boulevard des Alliés.
The Canadians entered from
Carpiquet in the late afternoon. Isolated resistance was overcome.
Caen lay in our hands.1
• That is to say, all Caen north of the Orne-the greater part of the city.
Jawbourgs lying across the river were still in enemy hands.
The whole situation is
maingly similar to the much earlier capture of Caen by the English under Edwards
IlI and his young son, the Black Prince.
It was almost exactly six hundred years
80, on 26 July, 1346, that Edward's soldiers entered Caen
from the north and
ound the fortified enclosures of the two great abbeys of William the
and his queen " undefended and desolate.
Caen was not a walled city, and so the
defenders retired to hold the Ile Saint-Jean across a branch of the Orne.
a sharp fight at the bridge, but " the
men-at-arms completed the work."
English archers prepared the way,
Edward found a copy of a Franco-Norman pact
They rested five
days in Caen, during which
to invade England eight years
the Archbishop to read
English fleet had
cost from Cherbourg to Ouistreham. It looks as if the Overlord planners knew their
medieval history.
A.D.
