ASSAULT DIVISION
of the 51st (Highland) Division: that " their regimental pride
was largely replaced by a greater pride in their Division."
same is not quite true of the grd Division, where you never
failed to detect an Infantryman's pride first and foremost in his
particular regiment. If he were talking to someone from outside
of the Division, then you would hear about the grd Division.
But this would not mean
that his regimental pride had been
replaced by pride in his Division, for the obvious reason that the
exploits of his battalion are nearly all part of his own personal
experience, while the exploits of the rest of the battalions are
incidental, and gratifying to him only inasmuch as he and they
all had a place in their Divisional plan.1
Perhaps Mr. Linklater was hinting at a supreme pride in
the common origins of the Division. It may not be denied that
home ties are of the utmost value to territorial units,
doubtful whether as much may be claimed for a Division-even
a territorial Division especially when it has seen action and
received reinforcements. The 3rd British Infantry Division had
no claim to a birth and upbringing in some exclusive corner of
the British Isles, nor had they need of such a claim.
As a result of reforms towards the end of the last century
and again after our temporary but long-remembered loss of face
in the South African War, the regular battalions of the line
became known as the ist and and Battalions of a Regiment, the
and (Militia) Battalion became the Special Reserve, and the 4th
and subsequent Battalions were Territorial Battalions.
battalions of the grd Division were all either ist or 2nd Battalions
of their respective Regiments.
our narrative begins,
But by 1943, at the time when
average of one in three were
of the Infantrymen
no more than an
regular soldiers.
Nominally a
Regular Division, then, the grd Division inherited the traditions
of the oldest regular County Regiments and proceeded to carry
on those traditions with the prowess of regular,
volunteer and
conscript soldiers together, fighting together in the same platoons,
bringing the guns into action together.
1 Mr, Nigel Nicholson, in a recent admirable article in the Spectator on Regimental
to military loyalty to be the sharing of recent experiences
adds an interesting observation: that, supposing the greatest stiraulus
a battalion has a run of ill luck, the men's loyalty will shift temporarily to the next.
nigher group which can claim an over-all success.'
if a company or
DIVISION
It is evident, then, that the battalions are not to be labelled
collectively (as is the fashion with Territorial Divisions) according
to some ancient political boundary such as Wessex or Nor-
thumbria.1 But this is not for want of such a boundary. The
Danelaw-territories of Scandinavian conquest and settlement
along the East Coast in the two centuries before William the
Conqueror landed from Normandy-conformed almost exactly
with six of the counties whose regiments made up the fighting
force of the Division. In fact, a convenient way of remembering
the Battalion component is to think first of the East Coast from
Suffolk right up to Berwick, where the Ist Battalion of the King's
Own Scottish Borderers have
their depot.
The base of the
Divisional Armoured Reconnaissance Regiment is Northumber-
land—they
3rd Reconnaissance Regiment,
(Royal Northumberland Fusiliers), and one of the two Territorial
units in the Division.
That North Sea coastline also joins up the
Ist Suffolk, Ist Royal Norfolk, 2nd Lincolnshire, and 2nd East
Yorkshire Battalions.
In the North the Danes came to the West
Coast, reaching, if not controlling, that part of Lancashire which
is represented by the ist Battalion of the South Lancashire
And with Regiments covering the Danelaw area so
conveniently,
the Division can
immediately take pride in the
tremendous fighting and seafaring
(Combined Ops) qualities,
and the spirit of independence that characterised the Norsemen.
This seems appropriate enough.
futility of trying to identify formations with territory is at least
twofold : in battalions the men who actually came from the area
were in the minority: in the Division the battalions themselves
are in a minority, albeit an important one.
The men of the
Division came from the length and breadth of Great Britain.
battalions that had no place in the Viking theory are
no disproof of the spread and depth of the Division's roots in the
2nd Battalion of the Royal Ulster
brought to the Division the spirit and stamp of an Irish regiment :
imported English modesty that prompted their
historian to state that " the war was over,
1 It is of interest to note the War Office proposal of 1946 to group together Regiments
of adjacent counties in order that, where they are unable to recruit from their own
Regiments may preserve some territorial character by recruiting
their neighbours.
