190
ASSAULT
DIVISION
they were almost on his position. The enemy managed to bring
down Defensive Fire and retire, with one groaning
who was brought in.
Having " got his man," the Rifleman" had
breakfast and went off to Brussels."
This patrol was evidently
intended to cover the German withdrawal from their bridgehead.
Later that morning, as plans were completed for a two-battaion
attack supported by two squadrons of Churchills, a reliable
civilian arrived with the news that the enemy had crossed the
river.
Wanssum was occupied by-the Ulster Rifles that afternoon.
The Division now held a series of rather scattered positons
among all the riverside villages on
the left bank as far down-
Vierlings-
stream as Cuijk : their names-
Geisteren, Maashees,
beek, Groeningen, Vortum, Sambeek, Boxmeer, Beugen, effet,
St. Agatha-
are sufficient to recall many memories to members
of O.P. parties, Support Companies, Rifle Companies, Squacron
of the Recce Regiment.
In fact there can be few members of
the Division to whom they are not familiar.
The river itself
and normally about 150 yards across, but now it had overflowed
and its average width was three-quarters of a mile.
Its normal
level was about 4 feet below its banks, and it only needed thre
days' heavy rain in the Ardennes to produce a rise of 12 feet.
There were regulating barrages (one was at Sambeek) that in
normal times kept this main north-south waterway navigable,
but even il these had not been under fire in no-man's-lana it Is
doubtful if they would have coped with the floods resulting from
the recent weeks of rain.
flood-dykes at varying
Fortunately there were special winter
places even these had been swamped.
distances from the river,
but in some
And the villages were
sited respectfully along this winter river-line.
carly in December the northerne,group of Armies was getulg
ready to close up to the Rhine.
front,
While on the Aachen-Cologne
irontage of two and a harewou per Division, the British second
the ten American Divisions pressed east on
Army released XXX Corps to concentrate in the north for the
drive down through the Reichswald and the country between the
Maas and the Rhine.
This release involved the grd Division in
a further stretch south almost to Venlo, though in the north they
lost the village of Bomeer and those beyond-
-and, incidentally,
the useful rest areas of St. Anthonis and Gemert-to the Canadians.
WINTER: THE
RIVER LINE
They gained Ooijen, Broekhuizen, Lottum, Houthuizen and
Grubenvorst, and occupied this
extension of the
South of the Aachen front the Eifel sector was
held almost as lightly as the
Maas sector-and there was no
There on the i6th the Germans made their
caperate attempt to cut through to Antwerp, and XXX Corps
was used to ease this situation in Eifel.
By their outbreak the
Germans postponed the Rhineland offensive a month, or perhaps
They also protracted the grd Division's long watch
The routine in the river-line was dreary:
It is an under-
satement to say, as Ken Bradshaw does,
that " in many respects
i vas a position without undue appeal!" He goes on to describe
how living conditions for his battalion in the line were slit-trenches
at flooded too easily and then graudally caved in, and now
they were spread out over a wide expanse of marsh and wood
that took two hours to walk round on foot.
At the time of the
regrouping in December the Commander decided to risk holding
te line once more with two brigades and the Royals Group
forward and a brigade in reserve. The full beneht of the training
and general " maintenance" thus made possible for units out of
the line was apparent when the Division went into the full-scale
offensive in February.
At the time it meant " an unending round
and stand-to" for
the forward platoons.
Moberly records for the Middlesex :
" Single sentry
post during the short days, double sentry during the long nights,
stand-to at dawn and dusk, and whenever an enemy patrol was
expected near at hand.
It was usually very quiet at night, and
cars and eyes were strained for any sign of movement.
then a trip-flare would go up,
but they were often false alarms,
set off by the wind or by a stray cat."
Guy Radcliffe,
Adjutant of the K.S.L.I.,
explains how,
they were in a village, cellars could be used for sleeping by day.
But by night it was slit-trenches
for anyone who
guards and patrols had been found.
Where there was no
village the whole life of the Company was led in slit-trenches
Successive occupants would improve them until
they became tolerably comfortable with lined walls, solid roofs,
But these long hours of standing about in the cold
