ASSAULT DIVISION
Sergeant-Major Olden also distinguished themselves at the head
of their men.
The Norfolk advance was equally fine and makes
equally distressing reading.
" At 4.15 a.m. a long snake of men
wound their way along the track to the assembly area ... At
9 o'clock the leading Companies crossed the Start Line. To the
right were a strong-point and large farm called Murmanshof,
and it was from these that we suffered out first set-back. A
Company on the right suffered badly. Major D. W. Smith, M.C.,
was shot clean through the head, all the Platoon Commanders
were either killed or badly wounded, only the Gunner F.O..
remaining to control what was left." Captain George Haign
M.C., of 16 Battery,
the 7th Field Regiment, the Gunner in
question, writes: "Most of the close quarter fighting I was not
able to see in detail owing to the usual smoke and confusion.
My operator and I were watching the battle from a shell-hole
about seventy-five yards away from the farm. We were neither of
us in very good form, having had about an hour and a hall's
Sleep the previous night. Before long the Company Commander
and two of his others had been killed, and the remaining oficer I
last saw with a wound in the leg being carried away by two of his
I could count only fifteen or twenty men remaining, who
with the loss of their leaders and so many wounded requiring
attention were already coming away trom the farm. I assumed
command of the Company, and gave orders to the only remaining
I hacant to organise a defensive position. After my operator and
I had helped some of the wounded I returned to the carrier, and,
after passing on what information I had, ordered the driver to
" brew up' straight away, and this being done, we took some tea
round to the remaining men."
The Norfolk D Company was now sent to work round the
left flank through the K.S.L.I., as there was slightly more cover
that way.
B Company had not got on very far,
but C Company
were able to join up with D, and " a fingerhold was taken on the
eastern extremities of the town." By three that afternoon " the
enemy had had about enough and the key to the town had been
Some house-to-house fighting took place with a few suicidal
a batroops holding out. A factory fell to C' Company and became
a bastion from which to operate."
The Lincolns were placed
temporarily under the command of 185 Brigade, and helped to
THE
RHINELAND OFFENSIVE
217
dear and consolidate the factory area. Late that night enemy
resistance in Kervenheim ended.
Already g Brigade had been ordered to prosecute the advance
next day to capture Winnekendonk, four miles south of Kerven-
Lim. The Ulster Rifles and K.O.S.B.s with 3rd Tank Battalion
di the Scots Guards, met only a few snipers as they advanced
cown the tracks to the right of the Kervenheim-Winnekendonk
mad, later in the morning the 3rd Recce Regiment established
contact with some enemy some 3,000 yards ahead, while Typhoons
inded to an enemy pocket in Berberheide wood.
The enemy
nad pulled back to a tight perimeter detence of Winnekendonk,
which was to be taken by the Lincolns " as soon after 5 p.m. as
They crossed the Start Line at 5.41, and then crossed 1,200
yards of open ground, where two of the supporting churchills were
knocked out before a third avenged them.
Major P. H.
Clarke, M.C., a Lincolnshire man from Binbrook in the Wolds,
mas killed by a grenade as he cheered his men on, but the rest
did not waver.
Once the village was reached, snipers fired on
them from first-floor windows, and Spandaus shot through loop-
holes made in the walls at ground level.
"Now the light was
going fast, and the Infantry and tanks entered the village in
allows of smoke, punctuated by the orange ashes of enemy
88 mm.s, and criss-crossed by lines of red tracer. It was a
terrible spectacle.
"The Battalion had really got its teeth in and was not to be
While Battalion H.Q. was fighting its way into a
house, the leading Company had reached the centre of the little
• The next day we took our ease, and saw the reward of
our efforts as the Guards Armoured Division poured through
our ' village."
Ahead of the Guards on the right-crossing and then recross-
ing the Niers-raced the grd Recce Regiment.
With 185 Brigade
following them up closely,
they had been ordered to
and capture Kapellen,
"to give the Guards a clear run."
Recce Regiment's brief account reads :
" On the 3rd
Squadron had a good run through
Kevelaer and Wetten,
captured two demolition parties in the act of preparing
for the Niers bridges, and was only held up just short of Kapellen
