HE 41B30000
266
ASSAULT DIVISION
was in full view from Brinkum,l where 8 Brigade troops were
able to watch the Lincolns' battle as they might have watched
the Tattoo at Aldershot.
The Lincolns' only comment on their
battle is that " it was heavy enough fighting in parts, for we
were in no mood to be stopped by anything, and by now the
Boche had, on the whole, little heart for the job. By 5.30 p.m.
hi oct ve tre heyed, and lo prones were pouring ins
At the end of that full day's fighting the Division had taken 22
officers and goo other ranks prisoner. The battle was definitely
The next day, April 26th, was the Division's last day in action
proper.
° Brigade passed through g Brigade at dawn.
The South
Lancs cleared up to and across the main Bremen-Delmenhorst-
Oldenburg railway line in the area of the gasworks.
Their
Battalion H.Q. in the gasworks offices dominated the rest of the
Brigade's objectives to the north-west of the town.
The Suffolks
went on from there to clear the whole of the Woltmershauser
Vorst.
That left the
Rablinghauser Vorst for the East Yorks,
the north-west corner of the city, where it tapered into a bungalow
housing-estate and into
the hamlets of Seehausen and Hasen-
büren farther down the
Weser bank.
operation of the campaign
For this
final military
Commanding Officer :
his narrative shoulexactly the mood of
must quote Bill Renison,
their
the Division in those last days.
" There was no oppositioiun any kind," he says, " till we
reached the limit of our objectives.
against two
There D Company came u,,
young Nazi fanatics dug into the side of a dyke.
(The threat of the flame-thrower got them out.)
"I went round
in the scout-car to see what was happening and met an extremely
rate young member of I company doubling his two prisoners
down the road as fast as he could go,
stream of abuse.
urging them on with a
As he was practically dead-beat himself, I put
him on the front of the car, while the Boches continued to run ...
" I was
asked
me if I
recalled to thoughts of battle when the Tank L.O.
could understand a message from a Company
From be a lew evenings carer, the suffolks had observed the landing of a
mall German plane, which took off early next morning
Then the German radio
lad announced that Himmler had paid a brief visit to Bremen!
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
267
saying they had g officers and 150 other rank P.O.W. I couldn't,
and went off to investigate.
They had come upon the control
entre of the local Ack-Ack defences facing the expected attack
from Delmenhorst ! Hallam had caught most of the staff under-
ground. They weren't combat troops in any case, and surrendered
without much argument, although the officers were
indigna Company, tails up, moved steadily forward with the
stream of prisoners swelling behind them—a mixed bunch of
Luftwaffe, sailors and all sorts.
Proceedings became pure farce
when those already in the bag started to shake hands with or
congratulate the late-comers as they arrived at the double. ••.
The Brigadier was in great form, and was to be seen, armed with
a Is-bore, standing in the middle of the road behind the leading
troops, with his gun at the ready."
Bremen was reduced to a wreck.
There were areas where
high, terraced houses and blocks of modern flats were undamaged,
but there were vast gaps and open spaces amongst huge hethe
of rubble.
In a few front gardens the lilacs were alive.
whole region of the railway was a tangle of twisted wreckage,
with the girder bridge hanging into the Weser.
(A Liverpudlian
says: "I thought of the Lord Street area of Liverpool."). The
dockyards, the harbours and submarine bases were all in the
same state, and, as far as could be seen, so was the city across the
river where fighting was still fierce in the great City Park.
From
an Air O.P. it was
observed that " in the centre of the town,
only the green leaden roofs of the Cathedral and the Rathaus
stood, and in one part there was nothing to be seen above ground
at all for a mile in any
It is an ironical reflection
that the Cathedral should have survived: it was founded in the
Year 789 by the Englishman Willehad, and that Englishman is
still the patron saint of Bremen.
Englishmen in
the eighth century, Willebald and the great Boniface, he devoted
his life to Christianising the heathen of north-west Europe, a
process that has never been completed.
Before the Division's task was completed,
the East Yorks
were ordered to continue, on the 27th, north and west along the
river bank to enable a I7-pounder troop to cover the
River approach. Again they met with slight, desperate, hopeless
