28
ASSAULT
DIVISION
Battalion felt satisfied with the part it had played in winning it"
they certainly had valid grounds for satisfaction. So, indeed, ha.
the and Battalion of the King's Shropshire Light Infantry and
the 2nd Battalion of the Royal Warwickshire Regiment.
The
latter may claim to represent the heart of Shakespeare's England,
the former the heart of Housman's.
Finally amongst the Infantry
Battalions we are to meet a famous London battalion, the 2ncl
of the Middlesex Regiment (Duke of Cambridge's Own), who
with machine-guns and mortars were the Division's
Suppot
It should perhaps be insisted that the three points of the
Triangle represent the Brigade Groups and not just the Brigades.
ror in every event it is in the order of things that the Gunner
are " tied up" with the Infantry.
And though for administration
the Regiments of Artillery have their own R.A. brigade organisa-
won, it will be seen now the foth tield negiment were in support
of 8 Brigade, 33rd Field Regiment of 9 Brigade and 7th Field
Regiment of 185
assault to the Cease Fire.
Brigade, continuously from the first great
Furthermore, one battery of each
regiment was virtually in continuous support of "its own"
battalion.
the yoth (highland) Field Regiment and the gra
Recce Kegiment were the only two major Territorial units in
the Division: the Territorial members of the 76th Field Regi
ment were from file and Angus, with their depot at Dundee.
batteries of the 20th Anti-Tank Regiment, R.A., were
"Brigaded" in the same way as the Field Regiments: so to a
less extent were the batteries of the
Regiment,
92nd Light Anti-Aircraft
gand LAA. Regiment had been converted
from the 7th Battalion of The Loyal (North Lancashire) Regiment
in November,
Infantrymen still kept a strong " Loyals"
Those Gunners who had been.
spirit alive
in the
The complete Order of Battle of the Division may be seen in
the second part of Appendix A. Its operation will become familiar
in the course of the narrative, and no more need be said by way
of introduction to individual units.
the Division develops
The important idea is that
personality
ordeals are shared, and commanders win confidence.
in battle,
when
The 3rd British Infantry Division was styled British
when
THE DIVISION
29
it was known that the 3rd Canadian Division was chosen as
the flanking division in the assault on the Atlantic Wall. The
object was to avoid confusion which might have arisen from the
proximity of the two 3rd Divisions.
(The coincidence was not
confined to the numbering of the Divisions: each had a gth
Brigade commanded by a Brigadier Cunningham !)
naturally accepted as a compliment when the Division is referred
as " the Ironsides" or " the Iron Division." But they are
compliments that were earned by quite ditterent groups of units
in quite different circumstances, not by the grd Division in its
" Ironsides " is surely another not entirely justifiable
reference to East Anglia, where Cromwell did his recruiting ;
and Iron, a symbol of the strength and resolution of the 3rd
Division in the Four Years' War,' can also suggest inflexibility
and cruelty, rust and robots.
The distinction of being British, on
the other hand, is open to only one interpretation. It is the most
suitable of all titles.
There was only one grd British Division
fighting in Europe, and from D-day until the Germans were
defeated the men of the Division deserved the honour of their
name.
1 Lieutenant-Colonel T. F. Furnell, O.B.E., M.C., Hon. Secretary of the Association
of the grd (Iron) Division (1916-18), in a very moving speech on behalf of the guests
at the first Reunion of the grd British Division (1939-45) Officers' Association, said :
"You of the 3rd British Division have more than lived up to the tradition of the
Iron Division.
This was the highest tribute that he could have paid, and was
greatly esteemed, but it remains true that the circumstances of the two wars were
extremely different.
