1200
ASSAULT DIVISION
are told, the early period is the most impressionable, when the
character is formed.
So it was with the Division.
formative influence was the restricted size of the lodgment-area
for the first month in Normandy, which, so far from producing
inhibitions, moulded the finest feeling of common endeavour in
the presence of a tangible enemy; it reshaped the Division's
And no one who was with the Division at that time
will deny that a new spirit was abroad. This was no new Division
(was there not a grd Division in action on the left of Wellington's
line for the last great battle with Napoleon?), but the point is
that, as they were our forefathers who fought at Waterloo, so, in
a sense, the men who fought with the Division back to Dunkink
in 1940 were the fathers of the aggressive spirit of the Assault
It is true that the 3rd Division has an unbroken tradition
from the time of the Haldane Reforms, a tradition hallowed from
the outset of the War of 1914-1918 by its valour in the retreat
from Mons. Since then the composition by battalions had been
completely changed. In the burning summer's heat of 1940 the
Division withdrew gallantly from Louvain to Furnes and Dun-
They were fighting then under Major-General B. L.
Montgomery, D.S.O., who expressed resentment at being forced
back across the Channel in the only terms the Germans could
His Division were among the last to leave Dunkirk.
After four years they led the way back.
So this is a different story.
Mr. Arthur Bryant claims for the
British Army that " the episodes in its past on which English
historians linger most fondly are those when it was most out-
numbered, most lacking in might, and therefore, by our reckoning,
most glorious and true to itself-Rorke's Drift or Mons or Dunkink
or the Rifles dying at Calais." But there is a danger in that
distinguished legend : to foster it is extravagant in human lives.
We must cherish it only as history, not as a policy we can afford
strength to match the might of Germany :
This is the story of how we fought when given
profitable lesson.
it yields a more
Infantry Brigade, from the
The unit composition had changed again since 1940: 185
79th Armoured Division, took the
place of the 7th Guards Brigade who had fought alongside the
THE DIVISION
8th and gth Brigades up till Dunkirk.
So that 8, 9 and 185
Brigades are the three points of the Divisional Triangle.
or more precisely the geometrical design of one
triangle divided off into three black triangles by a red one,
appears on the jacket of this book. It was painted proudly upon
all the Naval Landing-Craft that took the Division into action,
and bravely carried by every vehicle that went into action, on
Queen Beach :
it is worn no less proudly on every sleeve in the
Division. It was stencilled on hundreds of small metal discs and
used to mark the Division's route from the Norman shore to
The explanation most usually given, if you ask the
meaning of the sign, is that the black triangles represent the
three Brigades of Intantry ;
the red is blood.'
The three points of the Triangle,
then, were 8, 9 and 185
Brigades, and each was made up of three battalions.
battalions are not to be lumped together and given a label.
A man's pride in his battalion is a main element of success in
the fight. That is one of the few principles which has rested
unchallenged since the Napoleonic
The famous
redoubtable Rifleman Harris, tracing so vividly the ordinary
soldier's life through the Peninsular Campaign, leaves us in no
doubt that the finest army in the world was that which Wellington
led, that the finest regiment in that army was the 95th, and that
the best battalion in that regiment was that his major com-
manded. Similarly Quartermaster-sergeant James Anton made
no secret of the fact that there was no English regiment to equal
a Scottish one, and no Scottish one to equal his own, the 42nd
now the Black Watch). And Captain Mercer, writing of Water-
loo, held the view no less firmly that G Battery had the finest
horses, equipment, men and discipline, not merely in the British
Army but in any army in history.
These are natural sentiments,
and prevailed in all regiments, it will be seen, no less in 1944
But Eric Linklater has claimed " a curious thing" apropos
' The explanation given by an adjutant in a harassing moment was that the three
brigades are joined by red tape.
Field-Marshal Lord Montgomery, who as Div
Commander devised the sign with the help of his AQ meant just
"to indicate
the combination of threes
-the 3rd Division, the three brigades and the three
battalions in each brigade.
