AVERSDA
ASSAULT DIVISION
wettest and most dismal November known on the Continent for
many years,
warm woollen socks, pullovers and Balaclava
helmets arrived from the women at home;
that they were
appreciated is certain from the grateful mention of them in each
unit's records.
Unfortunately
the entertainment
arranged daily for approximately 5 per cent of the Division did
not, for a variety of reasons referred to later, get the same warm.
In the town of Helmond, some twenty miles behind the line,
the Div Club was now established in what had been a modern
factory-workers' club. The Dutch helped to stock it with many
and readily produced beds,
bedding and
facilities for 250, and built a stage.
There was a cheerful and
fairly homely atmosphere about this place as men came back to
spend 24 hours' leave or stayed for the night on their way back
to Brussels for 48 hours.
It so happened that the
action in the Maas pocket following the capture of Venraij was
a counter-attack,
at first light on
October 27th,
Panzer Division through Meijel to Deurne and Helmond, where
a few bombs were dropped :
this determined attack from the
south-east succeeded temporarily in penetrating the positions of
Armoured Division,? and for a moment
the Div Club was threatened! The permanent denizens of the
Club, such as Bernard Rigby, the Education Officer, found the
stows particularly disturbing, though indeed the whole Division
even more than before, on the alert.
This was the last
local German attempt to interfere with the northern L of C and
to distract our forces from the Scheldt estuary.
The main military operations of the
autumn and winter
were first the clearing of the mouth of the Scheldt to open up the
port of Antwerp, and then the battle of the Ardennes.
Division had no part in either of them.
For nearly four months
after Venraj the Division was committed to holding a relatively
peaceful but far from pleasant stretch of the line—16, and later
22, miles of it :
one period of regrouping they were
This en galling tradition that the British Army should be thus handicapped towards
bestowed upon us the wettest autumn for twenty years.
be forgotten how, in 1917, the weather
3 Seven weeks later the U.S. 7th Armoured Division were struggling to hold St. Vita
in the full flood of the Ardennes break-through.
WINTER: THE MAAS RIVER LINE
I8I
covering a front of 27 miles. For the first month, until 22nd
November, the line ran three-quarters of its length along
let bank of the Maas, between Cuijk and Vierlingsbeek, and the
remaning quarter, through Smakt and the eastern edge of
Venraj, was where the advance had stopped in October.
long sector north of Vierlingsbeek was held by the Household
Cavalry Group, consisting of the 2nd Household Cavalry and gra
Ree Regiments, with two Squadrons of the Inns of Court Regi-
The 3rd Recce Regiment held the right of this sector,
including Vierlingsbeek, Groeningen and Vortum. On their right
the front facing the German pocket tens held by two brigades.
conformity with the morale battle it was found possible to hold
one Brigade back out of the line almost throughout the period,
and at the same time the other two Brigades managed to keep a
Battalion in reserve.
The chief characteristics of the first month were a constant
downpour of rain (lashed from time to time by a howling gale),
frequent patrols both ways, a nigorous dally harassng programme
by the Divisional Artillery anadead Middlesex, and Stoic work on
"Fir Track"
and the almost unrecognisable
roads
in the
Divisional area by the Sappers, who also added a few minehelds
werever they could find a gap in the existing German ones.
Brigadier Cass, who had commanded 8 Brigade so successfully
since that assault on D-day, was badly injured on one of these
while partridge-shooting, and had to be evacuated.
(One thinks
of the Duke of Wellington, who was unable to resist giving chase
to a hare in the course of one of the Peninsular battles; no mine
was exploded, but the senior officers with him were very surprised.)
Brigadier Cass was succeeded by Brigadier E.
Goulburn,
D.S.O., who had commanded the ist Grenadier
Guards at
Nijmegen.
Division's patrolling was vigorous and valuable,
and
soon revealed, or rather confirmed,
the enemy's identity
and
The enemy's patrols also had a certain
value,
since
they occasionally provided prisoners and gave the
Division
an
idea of the sort of men they were facing.
Brigade
one
example of this was on November Ist, All Saints' night,
when
the sentry on the right flank of A Company of the Ulster Rifles
saw three men in the darkness, and, not being
satisfied
with
