ASSAULT DIVISION
southern parts as far as a small brickworks beside the Venraij road,
and the East Yorks on the left going through some woods to g
across the Vierlingsbeek road in the north and east of the village,
The Suffolks complain that " progress was slow, as the artilery
barrage was timed to lift at a rate of 100 yards in 5 minutes."
It is true that their follow-up close under the
model of how such advances should be made, and
excellent results.
According to the statements of the prisones
they sent back, enemy casualties from the great barrage were no.
heavy, as the houses in the village, though almost all demolished,
had cellars that
afforded adequate
Tommies were so close on the heels of the barrage that it was too
late to start fighting when we emerged."
it was on the left that resisance was strongest. Ine Last
Yorks had first to clear the woods to the north of the village
that were dog-shaped on the map. C and D, the leading com;
considerable defensive fire from enemy guns and mortars, and
also hampered by mines.
Companies pressed on,
avolaing the thickest of the mineheld on the left, and alter a
four's lighting were well into the " body" of the wood. hau
hour later they were sen-ing back prisoners, and shortly
before 2 o'clock D Company reached the south-west corner of
the wood: "D Company could advance no farther, as they had
JOst their officers and C.S.M., suffered several other casualties,
and at the moment were being commanded by a Corporal,"
The Suffolks and East Yorks were now just short of their objectives.
Steadily they fought their way into Overloon, against decreasing
opposition that was soon confined to sniping and mortaring:
5 o'clock A and D Companies of the South Lancs, each with a
Toy dearchis On me 4 urendaler Guards, passed throug,
the East Yorks and suftolks to clear the first wood on the Suffolks
right flank immediately south of the road at Overloon.
little opposition.
By dusk Overloon was firmly held and the three
Battalions of 8 Brigade had established a solid base for the opera-
tion of Phase 2: the advance to capture Venraij.
So far, so good. The Infantry had advanced doggedly and
their efforts were rewarded with success. They had only limited
OVERLOON
AND
VENRAIJ
ІбІ
support from the Churchills, which had been stopped by mines
unil, late in the afternoon, Flails got them forward.
The weight
o the Artillery support had effectively kept many German heads
down until the Infantry were
upon them.
The Middlesex had
yumed the Gunners in this, for once firing as a battalion, with all
tire machine-gun Companies in a line along the forward edge of
a wood, and close behind them,
in a clearing, all the mortars of
that day they.
fired 3,800
bombs and 300,000
rounds of Mark VIIIz machine-gun ammunition.
The Field
Regiments added a new trick to an already extensive repertoire
including the firing of shells filled with propaganda leaflets) by
uring what were known, sardonicaly, as Joker targets. this was
the joke : a " cab-rank"
of rocket-firing Typhoons patrolled the
i, weather permitting, while one of their officers worked on
the ground with a Gunner officer at either Brigade or Battalion
1,Q: the Infantry reported the position of an enemy strong-
point in their way,
the Gunner agreed with the Airman the
wact time when the Artillery would fire a few rounds of red smoke
si the strong-point, and the Typhoon pilots given this time, and a
brief description of the target by wireless, watched out for red
smoke and did the rest.
Our own troops saw the joke and laughed
The Germans never did have much of a sense of humour.
the I.O. of 76 Field Regiment and Flight-Lieutenant O'Brien
of 404 Squadron once performed the jape within 7 minutes of
the Infantry request : the good people of Overloon are having to
church in consequence.
That they were glad to
sacrifice their church may be easily inferred from the fact that in
included in their
programme of rebuilding a
war-museum as
a monument to
honour the memory
soldiers who sacrificed their young lives at Overloon,",
written to the
Government Information Office at The Hague, for a full account
of the battle that was fought in their gardens and in the ruins of
their homes:
even in the churchyard where their own dead lay.
Interrogation of the day's haul of prisoners showed that the
was disposed substantially as the
Intelligence staff had
German 180 Infantry Division was in
It was not a very good Division, and the Divisional
