NOTE
SINCE most readers find it irksome to have pages littered with
explanatory footnotes and after six years of war are, however
involuntarily, fairly well acquainted with army terminology,
explanations of any such terms as could not be avoided have
been relegated to a glossary on page 277. Wherever feasible,
army usage is adhered to, so that, for example, the 2nd Battalion
the Royal Warwickshire Regiment becomes in the narrative, as
it always did in the Division, the Warwicks; the 3rd Recon-
naissance Regiment (N.F.), the 3rd Recce Regiment; and so on.
New Preface and Introduction
In writing about a military campaign it is certainly an advantage
to have taken part. At the very least you know what the weather
was like, and the terrain, you also know which participants to
consult, and what to look for in which war-diaries, remembering
(as I very clearly do) that war is not fought with the convenience
of military historians in mind. When it was my duty to keep
our official war-diary up to date, and we were in action, other
duties came first. If we were not in action, there was not much
to record. I suppose Sir William Napier's The History of the War
in the Peninsula is so memorable because he was there, indeed in
the thick of it, commanding a famous regiment; also of course
because he wrote so vividly.
He enables us to feel present, for
instance at the opening of the battle of Salamanca in 1812, when
Wellington noticed 'with a stern contentment' that his opponent
had extended his left wing too much.
He 'fixed it with the
stroke of a thunderbolt', quietly ordering the commander of the
3rd Division to lead a general attack
The 3rd Infantry Division was a regular division of the British
Army, and has a very long history.
In this book I cover barely
from September 1943 to May 1945, in which time it
led one of the greatest, and most general, attacks ever recorded.
A 20-year-old gunner subaltern, I found myself, with rare
serendipity, joining one of the 3rd Division's three field-gunner
regiments on the very day they received orders to start training
for the Allied amphibious assault on Nazi-occupied north-west
Though ours was a regular division, my regiment was
exceptions among all the
components: ours
76th (Highland) Field Regiment,
Royal Artillery and I found it encamped in the exalted grounds
of Drumlanrig Castle, near Dumfries.
That day's exciting news
of our assignment
the Second Front led to a notable
celebration in our mess that evening, and probably in every mess
throughout the Division.
I at once became aware of the benents
of joining a regiment with interests in Scottish distilleries.
