ASSAULT DIVISION
respirator. A new steel helmet was issued, supposed to give more
protection. Each man received two 24-hour ration-packs and an
emergency ration.
He also received before the last of the exercises
a new battledress complete with unit and formation signs.
scale of spare underwear, boots, woollen comforts, anti-gas pro-
tectors was prescribed, and after that it was recognised that each
knew best with what to complete his own load, knew
What he needed to do his own job and how it was most easily
Besides equipment problems, which were legion, there were
the countless special tactical problems for which every unit had
to prepare and brief every officer and man. (It was a mistake
to borrow this legal expression to describe the complicated orders
and instructions that are unavoidable for a Combined Operation.
It seems unlikely that a barrister's instructions are ever in fact
reduced to brevity, but it is certainly true that Admiral Ramsay
found it necessary to compile his operation orders in the form
of a printed book of foolscap three inches thick, that the Divisional
Uperation Urder covered fifteen pages and several amendments
and appendices, and that this application to detail was completely
justified.)
With all these problems trial and error was the only way,
and there were enough trials to correct the majority oi errors.
As far as the units were concerned, once the preparations within
the unit were complete all they had to do was set off for the
marshalling area at a given signal, and the rest was comparatively
easy.
supreme.
At this stage in the exercise Movement Control were
Everyone
else became a serial number.
This had
its advantages in that a little of the responsibility of " route-
ing" and timing was removed from the unit officers and drivers
concerned. Indeed, supreme Movement Control was probably
the only practicable method of moving such large forces.
the 8th
But
Brigade rightly raised the objection that when
the
Assault Brigade is marshalling and loading its craft, it is deploying
for battle and therefore responsibility must lie with the Brigade.
Casualties in marshalling were being reported to Movement
Control Headquarters: they were the first concern of the Brigade
1 Originally the basic load per man was 95 lb.
This was considered excessive, and
reduced to 65 lb. (approx.) by arranging to bring in spare boots, etc., as " stores."
PREPARATION
With follow-up formations it was a relief to devolve
responsibility for movement temporarily on another body.
As it was, Movement Control shepherded everyone along the
treacherous roads of Black Isle to concealed vehicle parks where
trees grew up to the verges: they conducted the troops in and
out of leaky tents: they directed the convoys on down to the
hards. Landing Craft were signalled to beach, and units assumed
the responsibility for getting aboard. In the case of L C V and
L CT an extremely careful process of loading had to be adopted :
vehicles and tanks had to be backed on board (otherwise they
would have had to back off, a method of joining battle suitable
in cock-fighting but undignified in modern assault, even with the
menagerie of Crabs and Crocodilest that accompanies the battle
nowadays, turning the average landing-craft into a sort of Noah's
Ark). The loading of landing-craft did require infinite care in
order not to waste a square inch of priceless shipping space. To
that end much time between exercises was devoted to loading
trials down at the hards with all the men and vehicles and craft
Once aboard, the principal cares were Naval and navigational,
though a few more personal ones cropped up out in the firth,
onlined largely to the troops aboard L CT.
In a rough sea
tanks had to be shackled to rungs in the metal deck and to one
another, to prevent their sliding and damaging or causing the
One particularly squally day the sight of the L C T
astern breaking its back against a wall of water provoked the
inevitable dry humour and a little dismay among the watchers
in a similar craft.
This period was not without its toll of casualties amongst
men: some were fatal.
It is fitting to quote from the History of
253 (West Lancashire) Field Company of the Division's Royal
ingineers, which sets aside a page in remembrance oi one oi
It reads simply:
" Although the title of this book
1S D-day to VE-day, it would be incomplete without a reference:
to Corporal Harry Worthington, who lost his life in the opera-
tional clearance of a beach minefield at Nairn in Scotland on.
5 April, 1944•
since -day hangaroos and Buffaloes have joined toe menagere, which also contained
Weasels that periormed well in mud and Porpoises whose pertormance was patnetic-
