3U A10M00S0
Chapter Ten
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
"April is the cruellest month, breeding
Lilacs out of the dead land ...
T. S. ELIOT.
THE GERMANs defended Bremen with the
blind heroism of
The British grd opvision displayed another sort of
bravery: they fought and defeated the Germans knowing that
the campaign was likely to be over in a few days, that if they
avoided taking risks they might hope to survive the war.
trouble was that the battle of Bremen never looked at all like
being a " walk-over." 18 SS Training
Battalion fought grimly
at the approach to Brinkum.
the month fell there between
By far the heaviest casualties of
April 13th and 20th,
effect was not to discourage the rest so much as to increase their
determination to take their objective, and the manuy proceeded
to fight some of their best actions.
They were given every support
that could be got in the way of guns and tanks and aircratt.
Nevertneless, the loss of lile was hard to accept in view of the
imminence of German surrender.
the eleventh month of the campadi livas one of gain as well
as loss: the Division advanced from the Rhine at Rees to the
Weser at Bremen.
The third week of April was spent in driving
enemy back from the general line
Kirchweyhe-Barren-
Bassum (where they had confronted
7th Armoured Division),
Tack over the flooded land at Brinkum, right back into the city.
This was all part of the Bremen battle,
because here the enemy
vee inauced to squander their reserves in an attempt to seer
the fighting away from the city.
made in Normandy and in the Rhineland.
It was the mistake they had
Had they withdrawn
their forces intact to the far side of the floods they would have
been in a much better position to repulse the attack: but they
clung to nearly every village and farm just in front of the water
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
247
8 Brigade had already set off up the road from Bassum on
Priday, the 13th. The Suffolks led and the South Lancs covered
the open left flank. The Suffolks knew the first village, Nord-
ohide, to be undefended. Thence the road led four miles north
to Fahrenhorst and turned north-east for a further four miles to
A mile and a half short of Brinkum was a cross-roads,
the Suffolks' final objective.
They made good speed towards it,
with Major Hugh Merriam's A Company ahead in three groups,
moving in Bren-gun carriers and 15-cwt. trucks. A solid road-
block was by-passed, and an enemy anachine-gunner who opened
fre on the farther edge of fahrenhorst aid not stay but aisap-
peared into the woods.
occasional
The country was very low-lying, with
through a maze of side-lanes.
woods and undulations.
The road ran
straight
Most of the names on
the map
tiered broadly to collections of farms' and labourers' cottages
rather than to villages. As in most country where stock-raising
predominant, houses were
lairly thickly along the main road.
scattered all over the place,
The leading carrier section
with A Company was within a mile of the cross-roads when a
German soldier was spotted near a house some fifty yards from
the road.
He managed to send up a red Verey light before
they shot him. Continuing along the road, A Company ran into
heavy fire from another road-block half a mile short of the cross-
roads.
The Company Commander sent a
platoon round the
backs of the houses on either side of the road. Nebelwerfer fire
fell around them as they cleared a way forward.
When they
reached the last houses before the cross-roads, Hugh Merriam,
who was with one platoon,
shouted orders across
the
road to
Meredith, who commanded the other, for the final assault.
Both platoons got across the cross-roads, though on the left
the Company Commander had been wounded and that platoon
was now led by Captain Rogers.
They dug in as it grew dark.
A section of the enemy
approached from the
right
and were
driven off, to be succeeded by " a considerable body" of rein-
Here, as in the Rhineland and in Limburg, farmhouses were found to conform with
the pattern devised in the Middle Ages, if not before, so that the people lived in one
half
and the cattle in the other; and in some of the timberwork was carved a very
early date.
This is only to name one aspect of the Middle Ages that survived here-
abouts, but it is curious to reflect that the Division was entering the region whence
the first English had come to settle in Britain in the fifth century A.D.
