10 42650066
264
ASSAULT
DIVISION
back, having shot up some enemy, but they had also seen more
movement at one end of the barracks.
to state the position.
Could it be possible that some enemy
had infiltrated back into the barracks? It later turned out
that this was what had happened.
Having been driven out
of another position by a neighbouring attack, they had moved
across our front and had gone into the barracks.
of course, we were not to know this.
" Then suddenly we were sniped at from our right flank.
We were completely exposed on this flank! I could hear the
bullets whining very close and hugged the ground frantically.
The terrifying thing was that we could not locate this solitary
sniper. A man who was lying close to me was hit in the head
and died shortly afterwards.
we could to safety.
Try as I could I was not able to locate the fire, and the platoon
behind us could not pin it down.
myself an inch off the ground.
too. I wriggled as best I could to a small wall in order to get
some protection from this enemy who was picking us off one
by one.
seemed very close indeed.
wall all right.
went lunging past, clasping his arm and making a run for it,
I then began my tortuous crawl back,
desperately until I came out into the open again.
my feet and ran, ran as hard as I could.
for the mortar, hoping that I could
wore we rest. flowever, as I got the mortar up, - saw wai
M. and the other man had got through.
back and redistributed ourselves in the trenches. The enemy
then counter-attacked our position.
was in the side where we could see least, but we nau good
covering tre from the other platoon on our right, who saw the
enemy advance more clearly.
It was indeed their fire support
that kept the enemy from over-running our position,
attacked in strength.
for they
We returned fire as best we could under
the circumstances, but we were not la very happy, situation.
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER 265
Then, thank God, the tanks came up: they had been sent
by Company H.Q.
"I heard the tank on my right firing at the enemy, but it
had not come far enough up and most of the fire went over
our heads. This meant that we had to keep our heads down
a prevented us firing. The air seemed to be hilled with the
wine of bullets, and the dust kept kicking up around us. I
sent a runner over to the tank to tell it to move farther up, but
the tank commander did not seem to understand. This runner
had to cross ground under fire about three times before he
could get his message understood, and on one occasion he was
down off the top of the turret by the blast of a nearly expiost.
heard Corporal H. calling and went over to his trench. He
had lost three of his men and poor B. had been killed by a
He was still cheerful but had only a few men left.
called for reinforcements and some men from the rear platoon
We were now being shelled, for the enemy had
spotted the tanks they were using Panzerfausts and possibly
o's, but it was difficult to tell what was coming
remember something burst very close and temporarily deafened
me; the acrid smell of powder went deep down
go, making me retch. Earth tumbled down on top or meg
but I was all right.
"The volume of fire from the tanks and the neighbouring
Platoon, together with our own, eventually drove the enemy
It was too much for them.
The noise of shelling died
away mysteriously,
tanks started moving about in
When this happened the enemy withdrew.
suddenly ceased.
"We waited till another unit came up to relieve
moved off on tanks to another part of Bremen to put in a final
This attack went in smoothly, and by the
tired (and proud) remnant arrived to take up position, it was
more or less all over."
The Lincolns, as Lloyd supposes, were
diverted from
attack on the barracks, and at two that afternoon they attacked
instead the
Bremen airport and Focke-Wulf works,
was still being directed
upon the Divisional axis.
