ASSAULT DIVISION
Company made their first bound, and after a decent interval, as
we thought, I went up with the Brigade Commander and David
Willison, the Sapper, to see how things were going. We were a
little surprised, when we got there, to
find the Company in a
ditch only just across the road, and a tank in the middle of the
cross-roads firing at a house fifty yards away.
Shots were coming
out of several houses and singing in the trees overhead. ... When
things got moving,
the Company Commander, Bob Laird, came
over to my trench and flopped down beside me, only to draw
himself up to one of his shattering salutes as he realised the Brig.
was there too.
It was also somewhat comical, with a platoon
fighting a few yards away, to see civilians come out of a blazing
house and start busily salvaging their possessions."
Meanwhile A Company made excellent progress on the left
flank. One platoon was soon established on the bridge—a weak
wooden structure over the stream—in Heiligenrode, and the
village occupied. Now C and B Companies moved through, A and
D made for Mackenstedt. It was a difficult attack, involving a
complete left wheel with an exposed right flank.
that had filled the fishpond for the monks in Heiligenrode also
ran north through Mackenstedt. Gross Mackenstedt lay on the
far western side of the
stream, and here the
deprived the East Yorks of close tank support. But both Companies
quickly established themselves.
Bill Renison continues :
"Banger was already up to see by
what routes he could get the evening meal up.
I had lent him
Willia jeep while I was using the mobile Tac H.Q. ... David
Willison was concerned with the mines' and the number of trees
that had been felled across the road, though the latter could be
bulldozed out of the way in no time. . • •
It was necessary, of
for the two forward companies to carry their food across
the wreck of the bridge.
Banger had from somewhere produced
a magnum of champagne, which he left with Tac H.Q."
It about midnight, while the reonel was " getting worried
about A Company,
whose wireless had broken down," Ron
Brown (the Adjutant) came through on the air from Main H. 2'
which had remained for the night back in the pub on the Bassum-
1 Lieutenant-Colonel " Swazi" Waller of the South Lancs had been blown up in his
jeep that afternoon.
BREMEN AND GERMAN
SURRENDER
Binkum road. " At the wheel of my jeep, while returning from
bringing up the rations, Banger had been blown up on a mine
at the cross-roads close by Heiligenrode where the
Commander and I had spent our time in a ditch during the
Transport, including tanks, had been milling round
there all evening ... Ron had been back to the Field Ambulance
and been told that Banger must certainly lose a leg, but that
with his iron will it was hoped he would pull through.
was a tragedy that somehow I had never envisaged and I think
lat all of us had come to regard Banger as invulnerable .••
The night passed quietly as far as the enemy was concerned. •
Early in the morning I got the news i had been dreading •
Banger had collapsed and died during the night.
No words can
really express what this meant to the
morale of the
and as the hours and days passed by i realisea ture ana more
now much I had depended on him in so many wlg... ne
was buried during the afternoon."
But his spirit was never buried, nor could it be. The Times
published one tribute to Banger :
The Snapper, the paper of his
Regiment, published many, from men who had followed him in
a Rugby pack, or in a black Sudanese Company chasing a whole
Battalion of Italians over 200 miles across abyssian nountalls,
or in A Company that morning on the Norman shore aiter he
had talked to them in the spirit of the Elizabethans and gone
into action in the same spirit:
" This story shall the good man teach his son
And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by
But we in it shall be remembered,
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers."
"That a regimental officer should become a legend almost
throughout an army was no
more than his due,'
His deeds had certainly become legend in the Division.
"He was human to a most lovable degree, and he believed that
the good in most men far exceeded the evil, and he knew how
to call forth the good." He loved and championed his men, and
The whole Division was proud of him and saw in him
a representative of all that was best in themselves.
On the 18th, igth and 20th of April, 8 and g Brigades com-
