176
ASSAULT DIVISION
irrepressible cheerfulness and their refusal to be dominated by
a formidable environment any more than by a formidable enemy
force. In Burma, the Chindits proved themselves better at jungle
war than the Japs, who were, one would have thought, more
nearly in their own element.
Static in Holland,
dissolved and the dark winter descended over heath and bog,
the grd Division's humour stood the strain, though it is as wel
to record that there were moments when men were,
depressed. The Division could afford to admit this,
had just won a battle that was fought with medical charts as
well as maps-the battle of morale.
The importance of this local battle may be judged from
Montgomery's summing-up in his despatch.
without some mention of the truly remarkable success of the
medical organisation.
were two factors which contributed greatly to the results achieved:
probably no group of doctors has ever worked on better material;
and secondly, they were streetor the men of a winning army.
The despatch continues :
realise that the medical state of an army is not dependent on the
doctors alone.
morale is at its highest, and of all the factors which ensure a
high state of morale, there is none more important than succes."
i more were noded to emphasise the importance of the pom,
It is to be tound in the closing sentences of this signincant paul.
" High morale is a pearl of very great price. And the surest wa
to obtain it is by success in battle."
In general terms, then, the situation is clear.
GOC, the G (Ops) staff wins a battle,
Medical staff to keep morale high, which in turn helps
thereby helping the
G (Ops) staff to win the next battle.
the
Medical staff must constantly fight is that of morale.
So that the battle the
In the 3rd
Jivision this battle was very well documented, as befitted so
important a battle.
compiled by
The Divisional Monthly Medical Bulletin,
the A.l.M.S., sucntains a wealth of interesting
analysis to show the progress ot this fight, as well as all the
points of purely professional interest.
scientific gauge of the Division's spirit month by month,
The bulletin was a reliable
and if
WINTER: THE MAAS
RIVER LINE
177
it had not been for the danger of such statistics falling into the
hands of the enemy the distribution of this bulletin down to sub-
units might (on
Field-Marshal's hypothesis,
R.A.M.C. were fighting a winning battle) have proved another
factor of success.
It was perhaps seen by too few people at
the time, but the object was achieved.
The main medical victory in the Division was over the
modence of "battle exhaustion," and was fought immediately
ater the battle for Venraij. The measure of success was striking.
To state it at once, a simple addition sum shows that during the
campaign that followed the Venraij
battle and
mcluded the hellish battle of the Rhineland, the Division had
only 127 " battle-exhaustion" casualties over the whole period :
this was exactly half the number sustained during the one week
of onslaught on Overloon and Venraij.
Exhaustion cases are hard to define,
and vary from the few
een who take fright during the tirst two or three hours of battie,
and who can hardly be considered genuinely " exhausted," to
men who arrive in the R.A.P. shaking all over, looking older
than they should, staring, and tending to dive for cover at the
In addition there is the case of the man
mically exhausted from hard fighting, lack of sleep, and who,
as a result of his experiences, no longer has compete control ot
his nervous system. We have already noticed the Nortolks report
of such casualties under the foul conditions that followed Good-
wood in July. There were altogether too many men with one or
er of these symptoms during that week in me-oclove, and
the problems faced by the Divisional Medical staff were how to
deal with these cases during battle, and what prevenuve measures
to take between battles.
The former was their own professional
concern, the latter is of general interest, particularly in view of
the astonishing success of those measures;
which were based on
conclusions drawn from the recent fighting.
It was recognised that the general conditions of the
had been the worst possible-
cold,
wet weather;
inability to
dig proper slit-trenches owing to the
waterlogged ground; a
prolonged battle with not very rapid progress and, worst of all,
the continual fear of mines, encountered in large numbers for the
first time.
These conditions could hardly be improved by the
M
A.D.
