ASSAULT DIVISION
tanks in front of Caen, of heavy enemy fire from Periers-sure-
and of stiff enemy opposition to the Canadians on the
right flank. He ordered the Warwicks to disengage the enemy
in their original Assembly Area and occupy the area left by the
Norfolks. The K.S.L.I. moved off up the Periers ridge. In them,
they knew, was centred the whole hope of the Division : thems
was the central thrust of the assault, and aimed at Caen.
soon dealt with the machine-guns and mortars that opposed
them on either side of the cross-roads just forward of the crest.
But before we can follow them further we had better be clear
about the beach situation and the extent of the beach-head
secured by 8 Brigade.
The clearing of the beach-exits proved to be about the
hardest and most heart-breaking job of the invasion.
had one crisis been overcome than another arose. The tide came
quickly, and the beach was eventually reduced to a width of
1o yards instead of the 3o yards anticipated.
This meant that
vehicles had to land immediately facing one of the exits if they
were to get off the beach; there was not much scope for lateral
The exits were no longer marked, however, by the
coloured windsocks that the Navy knew and made for.
one period of heavy enemy shelling, from inland and from the
Coastal batteries along the left flank, it was obvious that the
Germans were ranging both on the windsocks and on the sixly
barrage balloons brought over for beach anti-aircraft defence,
some of which had already been cut adrift.
Commander ordered the immecahte loosing of the remainder.
The Divisional
The problems were innumerable, but a main one was the
solt strip of sand at the top of the beach over which bridging
vehicles and many others had to be towed by Beach Section
recovery teams; this amongst all the welter of transport edging
towards the exits,
and Armoured Vehicles, R.E., and, not least,
stranded landing-craft, derelict D-D tanks
over fifty self-
propelled guns (including the eight of the 5th R.M. Battery) all
firing from the water's edge, and having to advance up
beach at one point when they looked like getting out of their
Finally, blockages were frequently
caused beyond the
exits by tracked vehicles losing their tracks on mines between
the exits and first lateral, and later on, when there was a hold-up
INVASION: THE FOLLOW -THROUGH
81
on the road across the marsh, a continuous column extended
nose to tail right back into the exits and was itself the cause of
obstruction to tanks not yet clear of the beach.
If more were needed to aggravate a critical situation,
the
Commander of 5 Assault Regiment, R.E., had been killed at
-hour, and the Commander of 5 Beach Group was killed some
hours later, as he was carrying out a reconnaissance of the
westerly beaches. Major Carse, who had commanded the Battle
school in quiet Moffat, took over command of 5 Beach Group.
For the first four and a half hours of the assault craft had been
beaching to time, and the majority had been able to discharge
immediately.
Then it was decided to hold up all beaching for
half an hour to clear the beach.
This action was justified. When
beaching was resumed, the tide was ebbing and the exits were
8 Brigade were still attacking strongly defended positions.
The East Yorks found resistance at Sole much fiercer than had
been anticipated. Incidentally, they were not the first to reach
The chronicler of the 2nd Middlesex, relating the action of
their A (machine-gun) Company, writes :
under Lieutenant Milne, were reorganised and went off via Colle-
ville to strong-point Sole, expecting to find the East Yorks Battalion
H.Q. Instead, the leading carrier came under fire from a light
anti-tank gun."
However, the East Yorks had cleared Sole by
10 clock and the F.O.O. with C Company, Captain Featherstone,
established his party in an O.P. on the enemy position.
were "slightly embarrassed by the appearance of eighty Germans
surrendering from a dug-out.
A wide burst of Sten-gun fire at
the leading German, before it was clear what their intentions
were, hastened the process.
A section of the East Yorks were
asked to take the Germans in charge." The East Yorks now.
nade preparations for the attack on the gun position at Daimler.
their Commander, Lieutenant-Colonel C. F
Hutchinson, was
caught by enemy mortar fire in a sunken lane, wounded, and
had to be evacuated.
By I oclock the IO'5 cm. Dattery Mors had fallen to the
" softened-up" by the six-inch guns of
the cruises no. Dragon, and the k.a.l. hau arents to it.
As soon as the F.O.O. of 76th Field Regiment started ranging
