CYNOUS
ASSAULT DIVISION
1 hat involved some difficult Close Targets under the very noses
of the undaunted Suffolks.
Over the next three days my
regment was also answering desperate calls for fire in defence
of 6 Airborne troops holding Pegasus Bridge against attack after
attack by German armour and infantry. On 9 June General
the 6 Airborne Commander, wrote to thank the CO of
our Regiment for 'most generous and rapid support without
which we should have been unable to hold our position'.
would have
exposed 3 Div's left flank very dangerously to
damage trom 21 Panzer Division.
We didn't take Caen on D-Day.
Michael Howard in a wise
essay on The Caen Controversy', 2002, understands, and states
for the first time, that 'to allot Caen as the aspirational objective
was entirely legitimate
Dut to make its capture on the hrst
day of operations the linch-pin of Allied strategy was quite
unrealistic unless far greater resources had been allotted to the
task than those of a single (albeit augmented) infantry division;
and more resources could not possibly have been funnelled
through the bottle-neck of the beach-head in the time available.
Of course, for us, Caen was an absolutely serious objective.
all felt a sense of failure that we were not in and around Caen
by the end of D-Day, but we already understood the value of
lighting Hat-out for an 'aspirational'
target.
When,
that
atternoon, we knew that the 21 Panzer Division was already in
action in front of us, we found it suddenly much more difficult
to imagine ourselves in possession of that already heavily
damaged city, vitally important though its possession remained
as a main centre of potential communications.
How clearly I
remember taking part in the massive barrage, with Typhoons
rocketing in support, and g Brigade reaching the northern
approaches to the town as light faded on 8 July. Next day the
crumpled rubble of Caen lay in our hands.
Later in the campaign, I think we were particularly proud of
our conduct in the battle for Overloon and Venraj (chapter 6)
and in the even more intense fighting between the Maas and the
Rhine (chapter 8).
We knew what we could do, and were
extremely indignant if outsiders failed to recognise the triangular
Divisional sign we wore on our sleeves. It was a simple upright
black triangle divided by an inverted red triangle. I persuaded
NEW PREFACE AND INTRODUCTION
Colonel R C Macdonald at the War Office to ask the Field-
Marshal how he came to invent it.
The reply came back that
the sign was to indicate the combination of threes in the 3rd
Division with its three brigades, just as we had guessed!
When I was still with 3 Div at the end of 1945 we had moved
to Palestine.
Divisional HQ was on Mount Carmel, at Haifa.
One day I went to see the Divisional Commander, Major-
General 'Bolo' Whistler, later General Sir Lashmer Whistler.
He was the ideal divisional commander.
The photograph on
page 6 of the plate section shows him (with the Corps
Commander) looking exactly as he was: a big man, with a
cheerful grin that endeared him to the whole division, trom the
brigadiers downwards, and with the priceless gift of inspiring
confidence, making the right decision, and seeing it through.
You always knew exactly 'where you were' with him. (He made
one mistake: he smoked, and died bravely but 'before his time'
of lung cancer.) The reason for my seeing him on Mount Carmel
was that the Division we had known (1 for slightly longer but he
so enormously much better) was beginning to break up, and be
dispersed. I asked him if I could write a history of the Division
we had known and been so proud of. I wrote a
chapter: he read it and immediately agreed. I said I'd need t
go back to Whitehall, to work in the Cabinet Offices, where the
war diaries of all the divisions were stacked underground in the
care of Mr C V Owen.
He gave me 'an old-fashioned look',
again agreed, and I was posted at once.
He then asked the
various units of the Division if they would do their best to furnish
their own recollections of 'their' campaign, and these were sent
For them, I was especially indebted to Steve Hemingway of
the Suffolks, Jack Harrod of the Lincolns, Ken Bradshaw of the
Ulster Rifles, R C Macdonald, who commanded in turn the
and the Warwicks and whose
offices with Lord
Montgomery secured me his Foreword and his explanation of
the triangular divisional sign which he 'invented'.
extremely indebted to Humphrey Wilson of the Norfolks,
Radcliffe of the KSLI (whose own
fine history of 2 KSLI
appeared at the same time as Assault Division, from Blackwell's at
Oxford), and Bob Moberly of the Middlesex.
Sapper Stanley
