Chapter Five
THE ADVANCE INTO THE LIMBURG
LOWLANDS
FLERS HAD BEEN bombed in the D-day attacks on French com-
munication centres, but the people were overjoyed at the enuy
of a British D-day Division, and generous with kisses and flowers.
The day after the entry into Flers, the General
published a
special message :
TO ALL RANKS
As far as this Division is concerned a phase of the main
operation of this campaign has been completed.
You should be extremely satisfied with the part you have
Played. Your training in lOngland was directed entirely towards
the success of the assault landing.
out by all parts of the Division.
This was splendidly carried
Since then you have fought a variety of actions.
fought alongside Canadians and Americans.
And you have
advanced every time until ee enemy was soundly beaten, and
is now in full retreat.
You have had great exf thience of battle, and now realise
how much more there is to learn.
I am most grateful for your triorts, and very, very proud
of your achievements so far.
(Signed) L. G. WHISTLER, Major-General,
Commander,
France, 17 Aug 44
3 Brit. Inf. Div.
" Until 17 August," says
General Eisenhower's
" there was a steady seep eastwards through the gap,
came a convulsive surge to get out . . .
Road discipline among
2 Since then the Germans had looted and burned down the whole centre of the town.
THE ADVANCE INTO THE LIMBURG LOWLANDS
139
columns fleeing
toward the Seine
non-existent, and
retices plunged madly across the open country in an effort to
avoid the blocked roads.
Our air forces swept down upon the
choked masses of transport, and there was no sign of the Luft-
waffe to offer any opposition
Allied guns ringed the ever-
sinking killing-ground, and while the SS elements as usual
tought to annihilation, the ordinary German infantry gave them-
selves up in ever-increasing numbers.
By 20 August the gap was
finally closed near Chambois
The lovely wooded country-
side west of Argentan had become the graveyard of the army
which, three months earlier,
had confidently waited to smash
the Allied invasion in the Normandy beaches."
the whole period of development that was made possible by the
successiul amphibious assault;
all this without rest, with scarcely
tpause, yet with increasing pride and undiminished vigour. Before
the invasion it had been considered likely in high quarters that
casualies in the Ouistreham landing would be so severe and the
tort so exhausting that after holding the bridgehead for about
a fortnight surviving troops would have to be brought back to
Te-form in England.
At Flers, after ten weeks, the Division
directing its thoughts and ! dummies to the assault-crossing of the
By the 18th, the Sappers had the Tinchebray-Flers road open
for two-way traffic, and the 3rd Necce Kegiment reported clear the
extensive Bois de Messei, between Flers and Domfront,
by civilians to be concealing at least 200 Germans.
the Army Commander,
General Dempsey, visited Div.
H.Q. by
Air O.P., and by 11.30 the Divisional Commander had town to
a conference at 21
Army Group.
As a result the Divisional
roup met, in happier circumstances than they were usea to, and
the 20th the Division concentrated in the countryside round
Flers and prepared to practise crossing rivers.
Training began
To aid and
supplement battalion training
Training School under Major Ted Kilshaw was established o
to remain
permanently
establishment and follow the Division on its travels
Club-at a respectful distance.
But by the 2oth one of General Patton's flashing spearheads
