NOUS
18
ASSAULT
DIVISION
were more brave actions than could be recorded in a dozen
volumes of this size.
The Division was not fighting for some ideal,
some hare-brained theory of racial supremacy, such as can inspire
German Divisions.
The British are better at practice than theory,
the alternative was to acknowledge them masters of Europe,
if
not of the world.
In a recent essay,
in which he admirably debunks the
American journalist Ralph Ingersoll,
Mr. Robert Henriques
concludes :
"Let's go back to the old-fashioned, outmoded,
laborious process of studying the records, thus writing real history,
thence making true and logical deductions. ..." Sound advice
for Ingersoils, but truth exists in historical imagination as well
as in historical documents, and, while historians of strategy must
confine themselves largely to the records of the Higher Formations,
I doubt if it would be possible to produce anything like an
accurate picture of a Division's activities from a study, however
close, of all the official records. When it was my duty to compile
the official War Diary of my unit, and the unit was in action,
other duties always came first: if the unit was out of action,
there was nothing much to record.
But at the Headquarters of
higher formations War Diaries were, doubtless, attended to more
carefully, though one has to appreciate continually that the war
was not conducted for the benefit of historians !
delight of writing a Divisional
history lies in
the
range of the subject: it is a formation sufficiently compact and
intimate for the personalities of the various units to emerge and
grow familiar, as they cannot in any higher formation if only
because the component units of Corps and Armies
are ever
changing; at the same time it is a formation sufficiently large
to count among the decisive factors of the success or failure of an
Expeditionary Force.
At once we observe the intention of a
formation commander of the General Staff and the working-out
of that abstract intention as fully as is humanly possible by the
individuals down through all the ranks of his command.
But
individuals have no place in a War Diary, which is a record of
general activities, such as the start of an attack, the taking of an
objective, the arrival of reinforcements, or the withdrawal of a
PREFACE
I9
unit for rest and " maintenance." And even then the timings
recorded are more often than not those when the messages were
received at the battalion, brigade or divisional H.Q., instead of
those when the action really took place.
So that official War
Diaries are not a Divisional historian's main source.
I have constantly used the War Diaries for the verification of
events, while I have been entirely dependent on them for the
tactical information upon which General Rennie made his plan
for the Division's assault on Queen Beach on D-day.
take this opportunity to thank Mr. G. V. Owen and his staff at
Historical Section of the Cabinet Offices
for their ready
assistance with the innumerable files. But throughout the
narrative my first sources have been the personal accounts pro-
duced for me by the various units of the Division.
I am par-
ticularly indebted to Steve Hemingway of the Suffolks, Jack
Harrod of the Lincolns, Ken Bradshaw of the Ulster Rifles,
R. C. Macdonald, who commanded in turn the K.O.S.B.s and
the Warwicks, Humphrey Wilson of the Norfolks, Guy Radcliffe,
of the K.S.L.I., and Bob Moberly of the Middlesex, for their
respective
battalion stories.
As well, 1 am
most grateful to
Sapper Stanley for showing me his personal diary of the special
training period in Scotland, to Peter Lloyd from whose experi-
ences in command of a platoon of the K.O.S.B.s I have quoted
on pages 240-242 and
pages 262-265, and to
Bill
Renison,
whose unpublished reminiscences of his command of the East
Yorkshire Battalion are as fine reading as the journals of Martin
Lindsay, who commanded a battalion of the Gordon Highlanders
in a sister Division over an almost identical period of action. For
an appreciation of the Naval part of the invasion I am obliged
to the Commodore Commanding 15th Cruiser Squadron, who
allowed me to see his copy of Admiral Ramsay's Report to the
Supreme Commander ;
obliged also to Commander Kenneth
Edwards' book, Operation Neptune.
I owe an acknowledgment to
the Editor of Time and Tide, who first published the lines at the
head of Chapter VII.
Unless otherwise acknowledged, photo-
graphs are reproduced by permission of the Controller, Photo-
graphic Division, Central Office of Information.
My deepest obligation is to Major-General L. G. (Bolo)
Whistler, G.B., D.S.O., Commander of the Division, for releasing
