Chapter One
PREPARATION
IT WAS NOWHERE a festive summer in 1943 : in Galloway, where
the grd Division had gone to train for the Sicilian landing,
the
damp moorlands round the Solway Firth and the overcast blue
hills above Dumfries conveyed their melancholy.
never seemed more depressing than when the news was announced
that the Sicilian job had gone to another Division. The Canadians
were full of wrath when, after much unavoidable heel-kicking in
England,
they saw the Americans given the landing-opera-
tions in North Africa: indignantly they demanded to know
whether we thought they couldn't fight. We remembered Vimy
Dieppe,
and
had only admiration for their fighting
qualities; so the ist Canadian Division landed instead of the
3rd British Division in Sicily in July, 1943.
In that month the
broad plan for the assault on the Atlantic Wall was completed
and only awaited formal acceptance at the Quebec Conference.
It concerned an American, a Canadian and a British Division.
The grd Division was picked to represent Britain.
It is notable that no fundamental of that onginal plan had
to be changed, although when Eisenhower arrived in London as
Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force
scope and range were extended to include two more Divisions,
one British, one American.
year the task ahead of them.
The grd Division knew for a short
Every man guessed what would be
expected of him and had time to prepare himself. Through the
autumn and stormy winter, and the spring of 1944, the Division
trained as never an Infantry Division trained before. Here was
a job worth doing.
It was more than that: it was the chance
all men had dreamed of.
The establishment of the " Second Front"
was longed for by
the Russians, who had not succeeded in stopping and repulsing
losses,
the majority of Hitler's Divisions without sustaining
terrible
and it was clamoured for by over-anxious and
30
often
PREPARATION
irresponsible voices of British and American opinion : it was not
altogether dismissed from
the minds of the Germans as they
waited behind the Atlantic Wall, despite the assurances of the
seemingly inextinguishable Goebbels. The less these people knew
about it, the shriller were their comments.
Every member of the
3rd Division knew something, and loved what he knew. He kept
his observations to himself.
With new thoughts for company, men turned afresh to an
appreciation of the ground on which they would make their first
preparations for D-day. (The ciphers H-hour and D-day, which
were added to almost everybody's vocabulary on 6 June, 1944,
were already current language in the Division.)
The massive
Lowther Hills recovered from the gloom that had darkened them
since the announcement about Sicily, and if you had driven over
the Dalveen Pass to Moffat you would have been struck first by
the grandeur of the mountain road to Elvanfoot, then by the
atmosphere of Moffat, an apparently dull little town.
was the headquarters of the Divisional Battle School, and the
dullness was deceptive.
By day the sound of gunfire drifted down
the valley from beneath the Devil's Beef-Tub, as a troop detached
from one of the Field Regiments of the
Divisional Artillery
pitched high explosive or smoke shells just ahead of the Infantry,
and sometimes, with the wind right, the sound of a boy rattling
a stick along the palings of a
wooden
fence came
from
the
machine-guns supporting one of the companies in the Divisional
Inter-Company Assault Competition.
But back in camp in the
late afternoon the
dried and
greased by practised Gunners,
the small arms received their
careful maintenance, the ammunition was prepared for the next
day, and then Moffat came to life.
It is difficult, when describing any phase of army life,
avoid a constant reference to sports terms for analogy.
the feeling of personal pride which tingled everyone's
spine when
the great assignment was announced: it was just
like being picked for the best side in football, like getting an
international trial. Similarly with this whole question of training :
an obvious comparison to make is with the boxing team who are
coached and massaged individually and come together only in
sparring bouts before the contest. One almost irresistible tempta-
