DIVISION
were arriving at the Lowering Position, heaving-to and anchoring.
A and B Companies of the East Yorks and A and C Companies
ot the South Lancs moved to their loading positions by five of
the L C A in the davits of each Battalion L S I, and were quickly
hoisted overboard. Round them the other craft deployed swifty
for the assault.
Forming up and timings were extremely com-
plicated, in accordance with the detailed plan: they were wil
rehearsed, and so far it had all been like an exercise.
expected this similarity to last much longer.
The information regarding the enemy was that the coas
between Courseulles and the Orne was held by the right-hand
regiment of 716 Division. In the German Army all the battalions
of the same regiment were kept together, and the infantry division,
when up to strength, was composed of three regiments,
equivalent to our brigades.
the Right Regiment controntig
the Assault Brigade was thought to be 736, and it was reported
that the Division had as many as 40 per cent non-Germans,
mostly disaffected or conscript Russians and Poles.
appreciated that "as a centre of communications and Army,
Air Force and Civil H. Q.s, Caen is likely to be stubbornly defended
by the Germans within the limits of the forces at their disposal."
Among reserve formations 21 Panzer Division was known to have
been stationed at Mantes, though " one very recent report as yet
monarmed, but supported by tram movements, suggests this
may now be stationed in
thirty miles south of Caen.
area between ten and
us on D-day and we must be prepared for it."?
It could therefore intervene against
The information
regarding the topography of the
assault
was admirably detailed, and had, in conjunction with the maps
available and air photographs, provided everyone with a familiar
landscape. Of Queen Beach it said: " 3 Br Inf Div beaches are
good assault beaches.
a possible soft strip above high water."
the sand is smooth an, frm, except for
That " possible soft
strip" ought to have been underlined. The width of the beach
was expected to be as follows :
to low water-
"From the back of the beach
average 400 yards; from the back of the beach
' Divisional Intelligence Summary issued with the final Operation Order dated
14 May, 1944.
2 Ibid.
INVASION: THE ASSAULT
to high water—average 30 yards." But those were the figures
given for normal conditions.
" In the event," wrote Admiral
Ramsay to General Eisenhower,
"the weather had built up the
tide in the bay, and on no beaches, except Utah, was obstacle
clearance satisfactory before the obstacles were immersed."
that was not all. At high tide the width of Queen Beach should
have been sufficient for vehicles to manœuvre laterally along it
-" average 30 yards." " The weather had built up the tide in
the bay " : it left barely 30 feet.
The latest beach obstacles were described with accuracy.
The assaulting troops would first meet two groups of ramp type
(" knife-rest") obstacles starting 300 yards down from the back
of the beach. Then they would come to a double row of stakes
running continuously across the beaches, 30 to 60 yards between
stakes, 230 yards down from the back of the beach.
The last of
the under-water obstacles began 180 yards from the back of the
beach and consisted in overlapping rows of " hedgehogs" twenty
leet apart and fourteen to seventeen in a row. Hedgehogs were
constructed of angle-iron after the pattern of the caltrop used in
the Hundred Years War, but standing about six feet high.
Obstacles were still under construction, and the possibility of
mines below high water was anticipated.
The beach was backed
by a narrow strip of sand-dunes rising as high as fifteen feet, its
face sloping at forty-five degrees.
Between the coast and Caen
numerous German strong-points were suspected or known.
Upon the basis of such information Major-General Rennie
had been able to make his appreciation, and, with his staft, at
Aberlour House, formulate the plan that was now being put
into tactical operation at the Lowering Position.' In conformity
with an ambitious Corps plau an u which grd Canadian Division
n the right would secure a covering position on the general line
of the Caen-Bayeux: ribad from Putot-en-Bessin to
aerodrome, and on the left 6th Airborne Division would deny
ne enemy the use of the area between the Kivers Orne and Dives
north of the road: dbarn-Banneville-Colombelles,
it was the
tention of the grd British Infantry Division to land on the
beach at La Brèche, capture
south of the River Orne at that place.
Caen and establish a bridgehead
To this end 8 Brigade
'Alternative plans were prepared to allo for faulty landings or initial repulse.
