30 4 16500660
254
ASSAULT DIVISION
pleted the approach to Bremen by clearing right up to the floods
to the north-east of Mackenstedt-at Moordeich and Stuhr-
and advanced north right up to the main east-west Bremen-
Delmenhorst railway at Mittelshuchting and Kirchhuchting.
Here there were hardly any
floods.
At Kirchhuchting the
Division was practically in
This was the obvious line
of attack-from the west along the Delmenhorst road. After all,
it was the only dry approach! So the Germans thought.
way, that approach had to be secured in order to mislead the
enemy.
account of the Lincolns' part in this fighting shows
clearly the mood of the Division now that the end was literaly
in sight across the flooded fields.
This, as we anticipated on
page 24 at the beginning of our story, is how we fought when
given strength to match the might of Germany.
"The Lincolns
led," says Harrod,
" supported by a Squadron of the Sherwood
Rangers, who did us proud throughout the action.
It was the
best day's hunting the Battalion ever had. There was long, hard,
gruelling fighting, but the enemy was deficient in artillery, while
we had everything we needed, including Crocodiles.
Each Com-
pany in turn went into action with such dash and determination
that units of the Horst Wessel Division, the
Training
remnant of 18 SS
Battalion,
U-boat crews,
R-boat crews, and all the
ragged Volksturm could do nothing but retreat • • • hough at
nightfall on the i8th a small area of Stuhr north of the branch
ute So stll in enemy hands, the battalion had come a long way
and taken over 100 prisoners.
or 17 next morning company put in so terce an attack
excitedly firing fifty
Co. Ken my Chon Con Thn, DO
D.S.O.)
rounds rapid from an attic
window in
B Company n.<.-disappeareeм one horizon like something
mom Walt Disney. It is doubtl uSe y noticed Bremen as they
passed, or Hamburg ! "
At 10 o clock on the third mi or he Battalion was put in
again anu captured Kirchhuchung twenty-four hours in advance
of the Division's schedule.
In their day's " bag"
were the C.O.,
Adjutant, two Company Commanders and the remaining 25°
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
255
the ranks of 18 SS Training Battalion, withdrawn there from
inkum. They brought 9 Brigade's total of prisoners " caged "
in April past the 1,000 mark.
The previous evening the K.O.S.B.s had passed through the
Lincolns to attack Mittelshuchting.
They fought hard and were
til oing forward after dark. At dawn B Company went on to
secure the railway embankment, but only after a warm struggle.
Mo Lancs of 8 Brigade had previously carried out what
on the 18th.
attacks,
immobilising twenty more.
At midday that day the following
message was received at Divisional H.Q.:
" Personal from XXX Corps Commander. Commander-
asked me to
congratulate
Commander 2nd
battalion the Royal Warwickshire Kegimen on very the per-
formance put up by that battation auring the last three days
words were ' Please congratulate my
Regiment? I would like to add my congratulations.
watched that Battalion take on
Training
and fight them to a standstill."
On the 10th, field-Marshal Montgomery visited the warwicks,
inspected and addressed this
They had captured a fine Nazi
standard in Leeste and this had been presented to the
Marshal. He expressed great pleasure at the gift and told them
that it was now flying outside his caravan.
Now the Division was ready for Bremen.
The whole assault
on the city was co-ordinated by XXX Corps Headquarters.
XII
Corps had resumed the advance eastwards.
Under XXX Corps,
the grd Division would go into the attack as soon as the 43rd
and 52nd Divisions came abreast on the far side of the Weser.
The 3rd Division's task was roughly equivalent in scale to taking
the Gateshead district, that lies across the Tyne from Newcastle.
The flooded meadows served it as a moat.
No sign, scarcely a
was observed in the great mass of buildings.
On the
zIst, as 9 Brigade were relieved in Huchting by the 5Ist Division
and regrouped with 185 Brigade, the Corps Artillery was firing
