162
ASSAULT DIVISION
Battle Group Walther was sent to strengthen the Overloon front.
Div. Battle Group Walther contained a number of battalion
battle groups formed from German Air Force units and para-
troops. Such was Battalion Paul in Overloon. It provided 10g
out of the total of 147 prisoners taken by 9.30 that first evening,
Its strength was apparently not much more than 250 before the
attack, but they were experienced fighters, several of them wearing
the Crete armband. Their officers under Hauptmann Paul all
saved themselves (these battle groups and some higher formations
each bore
the name of their commanding officer). The con-
mander of No. I Company, Hptmn. Bockmann, came in lor
some caustic comments from his men.
He had, until recently,
been a Luftwaffe pilot, and his rare visits to his forward sections
had been made, they said, at almost Luftwaffe speed. 8 Brigade
had dealt with Battalion Paul very well, and were ready to deal
win battalion strutt on the right it necessary, ul Datalon
Hoffman on the left. The doggedness of their advance has been
remarked : it remains to add that, despite heavy shelling during
the night and the restriction imposed on movement by mines
that had been laid with typical German excessiveness, tails were
The next day was Friday, the I3th.
8 Brigade stood fast,
while 9 and 105 Brigades spent the day clearing pine-woods, &
attaches to that date.
sinister occupation in itself, without the dark potent that inevitably
-rom Overloon, belts of woodland extend
eastwards and round to the south and south-west. the one road
to Venray runs through them to south-south-east. 105 Brigade
were given this road as their right boundary and would advance
to the south-east, while g Brigade over on the right went south.
After the most difficult reconnaissance of mine-free
from their assembly area, the Ulster Rifles attacked at 9 a.m.
Passing through the South Lancs of 8 Brigade - who had got into
the northern edge of the wood at first light that morning. the
Ulster Rifles were soon acquainted with some of the handicaps
of this sort of fighting :
enough to be impenetrable,
" In some places the wood was thick
in others it did not exist at all.
German positions and abandoned equipment testified to their
recent occupation.
Snipers were encountered at once,
sitating a thorough searching of every inch of ground : mopping
AND VENRAIJ
them up was inevitably a slow, laborious process. ... Farther
south it was more uniform, with pine-trees of medium size,
hedged about with foliage and undergrowth through which a
way could be forced without undue difficulty.
Throughout the
wood were soft, sandy tracks, treacherous for vehicles because of
their nature and because they were often beset with mines.
Neither these tracks nor the shape of the wood itself bore much
relation to the map, even with
from an air-
hurrah, so that one of the principal dificulties was finding
Thus the speed of the operation was reduced, but by
forward edge of the wood.
reported D Company in the left-hand
Twenty minutes later the K.O.S.B.s advanced into the wood
on the Ulster Rifles' right, clearing up to the edge of the wood
on their right with Churchills of the Grenadiers supporting them
on the exposed right flank.
They got through to the forward
edge of the wood without much difficulty, though they
talled and mortared hard and the Churchills had to be Flailed
through a minefield.
As soon as they began to emerge from the
southen edge of the wood they came under cross-fire from
cemy machine-guns, two of which were stopped by Lance
Corporal Harmon.
He crawled under fire towards the nearest
threw two grenades in,
rushed it with his
then immediately went on to treat the
next post likewise.
excellent at this stage.
The co-operation with the Grenadiers was
Corporal Forrest, who had spotted a
German section stalking one of the uhurchills with bazookas,
the other five withdrew he tracked them down to their fox-holes
ran forward firing his Sten :
he killed two Germans, and when
and took them all prisoner.
Then it grew dark and the mortaring
Over on the left in the woods east of Overloon the Warwicks
and K.S.L.I. had had similar experiences.
The K.S.L.I. soon
discovered that the edge of the wood on the map
different from the edge of the wood on the ground, and Y Com-
pany only got on to its area after much wandering about among
the close firs.
But both battalions cleared their areas of the enemy
and were level with g Brigade along the southern edge
at nightfall.
That night orders were given out
