ASSAULT DIVISION
disorder and the whole lot fell to A Company, who had a fine
picnic."
Advancing on the left of the K.O.S.B.s, three Companies of
the Ulster Rifles were having an equally fine picnic, D Company
alone claiming 80 prisoners.
Purcell is mentioned again for the
way he led his platoon of C Company forward in tremendous
strides, capturing several posts with inspiring enthusiasm, winning
But on the K. O.S.B.s' right, the South Lancs, 8 Brigade's
left-hand Battalion, met sterner opposition. This was by passed
by the troop of tanks of the Grenadier Guards supporting G
Company, who " reached the main road but were picked off by
bazookas... The leading platoon of A Company forced their
way through the woods on to the road, but were picked off by
machine-gun fire enfilade, and by snipers, across the road.
Battalion consolidated between three and four hundred yards
short of the objective, the action having proved extremely costy,
especially in officers. Among the killed were Major Carse and
Major Watson, C and
Company Commanders, Captain
Carmichael, and Lieutenants Slack and Helm."
The Battalion on the right was the East Yorks. Their action
They had been given the responsibility for capturing
the vital bridge across the Mühlen Fleuth which 53rd Division's
Recce Regiment were to cross in the attack on Weeze next day.
Like the South Lancs, they found that resistance increased after
the first stages of the attack, but they reached the road by 1.30
From this point the road sloped down very gradually to
the right, passed through a copse, and crossed the briage not
are than sou yaras away. & Company under Keg Rutherford
were sent up with orders to seize the bridge, whose code name was
By two o'clock this was done, against comparatively light
opposition, and just across the bridge
Company based
the defence of their bridgehead on Schaddenhof, a group of
farm buildings in a clearing in the woods to the left of the road.
se bridge, a sold Class 7o construction, had been prepared with
four 500 Ib. bombs for demolition, but by an astonishing piece of
good luck the fuse had gone out.
wirelessed his congratulations
At 4. 10 the Corps Commander,
Renison on gaining Donald.
It was not long before the enemy made it clear that it had not
RHINELAND OFFENSIVE
been his intention to allow the bridge to be taken intact, or to
expose the defenders of Weeze to an attack in the rear when it
was imperative to hold that nodal point at least one more day
it his troops still in the Maas River line were to be extricated. C
Company were still busy organising the defence of the bridge, and
had sent back for more small-arms ammunition when at 5-30
they were approached by an enemy tank that quickly withdrew.
One section of the East Yorks' anti-tank guns crossed the bridge,
without their Platoon Commander, who had been hit by a shell.
The carrier-load of small-arms ammunition sent
forward to
replenish their low holding was also
hit by a shell and never
reached them. The only tank to cross the bridge with them was
the Sherman O.P. taken over by John Ford,
the F.O.O. of B
Troop, 76th Field Regiment.
He also provided the only means
of wireless communication between C Company and the main
force throughout much of the grim battle that now developed,
At 6.55 the 76th Field Regiment fired on " enemy forming up"
in the woods just south of the bridgehead.
This counter-attack
by a Company of ist Battalion 24 Para Regiment came on with
tanks, and the Field Regiment continued to fire their S.O.S. Task
without intermission until 10.55, when there was a pause before
the enemy launched the whole of the grd Battalion of 22 Para.
At the same time the other Field Regiments were
further D.F. Tasks at the request of Major
Pirie, M.C., the Battery Commander with Colonel Bill Renison.
Nearly everyone in
the Division was anxiously watching the
fate of C Company all night,
but especially
over whose wireless net came the terse, intermittent commentary.
The dumping of ammunition that night was a frantic
at one time guns having only ten rounds left, and consternation
was general when it was heard that Ford had dropped the range
until the rounds were falling right on to the Company position.
If the Gunners got desperately short of ammunition,
C Company.
borrowing 3,000 rounds of •303
Middlesex machine-gunners in the copse back along
to the small reserve
"Just as the opcomer in thou sank posed his pressed with ur eat wane stie
A hand will come in through the opening:
over the Gunner net.
