182
ASSAULT DIVISION
their reply, he opened fire with his Sten-gun. The patrol with-
drew, but one of their number reappeared a few minutes later
"dancing about the company's slit-trenches, crying : " Iommy,
come out !'" He had misdirected his invitation, which merely
evoked a stream of small-arms fire. Next morning a body was
found in a ditch in front of the company lines. A further indica-
tion of the mood of the enemy was the sight next day of the fist
V.2 weapons to be launched before the eyes of the Division.
AS
these projectiles ascended vertically into the sky they left a trail.
of white vapour, and from that day the bearings and timings of
these were collected from all over the
front and sent back to
Corps, but it is doubtful if they were close enough for the bearng
to have been of use.
It was hateful to watch these things making
for Antwerp and London and to be unable to prevent them.
8 Brigade's patrols also produced useful information, and to
start with, patrolling on both sides was so intensive thàt night
skirmishes were frequent. The South Lancs' historian says, with
rare expansion in a regrettably naked narrative :
"As our own
patrol activity increased the enemy's decreased, and towards the
end of the third week several of our patrols had reached the line
o1 the rallway and a most comprenensive picture or the enemy
posts had been built up.
M.M., and Lieutenant Kennie,
In this place Lieutenant Wright, M.C.,
M.C., of C Company, especially
distinguisned themselves, until both wye wounded on mines on
the 22nd, the latter going forward er, rescue the tormer."
so, such scanty treatment of a period of personal enterprise and
lamentable.
instance of heroism,
in a
Battalion
history, is
Apart from the local intelligence that was thus being gained,
considerable interest during that period attached to the broader
estimate of German
capabilities which was made regularly at
this time in the Divisional Intelligence Summaries. O.C. Rown-
tree, the G III (I), who had issued that first vital estimate of the
ottan sore elences, Was sul sumiarsing our own and enemy
activities and issuing a very intelligible account almost daily.
trom these it was clear that the main German preoccupations
at the moment were trying to form a reserve of crack troops
while staving off current penetrations (principally in the Aachen
area.
This, after the defeat in Normandy, involved them in a
WINTER:
THE
MAAS
RIVER
LINE
183
vast general reorganisation, and " the 16-year-olds (next year's
class) were largely eaten into,
and industry combed near to
scalping."
But the result of the effort was that 50 new Divisions
appeared, 20 of them in the west.
A typically interesting Summary
was produced on igth
November,
showing
that the Germans
had had to bring their reserve of crack troops,
the newly-formed
Sixth Panzer Army,
across the Rhine,
"to defend,
if necessary,
the crossing of the
Roer
River,"
which
was
being steadily
approached by the U.S. Ninth Army.
By coincidence (for it was
this Sixth Panzer Army that a month later broke through with
Pith Panzer Army into the Ardennes,
employing numbers of
troops dressed in American uniforms), this summary also repro-
duced a letter captured by a flanking formation and addressed
to Para Regiment Hübner from H.Q., LXXXVI Corps, stating :
"The Führer has ordered the fmn of a special unit of a strength
of about two bns for employment on recce and special tasks on
the Western Front... Personnel will be selected from volunteers
Who fulfil the followred requirements.
Knowledge of the
English language and also the American dialect and especially
their military technical terms. • i
Captured clothing,
eapt,
weapons and vehs are to be reported and collected for the eqpt
of the above special troops. •
These Summaries were
frequently rounded off with an
amusing tailpiece.
On the 20th
November the latest German
propaganda
leaflet was
reproduced under the heading
Hard
Times Indeed. It is a curious affair.
On one side was printed in
German, above the forged signature of General Eisenhower,
the
following imitation
Safe Conduct Pass :
" The German soldier
who carries this safe conduct is using it as a sign of his genuine
wish to go into captivity for the next ten years,
to betray his
Fatherland, to return home a broken old man and very probably
never to see his parents, wife and children again.
reverse side was the following prize example of Teutonic wit,
this time in
English: " Dear
Friends,
We are returning your
age-old dodge,
after having made
the necessary rectifications
with sincerest
thanks.
commend you on your enorts.
It was highly amusing,
and we must
But please refrain from molesting
us further in this direction.
It should be obvious to you that
the ideals for which go million Germans have fought (according
