106
ASSAULT DIVISION
Middlesex machine-guns and by guns of the 20th Anti-Tank
Regiment. These preparations give the lie to anyone who still
thinks we should have been advancing gaily. We would glady
have done so.
One of our greatest bugbears was that all along the front the
enemy were still desperately holding out in fortified strong-points
behind our lines. General Eisenhower mentions that " although
German claims to the effect of these strong-points in delaying the
development of our operations were greatly exaggerated, it was
undeniably difficult to eliminate the suicide squads by whom they
were held." He goes on to describe the radar station at Douvres
that only surrendered on the 17th June as being " the biggest
of these points, in the Canadian sector." But it was a team from
the 3rd British Division that forced its surrender.
legend current in the Division that the German Colonel Com
manding this garrison was in the habit of emerging by night
to visit his mistress in La Délivrande, and the compiler of the
Divisional Intelligence Summary went so far as
respectfully that the lady should be located and suitably booby-
trapped.
harder on
There is no doubt that enforced inactivity of this kind was
morale than any bloody thrust into fresh country
would have been : but it was necessary. Inactivity only describes
life at the front. This was a period of tremendous activity for the
Division's Gunners, who were firing constantly in support of the
6th Airborne and
5Ist Division
in attack and counter-attack
over the Orne, besides supporting their own troops with Counter-
Battery,
Harassing,
Defensive,
known to the Royal Artillery.
and every other kind of Fire
Their regular daily expenditure
was up to a hundred rounds per gun, and during an attack as
much as three or even four hundred rounds.
Victor Targets
usually brought a few kind words of approval from the lips of
the Infantry, who were naturally delighted to see the Germans
paid back in their own coin and with interest.
One infantryman
commented that our gunnery made German gunnery look silly :
however silly, it was still extremely inconvenient.
But the supply of shells was only one-albeit a major one—
of the questions that exercised the Divisional Services.
It was
extraordinary how they kept everybody fed and equipped and
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF GAEN 107
at the same time built up great dumps of reserves.
They had
to do it over beaches with no proper port, though by D plus 2
a "Goseberry" breakwater was formed by sinking various old
warships and merchant ships. This made a great difference to
the speed of turn round of DUKWs. Anchorage, beaches, and
dump-areas were under observation,
and shell-fire from D-day
until the enemy were cleared from the coast east of the Orne in
the second week of August.
The performance of the amphibian
DUKWs companies and Port Operating
troops through all
weathers, day and night, and with spells of shelling each 24 hours
for six weeks, was truly " of the highest order."
For the first three days the Division
Division) had to be supplied from four beach
(and 6th Airborne
Sector Stores
Dumps, as the ground intended for the Beach Maintenance Area
was still partly in enemy hands.
On D plus 2 an enemy plane
vector stores Dump that contained halt the ammunition ana all
dropped a stick of bombs over the area,
two bombs hitting the
the reserve of petrol, oil, lubricant and supplies for the force. An
enormous fire started, in which 60,000 gallons of petrol were lost
and 400 tons of ammunition.
With high courage the troops got
the tire under control in just under three hours and saved some
of the ammunition.
were started in the area on the gth and lot,
There was further bombing, and small fires
but after
that
maintenance continued smoothly until the Channel was lashed
by a gale that lasted from the 19th to 22nd June.
(" Thank the
Gods of War we sailed when we did," said Eisenhower.
After
the ith June the next possible date for Invasion was the
1gth.)
The final tribute to these supply troops is that the average tonnage
per day landed by the two
Beach Groups was as high as, and
suring the storm period highn a an, the tonnage landed on less
turbulent beaches.'
In an carly part of the book we saw the state of interdepend-
cace, spiritual as well as physical, of the several " arms" -
Infantry, Gunners, Sappers, Services.
We can now see in some
details how the spirits
(morale if you like) of the Division were
and how they were affected.
It is possible to generalise without
Probing too far into the feelings of the men who, at " Stand-
*By the end of the month 274,000
tons of stores had been landed for and Army,
much of it through the Mulberry at Arromanches; 3rd Divisions contribution at La
Bréche was 53,143 tons.
