enle
ASSAULT DIVISION
was derived from the thought of the Infantry who depended on
them, who lived up against the enemy, and who went forward
into one attack after another until it was all over. That was the
relationship in which the 17,000 were bound together.
good reason to believe that the bonds uniting all the grd Division
were especially close: they were tightened upon the stretch of
beach between Lion and Ouistreham and in the savagely-held
fields and woods on the ridge that shielded Caen.
Those were days of effort and danger in which no one could
fail to feel proud of his job;
there was glory in driving a bull-
dozer to clear a beach-exit, in driving a lorry-load of ammunition
or petrol down to the Pegasus bridge at Bénouville and over to
the ground held by the 6th Airborne Division, who were supplied
by the 3rd Division's R.A.S.C. transport until their own could
be brought ashore ten days later.
" The enthusiasm of the
drivers is terrific " is the typical note of one of their officers.
there was gladness in the performance of the individual task, it
was increased with the chance to co-operate.
When a carrier or a tank became bogged, a R.E.M.E. recovery
team would work with the crew and set the vehicle back upon
firm ground. When Sappers were going to lay mines, they guided
the R.A.S.C. drivers of the lorry-loads of mines through the
darkness to the site of the minefield.
When it became necessary
to concentrate three Armoured Divisions across the Orne for the
drive south of Caen and 750 shells and cartridges had to be
dumped beside each gun in the Divisional Artillery-all in the
course of two nights- the movement of ammunition over the
bridges had to be geared carefully into the armoured traffic :
that it was accomplished without stoppage and almost unnoticed
an example of the finest team-work between Provost, the
R.A.S.C. drivers, and the Gunners who went down to the Orne
bank and guided the lorries up to the guns.
When the Infantry
are in battle it is well understood that the Artillery and Engineers
will be working with them. When they are training together the
expression marrying-up is used to describe the common efforts of
the Gunners with the Infantry, and in action that union is in a
sense consummated, strengthened by mutual confidence.
Such
understanding is expected of the " supporting arms,"
the Machine-gun and Mortar Battalion, the Gunner Regiments,
THE DIVISION
23
the Sapper Companies: in the event it was almost equally
realised with units whose job it was not to supply support but the
less spectacular commodities— transport, rations,
equipment,
repairs to vehicles,
even signposts for the Divisional axis of
advance.
The whole system of interdependence is examplified
by the existence in each unit of a Regimental Aid Post. No one
feels independent of the Royal Army Medical Corps.
But the
bond is not just one of bloodshed.
It may perhaps be best
illustrated by the Royal Signals. It was the function of the Sig-
nallers to keep a communicating
link open throughout the
Division. When telephone-line could not be laid, wireless sets were
opened up : the traffic of information and orders was incessant.
No unit was outside this network. Everyone was kept in touch.
Quickness to co-operate
was nothing exclusive,
confined
within the Division.
We shall trace it in Combined Operations
with the Navy and the Air Force, as well as with the other land
formations. It is not the whole story. If it were, something would
have changed the British soldier; and it would take more than
the greatest military operation in history to do that.
He did all
the things that are attributed to him in this book and very much
more,
but he also said and thought things that may better be
imagined than chronicled.
If he were living in a muddy slit-
trench with death in the air around him, he undoubtedly wished
himself elsewhere and thought disparagingly, if anything, of the
soldier whose lot was less unhappy. If he was a technical soldier,
say a Craftsman in a Brigade Workshop a mile or two back, he
undoubtedly thought less than he should have done of the poor
beggar who was just creeping.
forward on a
reconnaissance
littol, and got on with his welding job. Whatever his separate
he had a corporate feeling as well. He still excelled in
co-operating when there was need.
Everyone knows the large
part of School and Army training that is devoted to team-work.
The results may best be observed on active service: they are
heartening to see and inspiring to share in.
Division appears in action.
nerged is that the neit spi
was born in the early hours of 6th June, 1944, that was conceived
on the shores of Scotland the previous autumn and
carried
securely through a wild, northern winter. With all infants, we
