ASSAULT
DIVISION
This was only the beginning of the excitement.
information was received that the move would be one of practi-
cally 300 miles to the area of Peer and Petit- (or Kleine-) Brogel
in the extreme north-east corner of Belgium.
Each unit would
spend two days " on the march," and the whole Division wold
be moved between the i6th and igth. The Division would be
provided with eight extra Transport Platoons for troop-carrying,
but there would not be the slightest chance of ferrying.
of the Divisional R.A.S.C. itself was " to troop-lift one Brigade,
and arrive on the same lift prepared for battle, carrying four day'
supplies, seventy-five miles petrol, two hundred and fifty rounds
fine gun of 25-pounder ammunition, and an augmented second-
line Small-Arms Ammunition." With the exercise of considerable
art and ingenuity it was done. The exact methods that so succeeded
a ways remained something of a mystery, but by various measures,
including the overload of a ton on all venicies, ana the use of
25-pounder ammunition boxes as seats in
the Troop Carriers
(compo-ration boxes had been carried this way on the previous
journey; it was thought that troops would find it easier to resist
the temptation to open the 25-pounder cases to see what was
inside), the equivalent of six hundred and sixty 3-ton loads in
troops, ammunition and supplies were carried forward.
On the
it was like a fabulous Royal Progress.
of the populace had been gratifying. Now, as they drove through
Albert and Bapaume, past Bourlon wood and the great,
tended fields where the dead lay from the time of the Four Years
War, so many men out of all our families,
enthusiastic welcome excessive and very moving.
just across the Belgium border, they stayed for a few hours, con-
sumed some beer brought out by the Belgians and some food and
slept a little, and drove on again.
they entered the Forêt de Soignes, regretfully forking right to
miss Brussels and make for Louvain, twelve miles due east of the
capital. Here was the line of the great rolling plain that some of
the old members of the Division remembered occupying in 1940,
when the Division's, and the country's, fortunes were so different.
What a change had been brought about in the course of four
years!
THE ADVANCE INTO THE LIMBURG LOWLANDS 145
A change was to be remarked, too, in the present situation as
the Division pressed out to the north-east, through Diest and over
the Albert Canal to Helchteren and on to Peer and Petit-Brogel.
It was a change that had nothing to do with the substitution of
Remish for French place-names or the transformation in the local
architectural or agricultural methods. It was that the ground
had been recently fought over; farms were still smouldering,
tanks stood burnt-out beside the road, invariably the horses and
cattle sprawled in the fields with their legs stuck in the air.
g Brigade and a Squadron of the 3rd Recce Regiment arrived
in the area on the 17th,
the day chosen to launch Operation
Market Garden with the object of establishing the Airborne Corps
astride the rivers
Maas, 1 Waal and Neder
Rijn and driving
XXX Corps north to the Zuider Zee. XXX Corps had a small
bridgehead over the Meuse-Escaut Canal near Overpelt three
or four miles to the north-west of Petit-Brogel. The three Air-
bome Divisions dropped that morning near St. Oedenrode,
Nijmegen
and Arnhem, and the Guards Armoured Division
pushed north from the canal bridgehead up the solitary road
linking Eindhoven, St. Oedenrode,
Amhem, Apeldoorn and the Zuider Zee.
Veghel,
Grave,
Nijmegen,
They were held up at
Valkenswaard,
seven miles short of Eindhoven, by strong
The grd Division and the IIth Armoured Division still made
up VIII Corps,
part in the Market Garden plan was to
operate on the right of XXX Corps. As at Vire,
was on the flank of the 2nd Army, next to the U.S. Ist Army, but
now, instead of working just across the road, Ist
concentrating on the
bridgeheads,
bitter struggle for Aachen and
some miles away to
Possibilities for VIII Corps
north-east were almost unlimited.
8 Brigade arrived next day, the 18th, while g Brigade spent
the afternoon in preparation for the assault-crossing of the Meuse-
Escaut Canal at Lille St. Hubert: one Class 9 and one Class 40
Bridge were needed in the Corps sector:
They had little time for
reconnaissance, but made the most of it.
The assault was to be
1 The lower Meuse, once it has left the Ardennes and entered Holland,
Dutch name of Maas.
