ASSAULT DIVISION
the boats entered the water and the crossing was made.
Lincolns met the stiffest opposition on the right, from small ame
and a 20 mm., but all companies were across within the first
quarter of an hour.
The training had not been wasted. A house on
the Lincolns' front was set on fire and the crossing area brightly
lit by the great flames.
Immediately the Pioneers got to work on
the rafts and the Signallers on their cables (both Battalions testly
to the excellence of communications during
this operation:
wireless and line were more than ever vital in view of the water
The blown bridge had crossed from Lille St. Hubert noth
into the little village of Brock, beyond which was a level-crossing
and a cross-roads.
Gaffikin got his company round Brock to 2
point on the road between the village and the level-crossing, then
attacked Brock from the north to the surprise of the Germans.
then as they cleared the village back to the canal, work began on
the main bridge.
Ine sappers nad lost no time. 24(as company were responsible
for building
They had
Lieutenant Cadwallader, who had been killed by an anti-tank
Lieutenants Boyse, Field, Duncan and Borrowman crossed with
while reconnoitring
the canal the previous
se assaulting companies. Borrowman was seriously wounded, and
Sapper Smith, who had been with him,
was taken prisoner, to
be recapture in brock by the Vister Rifles, together with the
live Germans who were escorting him and upon whom the tables
were satisfactorily turned.
of the bridge was begun at i a.m.
Despite the enemy fire, construction
boats.
It was open to traffic at i
a.m., although still subject to sniping, which sank two
Its span was 160 feet.
The Class 40 bridge was in the hands of 17 Field Company.
getting light, a
it was begun as soon as Broek was cleared, and though it was
They record:
thick mist concealed everything till ten
o'clock.
"The bridge was crnished by 5 p.m. without a
In fact it all worked out asome book says it should.
The Company received personal congratulations from
Dempsey, Commander of
2nd Army.
right of 9
A 3-30 p.m. 8 Brigade were ordered to cross the canal on the
This crossing was opposed
THE ADVANCE INTO THE LIMBURG LOWLANDS 149
than was expected, and the East Yorks found A Company of the
Lincolns having serious trouble with some Germans in a wood
who proved to be SS Officer Cadets out for battle experience.
"Se that you assist them to gain it," said the C.O. of the East
Yorks when he heard. Thirty-two of the Officer Cadets revised
their intentions and surrendered next morning.
185 Brigade had now arrived in the area, and the Division was
complete. They were three-quarters of an hour behind schedule.
The total vehicle casualties were found to be just over i per cent
and the average distance covered in the two-day march from the
Andelys area was 280 miles. The Div Club, despite a determined
eft to establish itself in luxury in Brussels, was prevailed upon
to move into an ex-German Panzer billet in the village of Peer.
To have been grounded beside the Seine on the i6th and astride
an enemy-held canal at the Dutch border on the ugth was an
accomplishment with which everyone in the Division
had a
nigat to be pleased, not least the Divisional R.E.M.E. Since the
arrival at Flers, Brigade workshops had been working
inspection and repair programme
that ensured any necessary
"stitch in time"
decarbonisation
repair to
approximately
len vehicles a day in each workshop;
Apart from the excitements
o experiment and conversion (they had turned captured German
tanks into A.R.V.s for their own use, mounted mortars on the
floor of all grd Kecce Regiment's hall-tracks so that they coula be
ired on the move, and then designed pent-houses for the half-
tracks with " canvas obtained by
C.R.E.M.E. in Paris") their
main source of excitement was front-line recovery, and that only
concerned certain men at the time of an attack or shortly after-
But they found their justification as well as that of all
the drivers responsible for the daily maintenance of their trucks,
in the complete mechanical success of transporting a
out of the permeating dust of Normandy into the sand-dunes and
marshes, the heides and peels of Limburg.
The K.O.S.B.s occupied Achel on the morning of the 2oth
and 8 Brigade advanced due east.
entered the
township of Hamont, the Suffolks' leading sections were met with
Peaches, apples and pears and estimates of the enemy in the town,
Varying in strength between none and a hundred.
took sixty prisoners, who could have hindered the liberation more
