72
ASSAULT DIVISION
though the latter were joined forty minutes later by the five that
had been unable to launch at sea.
H-hothe enemy's head Companies and is should land just a
The idea was that the D-D Shermans should land just ahead
H-hour to finish off the enemy, enabling the gapping teams to
work undisturbed at least by enemy small-arms fire.
But the
D-Ds had been slowed down by the heavy sea, and they all
landed roughly together at 7.30.
Already the front line of
obstacles was awash. The tide was rising fast, flowing up over
the sand at a visible pace. And those armoured vehicles, R.E.,
that landed ahead of the D-D tanks and Infantry were some
minutes without the close support planned.
They were not
likely to give that a second thought. This was the time for calm
thinking and swift action.
To clear the beach of those obstruc-
tions, both the inanimate and the very animate, was the job;
to make haste, for the next wave of men would break and flood
up across the sand in a few minutes, and succeeding waves would
develop the regularity of Atlantic rollers advancing over the
These R.E.
gapping and obstacle-clearing teams
ceeded in disembarking with the exception of one L C I carry-
ing a gapping team for White Beach.
discharged from this craft a close enemy anti-tank gun hit the
second flail, which jammed on the ramp door, while a second
hit caused an explosion aboard and killed Lieutenant-Colonel
A. D. B. Cocks, Commander of 5 Assault Regiment, R.E., the
man who was in command of all beach clearance and gapping
teams.
Our terrific barrage and bombardment " lifted" on ahead
as our Infantry assaulted the beach defences: and just as the
East Yorks and the South Lancs felt the relief of the solid sands
under their feet, the Germans were emerging from the solid and
comfortably furnished underground
shelters,
which seem to
have given them good protection from everything but shock.
Within a few minutes the enemy was applying the fire of rifle,
machine-gun, mortar and field gun to Queen Beach, particularly
to Red, opposite the God strong-point. The South Lancs on the
right had severe casualties in A Company, Major Harward, the
INVASION:
THE ASSAULT
73
Company Commander, being mortally wounded,' and one of
his subalterns, Allen, killed breaching the beach wire.
They sent
Company left to assist the East Yorks in the reduction of God,
while Lieutenant R. W.
Pearce, M.C.,
took command of A
Company and directed it right towards Lion-sur-Mer.
On this
beach the gapping teams had opened four exits at the end of
an hour, despite heavy casualties in men and tanks.
On Red Beach C Company of the South Lancs were engaging
tie active Cod, when the H.Q. and remaining companies of the
South Lancs landed almost on the strong-point.
B Company
vent in to help them, and Major Harrison,
their Commander,
was killed immediately.
So was Bell-Walker, who assumed
command and led an attack on a pillbox.
Battalion H.Q. moved
, towards the sand-dunes near an 88-mm. position,
and the
Battalion Commander, Lieutenant-Colonel R.
P. H. Burbury,
was killed by a sniper's bullet as he directed this assault.
The Red Beach gapping teams suffered crippling enemy fire,
lot most of their tanks and were nearly all reduced to clearance
Their first two exits became blocked by damaged
ands. They managed to open one gap with lateral communica-
tons alter an hour and a hall, and two more within the neat
quarter of an hour.
No mines were found on the beach itself,
trough the exits and strips behind the dunes and beside the
streets were thickly inlaid with them.
The obstacle-clearing teams fared worse.
Their work was
tore formidable even than they had expected; their first dis-
very was that every ramp-y tome stacie and a number of the
stakes, steel hedgehogs and concrete tetrahedra were armed with
a ellermine or Anti-Aircraft shell with push-igniter to operate
first craft that fouled them.
aggravated by the high tide and swell.
The situation was
By the time the un-
amoured element of the obstamounearing teams o ashore the
tavard ramps stood in six to eight feet of water and were about
to be submerged. Enemy small arms were still active and mortar-
fire was coming down.
Men on Red Beach were swimming in an
fort to remove the mines and shells, and a number were dis-
son ch baltaron, landed with its M.. and a section from brigade field amowance.
The light sections of the two Beach Group F.D.S.s set up
stations on cac beach, where id I passed 24 very harassing hours.
two Beach Dressing
