ASSAULT
DIVISION
to continue the advance next day, the
Brigade the South Lancs were to drive north-east to Schafterden
on the railway, a mile short of the Maas at Vierlingsbeek, whie
the Norfolks continued the 185 Brigade advance south astride the
Venraij road and the Lincolns crossed open ground in front of
the Ulster Rifles, and K.O.S.B.s to enter and clear the next stip,
the Laag Heide wood.
The South Lancs' account, austere as ever, is restricted to the
statement:
"The operation was effected by each Company
operating successively with limited objectives, and by 1800 hous
the ground was secured and 102 prisoners taken, C Company
being responsible for 83." That is all.
The same day Major
W. A. Waller,
M.C., assumed command of the battalion.
the picture of the Lincolns'
attack on the other flank is more
detailed. Burton had taken a patrol out at 4 a.m. to bring back
information about the dyke that ran across the middle of the
open stretch between the two woods,
but was brought back
himself badly wounded before he could get near the ditch.. So
at first light Major Smith took B Company forward without the
to deal with it.
they met the usual small-arms fre ana advance
As they reached the dyke German
Fire came crashing outtn, and in a few minutes the
had suffered such losses that Major Smith, who was under orders
not to become too heavily committed, gave the signal to withdraw
under cover of a smoke-screen :
a disastrous start to a days
Now a full battalion attack with a troop of Churchills and
a barrage Irom the Divisional Artillery was planned, and that.
afternoon the Lincolns advanced as the Ulster Rifles had dont
at Camoes, as o brigade did at the chateau: to a watcher it
was awe-inspiring.
as they approached the dyke close behind
their own barrage, down came the German mortar and shell
fire upon them,
They continued to advance.
this time perhaps more intense than
"Those who fell were left to the
arthuse whose job it was to look after them, and the lo
pressed on.
There was no cover only the soft sandy soil to
lessen the effect oi the murderous rain of shells." The Germans
who were waiting in the wood were unfortunate : some threw
down their arms and ran for their lives. They belonged to the
165
OVERLOON AND VENRAIJ
attain battle-group Kerutt.
The wood was soon cleared
corn to within a quarter of a mile of Kleindorp, a hamlet two
mis due west of Venraij, and just short of the Molen Beek.
simong the Lincolns' dead were Major Smith, and D Company
Commander, Major Dawson,
who was just back after having
been wounded near Cambes.
Their C.O., Colonel Firbank, had
gone in with the rest, firing his Sten, directing them, encouraging
lem wherever a cheery word was wanted. For his own courage
and devotion to duty he was awarded the D.S.O.
Between the 8 and g Brigade advances, the Norfolks advanced
hat day astride the Venraij road. From the start of their attack
d. am. they met stiff opposition that included artillery con-
citations observed from Venraij church steeple.
They were
uprised to find the road-bridge intact over the first dyke (the
same one that was proving so tatal to the Lincolns along to the
right. By last light Colonel Bellamy had managed to manœuvre
al four companies into a fairly compact formation
yaros short of the Molen Beek. After seven separate onslaughts by
Typhoons the troublesome Venray church at last started to
our, It was a day of unsettled weather, the clouds now dow
with drizzle, now breaking into a clear sky:
flying conditions
were bad, but improved.
During the day it became clear that
a separate operation was needed by another formation to clean
4P the area east to the Maas while the whole Division con-
centrated on Venraij. lIth Armoured Division, who had so far
a providing a hrm ditase for the Division, were to
-59 Brigade in the area of Schafferden on the 15th, 1 relieving the
South Lancs. That day the 3rd Division paused to draw breath
and prepare for the next day's battle :
their action was limited
The Typhoons were busy attacking ferries on the
Maas. And at Div. Headquarters the crossing of the beek and the
final assault on Venraij were being planned.
The Molen Beek was a much more formidable obstacle than
could be appreciated from a glance at the map.
It was a stream
Do more than 10 feet wide, but the banks were 4 feet high
sloping, so that the effective gap was about 25 feet.
In addition,
the approaches were almost impossible across low-lying
" It was in this Brigade's attack here on o T that Sergeant George Eardley of
the 4th K.S.L.I. won the V
