170
ASSAULT DIVISION
collected logs and faggots.
It must have been quite obvious to
the Germans what was going on, and they sent over shels to
add to the difficulties.
Late in the evening the Warwicks dis-
covered that St. Anna's Hospital was an asylum containing 1,700
incurable female lunatics.
The message from the F.O.O. with
the Warwicks was received over the air at the gun-position as
"two thousand bad women," and caused much speculation
amongst the Gunners.
Conditions in the hospital were pitil.
The A.D.M.S. (Colonel W. A. Robinson had just succeeded
Colonel R. D. Cameron, M.C.) and Civil Affairs immediately
organised relief.
That night's Div. Intelligence Summary reproduced a marked
map captured from
the Germans during the day,
three successive lines at which they apparently intended to stand
and stem the advance.
The first of these ran through Maashees,
on the river, south-westwards through the northern outskirts a
Venraij.
The Division was phostically up to it at all poma
they crossed it at all points during the day, the 17th, but progies
The only new enemy identification was 2nd Battalion
of Regiment Hardegg :
battalion had apparently been
rusned north from the Maeseyck front where the rest of we
Regiment were engaged. In the early hours, orders were given
out and the attack continued.
The K.S.L.I. had moved up
behind the Warwicks overnight, and daylight revealed the
battalion completely surrounded by a series of minefields. They
therefore delayed their attack until 8.30.
By the middle of the
morning, with a squadron of the 4th Tank Coldstream Guards,
wey had reached the V-shaped wood on the Warwicks' left. At
the start of their attack it looked as if the tanks would be heid
up by a minefield. Lieutenant Aldridge, the K.S.L.l. pioneer
othcer, walked anead of the tanks prodding for the mines, with
no cover from intense enemy shellfire,
gallantry."
For this he was awarded the M.C.
"showing the
By 10.30 the Suffolks had beerf held in the wood just beyond
Hiept and were under heavy rifle and machine-gun fire at cross-
tracks only five hundred yards west of the town.
At last their
Churchills got across the beek and joined up with them, loosening
up the battle. By midday the East Yorks, on the left of the Suffolks,
contrmed that they had one platoon in Venraij. At one o'clock
OVERLOON AND VENRAIJ
ie) reported two companies in, street-fighting, " with plenty of
Germans to deal with."
That afternoon Brigadier Cass ordered
he ufolks to face right and clear all the woods west of the town.
This they had achieved as far south as the new hospital in the
moods beside the main Merselo-Venraij
road at the end of
cother day's painful slogging. The South Lancs had moved up
chind the East Yorks and were ordered to enter the town at
tright. The K.S.L.I. had rapidly cleared the V-shaped wood
and with the Warwicks consolidated in Brabander.
Af 4o o'clock on the morning of the 18th, the seventh day of
tie operation, the Artillery opened up with two hours of Victor
arges for every gun within range) —a most impressive noise,
which heartened the tired Infantry.
At 6.45 the South Lancs
passed through the East Yorks into the north-west corner of the
There was heavy shelling, but as they advanced through
the main streets into the southern part they found that most of
the Germans had gone.
There were mines at all the approaches
and exits, and in the southern area the South Lancs overran and
«pured a 75-mm. gun while the Germans were still firing it.
The Warwicks, who at 2 a.m. had sent a patrol through
th-eastern quarter of the town into the Monastery of st.
ervatius and tound it clear or the enemy, came unus neary
machine-gun fire later in the morning as
they advanced to
occupy it; it was now quite a familiar trick of the Germans to
withdraw at night and infiltrate back into position just before
The monastery had a main block and a series of out-
buildings connected by glass corridors, and stood at the enemy
eage of the town on the road that led east into the villages of
Lul and Oostrum.
At midday the Warwicks were established
inside and in the grounds, whose far wall was for many days the
There was persistent and concentrated enemy shelling
and mortaring, crashing into the monastery, shattering
in all the corridors.
The monks behaved with fine self-control
conditions that soldiers,
tranquil life
consolidated by midday, and the Suffolks were completing the
clearance of the woods to the south-west.
so that Typhoons
weather improved
These last had with-
spend the afternoon strafing the Germans.
