I02
ASSAULT DIVISION
ness of the characters in this narrative. The 3rd Division were
holding this line in front of Caen between Cambes wood on the
right and the Canal on the left, till Caen fell on the gth July;
and then there was no relief.
Herminius and Spurius Lartius in the lay, were the 3rd Canadians
and the 6th Airborne (supported now by the 5ist (Highland)
Division), and together they faced the enemy's best tank divisions.
(The figures in
Montgomery's Despatch show an
enemy strength in the Caumont-Caen sector of 725 tanks and
64 infantry battalions at the end of June, against 140 tanks
and 63 Infantry battalions in the Caumont-Cotentin sector,
So far from budging during the next few weeks, they put in
limited attacks and gained ground from the Germans.
Entrenched, and nursing an aggressive resentment at having
been prevented in Caen, the men of the Division glowered across
the fields and got to know their bit of the line very well.
had brought the green countryside to full bloom despite the
German occupation, and much of it reminded them of their own
part of England.
You often heard the comment, " I still some-
times fancy it's just another exercise," and that was a tribute to
those
responsible
before the invasion:
Our line and the
enemy's were extraordinarily close.
the right 9 brigade held Cambes and the part of le Mesnil
wood that lay to the right of the main road. After the evacuation
of four old ladies by the Ulster Rifles on June I2th, Cambes
village was deserted.
Villages, peaceful by nature, try to preserve
a dignified neutrality as battle passes through the street, and after
they have been knocked about their ruins convey how deeply
they have been shocked.
Sometimes the shock is too much and
they die. And however unimaginative, most men are struck with
the strange spectacle of a village in decay, changed by a week as
by a century.
In his description of The Old Front Line, Masefield
sees the grass growing in the street of Hébuterne, the bells silent;
" The beasts are gone from the byre and the
church.
ghosts from the
cats of the village,
Stealing about among the ruins and the gardens are the
but are now too wild to come to him.
who have eaten too much man to fear him,
They creep about and eye
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF CAEN
103
nim from cover, looking like evil spirits." The horror grows
with the strain of static warfare, and a month is quite long enougn
to produce it. Near Cambes the cottages were too far gone to
provide shelter and the companies were dug into the gardens,
which yielded a welcome fresh vegetable supplement to the
Iwo houses in the village provided suitable
is and a third was established in the grenier of the white
From them it was possible to observe the whole system
of enemy entrenchments running round Cambes to Galmanche.
The avenue, running from the back of the chateau, straight into
la Bijude, was cut by a level-crossing, where our forward sections
were lying up, keeping a watchful eye on the German locality
200 yards farther down the avenue.
In this part the Germans
were never separated from our troops by more than 250 yards;
here and there it was 150.
If the enemy exposed himself it was soon found that he was
doing it to distract attention from his main positions, which
coud sometimes be spotted by the most careful observers where
folage, cut for camouflage,
had died, or where some new,
suspicious shape appeared.
But the only way to estimate the
strength of these positions was by patrols.
Listening-posts would
be put out each night in no-man's-land and patrols would roam
aoroad on reconnaissance. These would often be undertaken by
the same bands of men, usually volunteers, who became
and revelled in their exploits. But the strain told, and it was a
stake to depend aways upon u nour mer it was too much
to expect of them.
The Ulster Rifles relate how easily events on
patrol can take a wrong turies joned utenant furcell had patrolled
with a section to the outskirts of Galmanche village when an
they sentry was bumped who shouted " Halt." Purcell pressed
the trigger of his Sten.
either side of him attempted to fire.
It jammed. Simultaneously the man on
Both their Stens jammed.
now more ceremony they made one of the swiftest with-
drawals on record,
Boches."
"pursued by the shots and shouts of the
The Battle patrols of this battalion were trained and
perated by Major Charles Sweeny M.C., who later became
one of the Field-Marshal's team of Liaison Officers, and was
killed escorting a German admiral to Kiel—-the more tragically
in that the Germans had just signed the surrender.
