PROPERTY OF
BYERSON UHTLEASITY LARARY
238
ASSAULT DIVISION
square, but by 6 p.m. " things were fairly well under contro.
and a number of houses were burning merrily: the Battalion
was just about exhausted.
There had been no sleep for the
majority for two nights past, and it is a very tiring thing to keep
searching houses with Boche almost everywhere—and the type
that is not prepared to give in. If the momentum of the attack
could be kept up by passing a battalion through us the fate of
Lingen would be sealed." This is what happened. The Lincolns
came under command of 185 Brigade, and passed through the
Norfolks at 8 p.m. They found that street fighting in the dark
with no previous daylight reconnaissance was not a good pro-
position, and that as they edged their way forward they more
than once came under fire from houses they had already searched.
But when dawn came they could see what they were about, and
at 9 o'clock they were joined by a Squadron of the Staffs
comanry— old friends from the earliest days of the campaign"
ne-a do cade name-thone, machines that wi
Vorfolks had so much desired the afternoon before. The Lincolns
said: " We soon learnt that the Boches have no great liking
for flame, and it was a heartening sight to see them tumbling out
of the houses ' in bundles of ten'—to use
Quartermasters'
The effect of the Crocodiles must have been rather
like that of the Pied Piper five hundred and seventy years ago in
not-far-distant Hamelin :
" And ere three shrill notes the pipe uttered,
You heard as if an army muttered ;
And the muttering grew to a grumbling ;
And the grumbling grew to a mighty rumbling ;
And out of the houses the rats came tumbling • •
In ten minutes
making off.
there were ninety prisoners,
and the rest were
the operaton betweerlnee infantry anu we tam
crews was very enthusiastic, and by early afternoon the Lincolns
were not only on all their objectives,
Major Gilbert,
but C Company, under
had taken the road-junction, south-west of the
town, which the K.O.S.B.s were to have taken in the next phase!
day
launched
counter-attack
Warwicks area, with about twe nue nes of infantry supportea
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
by seven or eight S-P guns. This was the occasion of many brave
actions by men of the Warwicks.
Typical was the courage of
Private W. Gibbon, who stalked a German S-P gun supported
by German infantry and succeeded in putting it out of action
with his PIAT. He remained to snipe with his rifle at the crew
who tried to start up the S-P, killing one and wounding at least
Corporal T. Rowell found that the house he was
occupying had become the target for an S-P which had been
brought up to very close range.
Several of his Section were
buried under fallen mason,
He managed to release these men,
reorganise his position, and hold it until the attack was beaten
He was killed later, before he could receive the award of
the M.M. It is difficult to see how the whole affair came about,
but the fact remains that four of the S-Ps got into the town and
"started milling about in the back gardens of houses."
counter-attack was broken up with considerable loss to the enemy,
and all four S-Ps were taken.
9 Brigade were completely established in the southern part
of the town.
8 Brigade arrived somewhat out of breath from
some serious skirmishing in the neighbourhood of Nordhorn
which had chiefly concerned the South Lancs.
They took up
positions covering the northern and north-eastern approaches to
Lingen, leaving 185 Brigade to look after the sector between them
Colonel Pat Weston of the Middlesex took
personal command of his A (MG) Company and 12 (Mortar)
Platoon, some anti-tank guns and a Gunner F.O.O., and " Wes-
was responsible for the left flank between the river
and the canal.
Bob Moberly remarked that " Westonforce"
H.Q. " spread itself in a Schloss belonging to the brother of the
famous anti-Nazi in Germany,
Bishop von Galen of
The nodal point,
Lingen, was secure, and the advance was
The Guards and 43 Div. led out to the north-east and
The weather was warm again, and the countryside radiant
in spring sunshine.
The Ems looked peaceful enough, not unlike
a placid East Anglian river, the Suffolk Stour, or the Gipping.
But the bridges were broken and the roads were dusty with
On April 7th the 3rd Recce Regiment,
from their excursion to the Dortmund-Ems Canal farther south
