DIVISION
ammunition and could supply us with it no longer.
noon, for the first time since 1940, 25-pounders of the Division
shelled the enemy, and that evening the Commanding Oticer
of the 76th Field Regiment was ambushed and shot near St
Quentin les Chardonnets by the Germans while he was viting
the two forward battalions of 8 Brigade.
Mervyn Foster was a
very fine soldier and remarkably exacting commander, whose
contribution as an Artilleryman to the planning and succes of
the early stages of the assault was never properly recognised.
During the evening Colonel Hugh Merriman, commanding the
3rd Recce Regiment,
ordered a two-squadron advance on
linchebray and beyond, to begin next morning.
At last they made their long-anticipated break-through. Alter
preliminary trouble with mines, C Squadron on the right moved
quickly over the last mile or so into Tinchebray. At 9.30 the
N.C.O. in charge of the Suffolks' water-cart had arrived al
Battalion H.Q: " a little late but somewhat excited." It appears
that he had missed the track leading to Battalion H.Q. and had
gone straight on down the road, nearly to Tinchebray, and at no
enemy been encountered!
Quentin by the South Lancs with
An attack on
consequence called off.
armoured support was in
Instead the Suffolks sent Kenforce and
Perrettforce under Captain Mayhew and Lieutenant
Perrett to
search and clear the road and track running across the Divisional
They found only five very weanou ermans, whose boots
were worn through to their feet with marching.
Regiment were in Tinchebray ten minutes ahead of the
The 3rd Recce
U.S. 102
Mechanised Cavalry, their opposite numbers in U.S. and Infantry
Division.
(Colonel Merriman records in his regimental history
slat the commander of that Regiment « still owes us a Staghound
on this one !") In Tinchebray the river bridge was blown.
On
very exposed route,
the left, squadron lad yoressd Montsecret quickly but by a
and on reaching the bridge came
intense fire, their commander, Major Gaskell, being killed.
under
Overnight the East Yorks and South Lancs got across
the
river without opposition. At 8.30 a.m., 16th August, the Suffolks
hills,
set off up the Flers road, consolidating at La Rivière,
carrier platoon.
high in the
and sending Ken Mayhew on with three sections of his
Meanwhile, at 10 o'clock, G Squadron of 3rd
BREAKING OUT OF THE
BRIDGEHEAD
137
Recce Regiment started off along the
same route,
squadrons working swiftly forward on either flank. After investi-
gating the village of Landisacq and finding two German Mark IV
tanks ablaze with exploding ammunition at the bridge, Mayhew
decided to push on with one section of carriers into Flers, which
they entered with the leading Armoured Cars of C Squadron
night's Divisional Intelligence
Summary recorded :
shortly after midday: A rare honour has this day fallen to the
It has captured a town ahead of the B.B.G."
