pg_0001.pdf:
ments (Sec. 36), and
d his representatives.
ay, war duties will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
or sub unit will bey quest, thot out whethen or not, to the diady should be kept be ..i
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
in regard to weadons. eaupment. tactics.
organisation and inter-service
co-operation
which
may be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
A war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.-It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii)
Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(lii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
/ of mobilisation or
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
abordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
Appendices will be
nubered, and each will nave a drier descriptive neading naming the author.
References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(iv) Copies or important and relevant aemi-official letters by commanders of formations,
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H.Q
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached.
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c G.H.O. 2nd Echelon for
transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office
The duplicate copies of
he diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the officer i/c
nd Echelon to be transmitted to record
s offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.-The time entered should be the time the information or order
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if kn
Instructions rogarding War Dianes and Intel Volt:
Monthly
Diaries
enclosed in
covel
Sheet 1.
WAR DIARY
reparea lu manuscriou
Month and Year.
Place
Date
31
May44
JUNE
Hour
INTErAGENCEZSUMMARY.
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
'C' pin. Group (36Vehs + 98 Personnel) under Command of
Capt. Forman and It. Neighbour leave Concentration Area
PETWORTH & arrive Marshalling Area, Camp 4 Portsmouth.
Jun011
'C' Pln. Group embark at GOSPORT on ISTS 382, 383, 385.
13 Vehs + 32 Personnel 'B'Pln under Lt. G. R. Glenny.
loft Concentration Area PETWORTH and arrive Marshalling
Area.
'A' Pln.GD• (36Vehs + 96 Personnel) under Capt. KS. Duffus
& It.JT. Hardwicke and Balance of 'B'Pin. @p• (23Vchs +
61 Personnel) under Command Capt. DI. Robertson & Capt. Allison
left Concentration Area PEIWORTH
and arrived Marshalling ARea
Portsmouth.
"o'pin. tpo
still lying up on ISIS OfF PORTSMOUT.
'c'Pin. Cp.briefed at sea. LSIs set Sail 2100 Irs.
Army Form C. 2118
Unit 90 Coy • RASC (Arnd. Bde. -Assault)
Commanding Officer Major J.R. Cuthbertson, RASC
References to Appendices
•WAR DIARIES SECTION
INO....
8 - JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
*6391, Wt.48123/1073. 3193, 2/43. Wy.L.P. Gp.656.

