Water inlet and outlets are shown of fixed sizes in fixed positions.
outlets are shown so as to allow of connection being made on either side of
engine as may be required.
The remaining outlet is to be covered with a blank
The areas of the water passages in these have been made large enough for
thermo-syphon circulation, and arrangements have been made for a flange joint
to be made at these places.
The important dimensions in the drawing mentioned above are :—
Height of trunnion above frame.
Diameter of trunnion.
Distance between centre of trunnion and bonnet support.
Centre of inlets and outlets.
Diameter of outlets.
Fan to be fitted of sufficient capacity to prevent water from boiling during
any of the trials of type vehicles.
Radiators to be of the simplest possible form to allow of easy repairs, and
to be of the vertical straight gilled tube type.
Honeycomb radiators will not be
A draincock with not less than & in. bore to be fitted to the lowest
point of the water circulating system which must be so designed that it can thus
Provision to be made to stiffen the frame to prevent the radiator from being
subject to stresses due to the racking of the frame.
Radiator to be protected from possible injury in case of collision by a stout
bar or tube placed in front and across the centre.
See Drawing No. 101c.
12. Bonnet.—Bonnet to rest on angle or channel steel supports independent
of the radiator.
13. Fuel Supply and Petrol Tanks.—Vide Drawing No. 110c. Vehicles of
both classes to be fitted with 30-gallon tanks.
Gravity feed supplemented if
necessary by hand pressure pump on the steering column to be employed.
Position of hand pump (if used) is shown on Print No. 103g.
of one of following materials :—
Copper or brass brazed or properly riveted and soldered.
Lead coated steel.
Galvanized welded steel.
General arrangement of tank shown in Drawing No. 110e.
Petrol gauge of
approved type to be provided, also gauze filter in filling hole, and means for
cleaning out tank.
The following are standardized :—
Sizes of plugs.
Size of filling cap.
Filter.
Position and size of inlet and outlet.
Diameter and length of tank.
The object being to make the tanks interchangeable although some small
variations may be permitted in the non-essential details.
Easily accessible filters to be provided in the supply system.
Wo27 1/2
14. Lubrication and Oil Tanks. -Oil tanks to be of sufficient capacity to last
for a run of 200 miles with the vehicles fully loaded.
Lubricators for engine
and gearbox to be of such a type that they will work efficiently with the War
Department oil which will be issued on mobilization.
The specification of this oil is given in a separate appendix.
15. Grease Cups.—The following sizes of grease cups only to be used :—
Rotherham's
catalogue.
Diameter across
across body of
cup in inches.
Diameter of
threads of cup.
No. of threads
Thread of
shank.
NũI
EE
gas
All cups to be threaded 16 threads per inch (British Standard Automobile
thread), and to be fitted with spring catch on cups and tee head or other device
to enable them to be turned easily.
(Messrs. Rotherham will manufacture these
at the prices quoted in their catalogue for their existing standards.) Means of
lubrication, preferably grease cups, to be fitted to spring shackel pins.
16. Change Speed Gears.—Both classes of vehicles are to be fitted with
four speeds forward and one reverse.
Gate change to be employed preferably
of the type in which the lever is pivoted at the lower end.
The arrangement of
the gate is as shown in the Drawing No. 103g.
Engines are to be provided with governors, which shall be so arranged that
it shall not be possible to drive the vehicles of Class " A" at a greater speed
than 16 miles per hour, and those of Class " B" at a greater speed than 20 miles
per hour, even with the engine accelerated to its utmost extent.
The ratio between top and bottom gears in both classes is to be about 5 : 1,
giving bottom speeds of about 37 and 4 miles per hour respectively.
Reverse
speed is not to be appreciably higher than bottom speed. All vehicles to be
capable of ascending a gradient of 1 in 6 on the road fully loaded.
Vehicles to
be reasonably quiet on all their gears.
17. Hind Axle.—The final transmission of power to the road wheels is to be
by means of a live axle in which a bevel drive of approved design should be
employed.
Chain drive to hind axle will not be permitted.
As the standardization of hind wheels will entail difficulties in the standardiza-
tion of brake drums and other parts, the only parts which are standardized are
axle arms and bushes, which are to be the same in both classes of vehicle.
Axle arms are to be 32 in. in diameter and of the type in which the wheel
runs on the axle and in which the driving shaft does not carry any weight.
Floating bushes of bearing bronze are to be used, & in. thick and 75 in. long,
vide Drawing No. 100c.
23
