WO27 7/2
CHAPTER IX
THE DEMANDS OF WAR
Section 1.—The Position at the Beginning of the War
The machinery of the impressment scheme on the whole worked well at the
outbreak of war, in spite of the fact that it had been originally designed to
acquire a considerably smaller number of vehicles for a smaller force than was
ultimately formed.
The quality of the vehicles obtained was not as satisfactory.
The comparatively modest requirement on which the scheme was based had
enabled the Chief Inspector of Supplementary Transport (C.I.S.T.), whose
responsibility it was, under D.S.T., to select his vehicles with considerable care
from a small number of makes, and to insist on high mechanical efficiency.
He was thus in theory able to look forward in an emergency to the arrival of a
homogeneous mass of impressed transport, of good quality from commercial
standards, the maintenance and spares supply of which would be reasonably
simple as the result of the small number of makes and types selected.
The
situation which in fact presented itself was not so reassuring.
The increase in
the number of vehicles required of necessity led to a lowering of the mechanical
standard for acceptance and to the inclusion of many additional makes.
A considerable proportion of the additional vehicles were of the mass-produced
type, in which hard wearing qualities were inevitably sacrificed in some degree
to cheapness of manufacture.!
The numbers of different makes, and types
within each make, which had perforce to be accepted were so great that problems
of repair and provision of spare parts reached appalling and unmanageable
proportions.
Spare part supply was in fact totally inadequate even during the
inactive period before the German offensive,? and during the short-lived first
European campaign was a source of far greater weakness than vehicle quality
and design.
For during that period the good road and rail communications of
France, assisted by abnormally dry weather, seemed to justify the arguments
of the school of thought which considered commercial vehicles " good enough".
The change of scene to the Western Desert put an end to such complacency and
made abundantly clear how wishful was the thinking which denied the necessity
for specially designed military vehicles for military purposes, and how much
was owed to those who had secured at least that sound design and production
were kept in existence.
appear excessive,
especial as critic parof the antinen aspend bed elise way roper sic,
May, ) Paper prepared by D.D.W.S.(C) for Q.M.G. on Standardization of "B" Vehicles,
