In retrospect, however, these criticisms, formidable as they were, lose some
of their force.
They were made in the stress of war, and in fact troops did
receive their vehicles and the General Staff its information, but there remains a
small but hard core of truth. In point of fact the organization was not ideal,
it was admitted even by those who operated it to be a makeshift, and the
sometimes unsatisfied demands upon it by the General Staff were regarded as
reasonable, in spite of the widely accepted view that the General Staff thrived
on making impossible and unnecessary demands from other departments of the
War Office.
It is not within the scope of this book to do more than express
statements of fact and of opinion current at the time.
The reader must judge
for himself to what extent the system evolved was straitened by circumstance
and to what extent improvement could have been effected.
Section 5.—Spares
References have been frequently made in preceding chapters to the great
difficulties experienced in the provision of vehicle spares.
In Chapter Il some
indications of British problems were given, together with a suggestion that a
partial cause for shortages of spares might be psychological. Earlier in this
chapter it was pointed out that the question was international and was bound
up with the general question of standardization.
It was in fact the thorny
problem of spares maintenance for the large number of non-standard U.S.
vehicles employed by the British Commonwealth in the early stages of the war
largely responsible for investigation into the possibilities of
The spares problem was not merely a matter of keeping operational vehicles
in working order, difficult and important as this obvious aspect was.
shipping space was also a vital factor, as is illustrated by the fact that the
Combined Shipping Adjustment Board in mid-1942 addressed a memorandum
to the Combined Chiefs of Staff expressing the wish that greater efforts should
be made to maintain vehicles overseas by the shipment of spares in order to
conserve space used in the shipment of new vehicles.
As a result of this
memorandum the Munitions Assignments
Board (W) recommended that
spares for standard and non-standard vehicles of U.S.
origin should be
manufactured and exported to reduce to a minimum immobilized vehicles in
theatres of war. There was a division of opinion between the United States
and British representatives of the Combined Chiefs of Staff on the interpretation
of this recommendation in its effect on non-standard vehicles.
States considered that production of spares for non-standard types should be
accomplished only to such an extent as did not interfere with the production of
standard types of vehicles and spare parts.
The British view was that any
drastic reduction in the shipment of spares for non-standard vehicles would
result in the immobilization of perhaps 100,000 vehicles in all parts of the
which were performing a most useful service, and in addition would
necessitate the use of additional shipping space to replace immobilized vehices
(1) See Appendices C, D and E to this chapter.
WO 277/21
A compromise recommended by the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, was
accepted, and was reasonably equitable, although it was not unnaturally more
favourable to the United States as producers than to the British as recipients.
The agreement reached was that' :—
(a) No spare parts would be supplied for vehicles manufactured earlier
(b) Spare parts would be restricted to those of a high mortality type and
functionally essential to the operation of vehicles.
(c) Requisitions submitted by the United Nations would include spare
parts for one year's maintenance.?
(d) Requisitions would show the total number of serviceable and obsolete
vehicles in all theatres by type, model and year in the possession of the
nation submitting the requisition.
(e) Requisitions would be reviewed by the International Supply Committee.
Spare parts approved for procurement would be obtained only from
existing stock or existing manufacturer's facilities, and their provision
would not be allowed to interfere with the current programme for
standard vehicles and their corresponding spare parts.
(f) Material would be made available to manufacturers of non-standard
spare parts in minimum necessary quantities and in priority equal to
that assigned for production of standard vehicles and parts.
The word " standard" as used in this agreement might appear to imply
that standardization in the United States was in a very advanced state. In fact
the word was used to connote all types of vehicle for which the U.S. War
Department was placing contracts for its own use.
As in effect the United States was alone among the United Nations in
producing equipment on a scale greater than its own needs, American problems
can be regarded as representing international problems in general in the first
years of the war. The maintenance of non-standard vehicles was, of course, a
decreasing liability, and the provision of spares for U.S. vehicles ultimately
became a problem of bulk and of methods of storage and distribution rather
United States provision of spares, at least
in comparison with British experience, became a matter of routine, in so far as
the organization of such a gigantic undertaking could ever be regarded as
British problems, although on a more limited scale, were more acute, being
aggravated by the employment of a vast number of different makes and types
The general policy? behind the maintenance of transport was that
essential civil transport was as important to the war effort as military transport.
Priorities were abandoned, and bulk allocations of materials were made to
manufacturers for the production of spares for all purposes, quantities being
based on previous consumption. A distinction was, however, made in the scale
of spares for different categories of vehicle. For military vehicles, including
the Navy, Army and Air Force, the aim was to build up buffer stocks of
spares up to 12 months' supply. For civil vehicles, which included those of all
civil government departments such as the National Fire Service, the Post Office,
(*) Letter from Combined Chiefs of Staff to C.P.R.B., 17 Oct., 1942.
(3) This period was extended to two years on review in Apr., 1943.
(*) Paper by Ministry of Supply for C.P.R.B. Truck Committee, 20 Nov., 1942.
(C31438,
