mobilization' in the weeks before the Munich Conference. The problem of
allocation of hired vehicles was never
satisfactorily solved with regard to the
Army's requirements.
The organization for impressment of vehicles for the Army was, on the other
hand, regarded as satisfactory, and a reasonable inference to draw is that it was
owing to the fact that the War Office was in complete control of the scheme
without reference to other departments.? It is true that there were instances of
the hiring of vehicles already noted for impressment by the War Office, but the
degree to which this took place was only sufficient to cause irritation rather
than confusion.
The Mobilization Report for 1938 stated that the numbers
of vehicles noted as obtainable from commercial sources by impressment were
sufficient, and in July, 1939, the same was generally true.
Some doubt was
expressed as to the possibility of obtaining in time some 500 vehicles for units
moving on Z + 6 day, but no difficulty was expected in providing vehicles for
units required to move after Z + 6 day.
The problem was therefore caused by
the machinery of impressment which did not begin to turn until Z + 1 day,
rather than by the quantity of vehicles available, and was solved by purchase
before mobilization.
The reasons for the shortage of British-built load carrying vehicles throughout
the war can be shown to have their origin in the re-armament planning for 1937,
in which year a detailed report on the vehicle requirements of the three Services
and of India and on the allocation of industrial capacity to meet them was made
to the Committee of Imperial Defence by Supply Committee No. VI. The
estimate of requirements was based on the assumption that the Western Plan
would be
adopted, and the quantities
of vehicles considered necessary for
the first year of emergency were :-
(a) 3-ton 6-wheelers
(b) 3-ton 4-wheelers
30-cwt. 6-wheelers
(d) 30-cwt. 4-wheelers
(e) Trucks and vans
13.956
10.955
14.416
10,451
11,797
Total
61,575
The distribution of this total was :-
War Office
54,128
Air Ministry
6.6844
Admiralty
India
300
463
S. of 3. Yo Misfor of Piano an out Defence siVe
were in fact mobilized. (Letter from
that hired Vehicles could be replaced, a Treasury
57 Vehs/6238.)
, 1940, a be to Wad, l Tre with sortion restricted the use of sis poniso
to the Ministry of Transport acting on behalf of the War Office.
This was intended to ensure
tha dearsental tranch strice should be dislocated by the isolated action of any one service
(3) 57/Vehs/6206, 6 Sept., 1937. \
*) As a result of this report, the total output of Crossley vehicles, except for sufficient to
Were try, cogether With 60 per cent, of the output of Albion Motors.:
existing War Office vehicles of this make, was allocated to the Air
nt. of the output of Albion Motors.
The remaining factories
Dennis.
Thornycroft.
Morris-Commercial.
12
WO 27 7/26
The Committee came to the conclusion that existing manufacturing capacity
for vehicle production was more than adequate to meet these requirements with
the exception of 6-wheelers, of which there were estimated to be prospective
War Office and Air Ministry deficiencies of 1,006 and 846 respectively. It will
be remembered that this type of vehicle, in spite of a subsidy, had no attractions
for the transport trade, and that peace-time military purchases were insufficient
to create enough potential manufacturing capacity for war-time.
It was recom-
mended that the War Office and Air Ministry should consider whether these
deficiencies could be met by impressment, adjustment of types or the purchase
of reserve stocks.
The War Office, however, anticipated that the substitution'
of the Middle East appreciation for the Western Plan would involve reductions
in army requirements in 1938 : the situation was therefore thought to be con-
siderably less serious than the report suggested, and no action was taken until
the spring of 1939, when a real expansion in the size of the Army was authorized.
The result was that what appeared to be surplus manufacturing capacity was
surrendered to the production of other munitions-notably aircraft.
It is
difficult to understand how this came to pass as when the implications of the
Middle East appreciation were fully analysed, increases in vehicle reserves were,
in fact, found to be necessary.
Never in the course of the war was it possible to
recover for vehicle production the factories which had been discarded upon such
false assumptions.
Hence the utter dependence of this country upon North
American production during the war.
A clear indication of the mental attitude towards transport in those critical
years is given by the fact that two of the three largest producers-Austin and
Ford-were not required for production of load-carrying vehicles for the
rearmament programme, and it was not until 1939 that the production capacity
Vauxhall Motors were, however, included, and
the pre-war planning did provide some degree of standardization owing to the
fact that this firm was to produce the bulk of 3-ton and 30-cwt. 4-wheeled
vehicles, and Morris-Commercial Cars was to provide all 30-cwt. 6-wheelers
of 15-cwt. trucks.
Standardization by makes was, however,
necessarily abandoned in 1939 when the increase in types and quantities required
made it essential to accept the output of every available manufacturer not already
engaged on production of more vital equipment. An illustration of the serious
nature of vehicle shortages is afforded by the necessity for negotiations with the
General Motors Corporation at the time of the Munich crisis in 1938.
significant that credit for opening discussion must be given to civilian enterprise,
but the War Office was not slow in seizing opportunity.
of the General Motors Corporation visited the War Office to discuss British
vehicle requirements in the event of war.
As the result, with War Office
approval, the General Motors representative telephoned on the same night to
every G.M.C. establishment throughout the world instructing them to " freeze"
all load-carrying vehicles, with the option of giving the United Kingdom the
first option of purchase if required. On the following morning the War Office
was presented with a written statement of the numbers and locations of vehicles
(*) See Part I, Chapter I.
(3) Encl. SA 57/Vehs/6205, 4 Feb., 1938. *
