owner prior to the signing hereof, and the owner agrees to indemnify the
War Department against all claims which may at any time be made against the
War Department by any person or persons claiming any interest in any vehicle
enrolled under this Agreement.
21. Payment to Owner.—In the event of purchase being effected by the
War Department under this Agreement payment shall be made to the owner
signatory to this Agreement, and it shall be obligatory upon the owner and not
Department to adjust such amounts as may be due to other
parties claiming an interest in the ownership of the vehicle.
APPENDIX D
ABRIDGED SPECIFICATION OF THE WAR OFFICE 30-CWT.
4 × 2 VEHICLE, 1923
Note.—Diagrams, Appendices, Schedule, etc., referred to in this Specification
are not reproduced in this Historical Monograph
Four-cylinder, vertical engine, minimum bore 100 mm., minimum R.A.C.
rating h.p. 24•8, capable of maintaining a b.h.p. not less than R.A.C. rating for
three hours' run at a speed equivalent to 22 m.p.h. Inlet and exhaust valves
mechanically operated.
Valve stems enclosed in removable dustproof covers.
It is desirable that valves or parts of same cannot enter the cylinder if fracture
If gudgeon pins work loose they must not score cylinder walls.
Provision to be made for dropping the lower half of the crankcase without
disturbing the main bearings.
If crankshaft runs on ball bearings, this stipula-
Means of adjustment to be provided for timing chains.
Test plugs to indicate high and low oil levels and a plunger type of lubrication
indicator are required, the latter to be fitted to the dash so that the driver may
The oil filter must be accessible, large and efficient, and its
withdrawal should not involve the loss of the main body of oil.
The engine must be in a bonnet, which must be entirely removable and must
rest on angle steel or similar supports independent of the radiator.
must not be under the driver's seat, and the exhaust pipe should, so far as
possible, pass outside the undershield.
High tension magneto ignition of approved type. If automatic advance is
fitted, complete control should be provided for connecting it up to contact
breaker of standard magneto, in case the latter should have to be fitted as a
It is desired that magneto should be as standardized in the
British Engineering Standards Association's Report No. 80, dated 1917 ; if not,
it must be interchangeable with standard.
Couplings should also be as laid
down; if not, provision must be made for fitting a standard coupling.
ignition timing must be clearly marked on the flywheel to a fixed pointer with
The starting handle should preferably be carried on an extension of the
crankcase; folding or detachable types are not desirable.
The handle should
be kept vertical when not in use, and renewable dogs must be fitted to both
crankshaft and handle spindle.
consumption desirable.
Maximum petrol consumption, one gallon per 40 gross ton-miles; lower
WO27 7/2
28
The engine must be efficiently cooled under all conditions, or must be
capable of simple modification to enable it to function effectively in tropical
climates.
A pump is essential, but if it fails circulation must continue.
temperature of the cooling water must not exceed 100 degrees above that of the
atmosphere.
Provision should be made for fitting a radiator cover of the apron
type for use in cold climates.
Adequate draining of all parts must be arranged for, preferably by one
accessible cock not less than 1 in. bore.
This cock must be so fitted as to prevent
accidental opening. Provision must be made for cleaning the cylinder water
jackets and passages.
An undershield held by spring clips, extending as far
back as the gear-box and provided with drain holes, must be fitted.
The radiator is to be so supported that it will not be damaged by frame
It must be of the vertical gilled-tube type, and must allow for
easy repairing and cleaning.
The minimum bore of the tubes to be ⅖ in. Filler
cap opening at least 2% in. diameter with hinged cap, secured by screw fitting
Overflow pipe, minimum bore 7 in. Radiator protected
by collision bar or tube at least 1} in. diameter, placed in front and across centre
Fan, large diameter, placed close to radiator,
preferably driven by flat belt. Drive to be readily accessible for repair and
Petrol tank, minimum capacity 15 gallons.
Adequate supply must be
ensured to engine on all gradients up to and including 1 in 42 and any
A gravity feed with two-way cock for retaining 22 gallons is
Supply cock to the carburetter to be operated from outside frame.
If pressure system is used, auxiliary gravity tank to hold at least 2½ gallons must
In this case a cock is to be fitted on the main petrol tank and an
approved pressure gauge provided.
The vehicle should travel 200 miles fully loaded on its tank capacity and
spare supply, the latter to be contained in two or more 2-gallon tins carried in
special racks provided as part of the body equipment.
of the following materials :—Welded steel, galvanised after making; copper or
brass, brazed and riveted and stayed at soldered joints ; sheet steel tinned, if
approved type and adequate removable gauze filter in filler hole are necessary.
Petrol tank filler to be outside frame, and means provided for cleaning tank.
Filler orifice, minimum diameter 2 in., cap of hinged type tightened by screw
Accessible filter of approved type to be provided in supply
Petrol must not leak on to exhaust pipe.
Clutch
Plain cone or single disc type, with satisfactory means of lubrication to clutch
spigot and withdrawal collar or thrust bearing; to be of ample capacity and
designed to facilitate gear changing, ample wearing surfaces, accessible means of
adjustment and efficient clutch stop must be provided.
35
