Section 2.—Partially Tracked Vehicles
It has been recorded in Chapter VIII that some attention was paid to the
development of partially tracked vehicles in the inter-war years, and that the
project was not very seriously pursued.
The reasons for rejecting this design
are not clear; that the matter was given consideration at all was to a large
extent the work carried out by the German Army.
It is quite certain that
renewed British interest during the 1939-45 war was caused by the exceptionally
good performance of these German vehicles, and as British development con-
sisted almost entirely of copying German design, a short description of their
origin is required.!
German semi-tracked vehicles had their origin in trials which were carried
out in 1926 with a view to selecting the best type of vehicle for use as an artillery
tractor.
The first members of the range were originally termed the light, medium
and heavy cross-country tractors and were later re-named, from their trailed
load ratings, the 5-, 8- and 12-ton tractors.
A, prototype of the medium tractor
had been completed by 1932.
The early models of all types were characterized
by a rather short tracked portion, having four bogie wheels a side with leaf
spring suspension.
In later models five or six bogie wheels were employed and
suspension was by individual torsion bars carrying cranked carrier arms.
In
1934-35 two lighter series, 3-ton and 1-ton, were developed with torsion bar
suspension.
Armoured vehicles based on the 3-ton tractor and a shortened
1-ton chassis were very largely used during the war as armoured personnel
carriers, reconnaissance vehicles and self-propelled gun mountings.
The next
development was the 18-ton tractor, prototypes of which appeared in 1938 and
1939.
These were used as artillery tractors, heavy recovery vehicles and for
mounting mobile cranes.
Development in all these types had reached a satisfactory stage by the end
of 1939, the models then in production being manufactured throughout the war
with only minor modifications, except in the case of the 5-ton tractor which
was superseded at the end of 1943, at Hitler's instructions, by the Heavy Military
"ractor.
With the exception of this latter vehicle and the light tractor, which
had all-steel dry-pin tracks, all German vehicles of this kind used a track with
detachable rubber track pads and sealed lubricated needle roller bearings for
the track-pins, a design which ensured low rolling resistance, extremely long
track life and constant pitch.
Front wheel steering followed conventional
interest in view of British developments.
practice and was co-ordinated with track steering; these two features are of
The first war-time expression of General Staff policy with regard to this type
of vehicle mae contine in a nader prenared bu Aries for the Weapon
f Military Intelligence, the War Office
2) Recard of German Army Baninment 1920_Ae Value TV. compiled bu the Direct
92
WO27
78
9
for new heavy and light artillery tractors.
Development Committee in March, 1943, in which he discussed the necessity
At that time the Scammell tractor
was employed for towing heavy artillery, and either the A.E.C. Or the American
S.U.2 for medium and heavy A.A. artillery.
Both the British vehicles were over-
loaded, under-powered and had a poor cross-country performance.
therefore proposed to produce a three-quarter-tracked vehicle on the lines of
the German Krauss-Maffei tractor for all these types of artillery, carrying their
stores and ammunition and a crew of 13.
A prototype was then being con-
structed by Morris-Commercial Cars, Ltd., but very little progress had been
made, and no decision had been reached regarding the firms which would
ultimately go into production.
There was no satisfactory towing vehicle in existence for the 17-pr. The
Field Artillery Tractor used for the 25-pr. was barely satisfactory, and, since
the decision to carry more rounds with the gun, which necessitated the use of
a limber,
it was overloaded.
The Light Artillery Tractor was satisfactory
mechanically but possessed too high a silhouette.?
These vehicles were just
good enough and no more, and to improve the situation it was proposed to
introduce a three-quarter-tracked light artillery tractor, also on German lines,
to tow these equipments.
It was designed to carry stores, ammunition and a
crew of nine, and was to be adaptable for towing the 6-pr.
It consisted of a
Matador chassis, the rear axle of which was replaced by part of the suspension
used in the Valentine tank.
A prototype was in process of construction by
A.E.C., Ltd., and was then at the same stage as its heavier counterpart.
Neither of these prototypes proved to be entirely satisfactory, and work on
both was stopped.
The War Office requirement of a speed of 25 mih. had
proved impossible to attain, and it was found that there was too wide a divergence
between the demands made upon tractors for medium and for heavy artillery to
permit one vehicle to fulfil both roles.
Medium artillery equipments required
comparatively high speed and high cross-country performance, whereas heavy
artillery called for slower speeds, greatly increased loads, and a lower standard
of cross-country performance.
It was therefore decided that for the immediate
future, wheeled tractors must suffice for heavy artillery.
Further work on the
light tractor, intended primarily for
the
25-pr., was entrusted to Vauxhall
Motors, Ltd., who were provided with captured German vehiclest from which
to make as exact a copy as possible.
The only major point of dissimilarity from
the German vehicles of the prototypes ultimately produced lay in the engine,
a twin 6-cylinder Bedford.
A number of unnecessary delays was caused by the inability of A.F. H.Q. to
carry out War Office instructions to send essential components of German
vehicles to England by air and by the despatch of a machine by sea which
proved on arrival to be of the wrong type.
When these mistakes had been
rectified Vauxhall Motors adopted a somewhat obstructive if understandable
attitude by showing unwillingness to begin work until they were assured of a
(*) W.D.C./P(43)21, 18 Mar., 1943.
(e) The S.U. was no longer in production.
‹(P) D.R.A. 10th Meeting: W.D.C., 18 Mar., 1943
(*) Z-GKW 3 and Z-GKW 5.
93
