44628072
WO 171/2114
•13:17)
OTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
PARA. 1.-A war any wu
cate from the first day of mobilisation or
uticular command or appointment by :-
toff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
ten and the number of other tank to liven an of ani, is should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(111) Commanuets vx
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
i) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
TE A. —In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
the first day of embodiment.
B. —See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras, 2, 4 and 8.
NoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
The War Olice, Lordern, S, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
i, or Re onto should be entrod up, not in the order i iven hove ht bt tho time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A cope of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A F. W.3009) and of each operation o
e order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
( chant deport on prating dam up by a subordinate formlion
will entered up dil hach entry actiol a ty tie of of detailed to, hep it, on
trom a ar diary is an offence under the Oficial Secrets Actretention of appendices, maps, étc.,
or other pe it should he a delet, hat the ofer a initio the entries is the commander
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
) Important osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(1) Date cation in Me cements dimits oat tver
(il) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(Se PA. Vol ines will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
the spEciAl, No The the time catered should be the time the formation oror ar roche
37-17- 16005
S7-17
ROOTEN
a180
