4627962
WO 171/421
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
PARA. -1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
() Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
Fact hour of important occur poss, factor a Feting
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied
iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(vi) Charge in establishmen of oster ith,
As regards casualties the names and ranks
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
i ce ind the number of it on the or lowers and st as, tras sport d be noted
(vil) Meteorological notes
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NorE A. -In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
1 or events should be entered up, not in the order siven bov hit te he dine they
NOTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
® A dia tid rate , an an a sed by tie come entire of
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
one no to de a per is to ate die i po trian i tries record operatin,
data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
(iii) A copy of each narrative
Sie or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
ding naming the author. Reference
Appendices unt of
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations
indy ding any which day have been marked "personal" (provided the wol fo oations
(See SA. Vol aries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
NOTE.-It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows:
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(1) Imp daist osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(1) The pite copy, dear on ted ang
the Spend NoT The or entered should a the time the taformation or order con
Month and Year JUNE 1944
Date
Bol
WAR DIARY
INTELRICENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required)
Summary of Events and Information
Sailed for French coast 1730 hrs.
Accompanied by It M E Goodson
(Div Ord Fd Fk) and with one car.
For pre-landing notes see
Appendix "A"
(D + 1)
Arrived off Ouistrehan but not called forward for landing; delay
appears to have been caused by lack of facilities (e.g. rhino
ferries) for discharging,
and reluctance to beach craft.
(D + 2)
Landed 1125 hrs and immediately visited Sector Stores Dump.
Functioning well.
Two of the four special lorries already landed
and units awaiting issues. Issues controlled by DAA & QIG and
proving invaluable in meeting urgent requirements until IRs.
ready for issue. Brens, Mortars and Wireless Sets particularly
in demand, mostly to replace losses on the beach.
Only small
scale spasmodic air raids with no shelling of the beaches. A few
planes flying low managed to get in at about 1215 and scored a
direct hit
in No. 3 Sector Stores Dump, where a quantity of
M3524/1218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co. Ltd. 51-1541)
Army Form C.18.
ADOS 3 BR INF DIV
Commanding Officer LT COL R.V. BLUNDEOS.
References to Appendices
Pre-Landing Notes
Appendix "д"
WAR DIARIES SECTION
17 JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
he party
small
$ borrowed
rOm
cores
ling
scaled
id before
]lowed
stailed
D + 5
