sept trom the mist uay ve vu
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
PARA 3. A a day is She Ise ofer in poemie a his trial record, pipation,
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
pratint popographical and climatic.
mate or iportant our pose as of rooting
rdinate command
(v) Nature and descripfion of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(v) Change in the biben of often rank, or tood ana dies the na ho and not of
In addition in the case of units on the I. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
Occur, or. to to thou be entered up, not in theories given hi might be the time they
his representatives.
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or other pete mento be ide cleat, hot the fier he is to the in ties is the commander
PARA. 3.-0 mitted.
prepain aTy so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
() Impotent osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i at alien te cent ie n the ot torenty ou hour and resent dispositions.,
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(See P.., Vol dinies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows:—
SPECIAL NOTE.
the unit concerned.
"i Tie or mered told he the time the ten in mered roches
Month and Year. Qug HU
Hour
FRANCE
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
2 Shur Amy Fom C.
118.
Unit 2x - 6 Autone De. Ord. Fa.
Commanding Officer H/ous capt
References to Appendices
при спр.
21/ 0g8 cap
21/03 0gо
hocking la esport
вод 1 грн
Saling actin taker are list of sta (part oreg) harder A
PoS to arena tarmiser 1 3.0.05.
I carp she come fong.
My demands reno for atre dealt enth deng mone
Regal heretal Be joiner De. To ta supplia by ela det
WAR DIARIES
1G.H.Q. 2nd ECHELON
21) осі
21/40 cat
10
N135241218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co.Lta. 51-1541)
dons
ments in your Bulk Oi
you have requested,
ore of your doc
ents
- Enquire ai
re documents are in use
Desk for full details
