NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors aff
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troo
important phases.
ordinate command
(v) Nature and descripfion of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupiec
(v) Chants in chablishen of stre rah,
of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
1) PEte to should be entered up, ach a the order as aven thi me ht he chi tim they
and (vil) might be added.
his representatives.
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
or oner pete heni he made cer that the oficer who inito the in ries is thor
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
prepaRing a aTy so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(*) Ind decist orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches reccived and issued,
(1) patheties Necement durin the at treaty for hour and present dispositions.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(See PIS., A diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. T.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
SPECIAL NOTE -
the siA. No. The The in need should to the in he stret not ode raches
and tor
Month and Year..,
Чете 1 944
ORIGINAL.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form G. 211
Unit Det - l aubre Dis Ord
Commanding Offer. Mess ept.
References to Appendices
(Det 2)
5-20 anolites in Ceos Poace unte 2180 des oler
1/ 253 g
Carly at cradles a de comes fae/
WAR DIARIES SECTION
- JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Landey, almat deched, artifact to colle
Bedo NAN - STAR area. Placeeded t oddea
ARCHiE + dug no. Renames ace right.
lene event defeat canning come tim
B (R.A.0.C.
ments in your Bulk Oi
you have requested
ore of your doc
ents - Enquire ai
ore documents are in use :
Desk for full details
control
