INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
creatoRs, lie partir diary mil be ep in duplicate from the fist day of mobilisation of
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
i Detailed a count operation dixiet hourt sketchts nocent post factors afietin
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
3 or tolares asta if a tie a nio and nored.
i adition the case of then tanks fol change i stores, transport, be.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept tom the irst the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
No we to to thou be inered up, not in the veer ( aven th mitht be the tim they
PARA, 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and Paro an a diary i See te die i a fumit litera record parien,
AF. Cail be entered up daily, each
om a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts
it entry action a ly tie fier detailed to, keep it. on.
or oter pete hena be inde clear, that the ofice he inis to the entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
i) Daily locations.
lay otis i lovement de ther of trenty fou hour and present dispositions.
ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer reguired
i A copy, in cach na native or eport on perations dervn up by a subordinate formation
ed in the text omas relating thereto, to supplement the account
(See F.S.R., Vom ties will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
he unit concerned.
SPECTAL NO. The one entered scold be the tim the niven it of at it teaches
ime of the event recorded should also
Month and Year, l Leb
Date
Place
FRANCE
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Shut 1 / 3
Army Form C
Unit Det - 6 Astro Des. Ord Fa
Commanding Officer Mere capt.
References to Appendic
t report
10000
heating be ener
Egaag gertatop ended
open all a part age la tra faces gus or cha
de tea a pinin lung centric at i ryane, Mean alig
18 ter
3521/218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co.Ltd, 51-1541)
id Echelor
ments in your Bulk Or
you have requested,
nore of your doc
ents - Enquire ai
dre documents are in use
Desk for full details
control
