Operation Overlord: Part IV
168
First, to contain the beachhead at Caen in order to prevent
a breakout to the Seine and to the prizes of Le Havre and
Paris; second, to prevent the capture of Carentan, thereby
preventing the junction of the American V Corps and VII
Corps and the consolidation of the lodgment area. Con-
versely, Allied strategy was to seize Caen, hold it as a pivot
for the development of the campaign on the western half
of the front, and, concurrently with the operations to seize
Carentan, drive westward to isolate Cherbourg from the rest
of France and then due north to seize the port.
From Utah beach the 4th Infantry Division drove inland,
crossed the inundated area on the causeways seized by the
101st Airborne Division, and relieved the latter for opera-
tions southward toward Carentan. It then worked westward
toward Ste. Mere-Eglise, where it made contact with the 82d
Airborne Division.
The main north-south Carentan-Cher-
bourg highway was now in Allied hands, and when the 90th
and 9th Infantry Divisions landed on D+3 and D+4, re-
spectively, VII
Corps employed
them to attack toward
Montebourg and St.
Sauveur-le-Vicomte, on the way to
Cherbourg. To prevent the port's falling into Allied hands,
the Germans rushed
additional troops
into the Cotentin
through the western half of the peninsula, which was still
in their hands.
From Omaha beach V Corps pushed the ist and 29th
Divisions forward from the toehold it had gained on D-day
near St. Laurent-sur-Mer, the Ist Division linking up with
the British 50th Division at Port-en-Bessin. The 29th worked
its way westward toward Isigny, near the mouth of the Vire,
and southwestward toward Carentan. In the meantime, the
2d Infantry Division, which had landed on D+1, moved
into line between the Ist and 29th Divisions, and resumed
the drive southward, reaching the town of Rubercy on D+2.
On D+3 Isigny fell and the next day the Cerisy Forest was
in Allied hands. By the time Carentan fell on D+6 the
The Invasion of France
169
advance of V Corps of the First United States Army had
carried it more than 12 miles inland from the coast.30
From Gold, Juno,
and Sword beaches operations were
directed principally at the capture of Caen and the gaining
of depth on the western sector of the Second British Army
On the sixth day of the invasion the U. S. Chief of Staff and Com-
manding General,
General Bradley,
Army Air Forces visiting the beachhead. Left to right:
General Marshall,
General Arnold.
front. Having linked up with the American V Corps, XXX
Corps thrust south toward Villers Bocage, spearheaded by
the 8th Armored Brigade
and the
7th Armored Division,
which came into action on D+4. But enemy resistance was
stiff, heavy
concentrations of German armor stood in the
way of the advancing Allied troops.
By June 12, when the
XXX Corps front had reached a line running from La Belle
Epine through Tilly-sur-Seulles to Bronay,
three armored
divisions-the Ist ("Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler")
and 2d
30 Eisenhower; altic,
Chiefs of each
Staff, ead,
ent. Cerahction Report
146,
Montgo;
