126
Operation Overlord: Part III
coast also helped focus German attention on that area.
The threat to the Pas-de-Calais was made to suggest an in-
vasion date during the latter part of July, so that the
Normandy operation would not be taken by the Germans
to mean a substitute for it. In other words, while operations
in Normandy would be in progress, the threat to the Pas-
de-Calais would remain no less real. Shipping was made
available in the east and southeast of England for an initial
force of 12 divisions, the Pas-de-Calais D-day assault to be
launched by six divisions at Cap Griz Nez, followed up by
the remaining six. Thereafter, because of the short distance
between England and France in that
area, the available
shipping would make possible a build-up of forces of ap-
proximately three divisions per day until a total of 50 had
been reached.
The "Threat" to the Pas-de-Calais
The preparations for the invasion of Normandy suggested
a target date earlier than that of the latter part of July.
For as long as possible after the "Neptune" landing, there-
fore, the planning staffs wanted to have the German High
Command deceived into or confirmed in-believing that
that operation was merely a diversion, designed to draw
German reserves away from the Pas-de-Calais, where the
"real" threat existed. Dummy landing craft were berthed in
eastern English ports at Dover and in the
many units of the artificial harbors were parked at Selsey
and Dungeness, instead of in western English ports; and
actual ships and landing craft for several divisions were ac-
cumulated in the Thames Estuary and in ports on the south-
east coast of England. Heavy bombing attacks were be-
sides carried out on targets in the
Pas-de-Calais, both
before and during the operations in Normandy; mines were
laid on both sides of the Straits of Dover, suggesting a desire
to seal off that area from German naval attack; and prepara-
Deception
127
tions were made to equip warships and heavy bombers with
special radio and mechanical devices which would give the
same appearance to enemy radar as that given by real naval
and air forces." Important ground units scheduled for the
later stages of "Neptune" were, in addition, moved into the
toe of Kent, opposite Cap Griz Nez: Headquarters II Corps
of the Canadian Army and corps troops were moved there
from Sussex as a ruse. The Canadian 2d Infantry Division
made a similar move, setting up its headquarters in Dover,
directly facing the Pas-de-Calais.
Fictitious Radio Traffic
The most important of the deception measures, however,
was wireless. It was known that the Germans
placed
great
weight on monitoring Allied radio traffic in Great Britain in
order to determine the strength and location of Allied troops.
Allied planners therefore decided to make wireless deception
the principal means of concealing the time pattern of Allied
strategy. The idea is held to have originated with Colonel
John Bevan, British Army, on duty at the War Office. Не
put forth the idea of carefully executed wireless operations
by special signal units simulating characteristic radio traffic
accompanying training and movements of
preparing for an amphibious invasion.® This
involved the representation on the air of non-existent
devices, was decisive in the German failure to consider the
Normandy invasion the main Allied effort in western Europe.
The German High Command's belief in a Pas-de-Calais in-
vasion was so firm that even after many weeks of fighting
in Normandy they refused to weaken their defenses in the
6 Montgomery,
Normandy to Baltic, 29
Army,
1939-1945 (Ottawa,
1948)
with
Col.
173John Bevan,
Cannonan
Record,
Conversation
randum
British War Omee,
November 1943.
