Operation Overlord: Part I
contribute anything substantial to a military
campaign in
the northwest of Europe late in 1943. It fell, therefore, to
President Roosevelt,
after taking counsel with Admiral
William D. Leahy, his personal Chief of Staff, to exercise
prudence and keep Allied military strategy on an even keel.
Wartime military cooperation between
the United States
and Great Britain began in 1940. A military mission, headed
by Rear Admiral Robert L. Ghormley, U. S. Navy, left the
United States for London in July for military staff conversa-
tions with British defense chiefs.
A basic Allied
policy
emerged from these conversations: A policy of taking the
strategic offensive in Europe and of going on the strategic
defensive in the Pacific. These conversations were followed
up by additional consultations in Washington early in 1941.
The agreements, embodied in a formal document known as
ABC-1 (American-British-Canadian
Staff Conversations),
declared that of the nations comprising the German-Italian-
Japanese Axis, Germany was the most dangerous to the se-
curity of the Western Hemisphere. They called for a defeat
of Germany first, for the maintenance of control over the
Atlantic, for operations in the Mediterranean to drive Italy
out of the war, and for the concentration of Allied ground
forces in the United Kingdom to prepare for an invasion of
western Europe. It was accepted that some of the provisions
of the agreement would come into force only if the United
States became a belligerent. The principle of unified com-
mand of all Allied forces in each theater of operations was
affirmed.
The "Arcadia" Conference
Almost immediately after the Japanese attack on Pearl
Harbor on December 7, 1941, the ABC-1 agreement became
operative. A conference was arranged between President
The in a guay of united States to Cad, Pa i ho ces a oper
Hiot Monica
The Battle of History of
tc Unisd states Naval Operations in World
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
9
Franklin D. Roosevelt and Prime Minister Winston Churchill
at Washington for the purpose of translating the Allied agree-
ment into specific military measures.
The
"Arcadia" Con-
ference, as it was called, lasted from December 22, 1941 to
January 14, 1942. Besides confirming earlier decisions on
strategy, such as declaring Germany the chief enemy, a
single Allied military command for directing the
formed under the name of the Combined Chiefs of Staff.
This body was made responsible to the President of the
United States and the Prime Minister of Great Britain. The
strategy adopted for the Pacific was that of denying to the
Japanese access to raw materials and of holding essential
Allied areas in the early stages of the war.'
Before it reached the United States, the British delega-
tion, headed by the Prime Minister, cabled a proposal, for
the consideration of the conferees, that the main effort of
the Allies in 1942 be devoted to the occupation of the entire
seaboard of North Africa, stretching from Dakar to the
Middle East. The British were to operate westward out of
Egypt and United States forces eastward from Casablanca
and other ports. The aid of the Vichy French was to be
sought.
forces be brought to England and that, together with their
own strategic bomber force, an intensified air offensive be
started against Germany's centers of production and other
strategic targets.®
The "Arcadia" Conference adopted these proposals, which
were made binding on both
the
United States
and Great
Britain.
Since Canadian forces in oversea theaters came
under the operational control of British commands, the
Canadian
position was represented by the British defense
chiefs and the
conference decisions made binding
on that
country, too. The essence of the grand strategy adopted was
7 J. L.
"Establishment
Review,
XXVIl (Rovember 1948),
the
Fundamental Bases of Strategy," Military
8 Churchill,
Grand
