22
Operation Overlord: Part 1
The London Conference
In order to resolve the stalemate between the position of
the British Government and
his own Army advisers on
questions of specific military operations in 1942, the Presi-
dent sent General Marshall, Admiral Ernest
J. King, and
Mr. Hopkins to London in July. His instructions
were to
reach mutual agreement and to prepare plans for operations
in which American troops would be engaging the enemy
that year.43 The President thought that United States troops
should either fight in the Persian Gulf and Nile Delta region,
in conjunction with British and Commonwealth forces to
save the Middle East, or come in through French Morocco
and Algiers. 44
In London, the Marshall mission made a final endeavor
to win the British Government's assent to a cross-Channel
invasion of France and to an abandonment of its advocacy of
a North African operation. Opposition on the part of higher
American military authorities to the latter undertaking—a
stand not shared by ranking officers of the United States
Navyt5—centered on the ground that a North African in-
vasion might prove too hazardous, especially the passage
past Gibraltar. Fear was expressed over the threat of a
German march through Spain to attack Gibraltar, making
the intended landings in Algeria impossible. The British
Army, Navy, and Air chiefs considered a North African
invasion not unreasonably hazardous, however. They con-
sidered the chances of a safe passage through the Straits of
Gibraltar very good. Moreover, the British Government had
every reason to believe that Hitler, deeply involved in Russia
and in the Middle East, was not prepared to enter Spain
forcibly in the face of the unwillingness of the Spanish
Government to let German forces pass through Spain and
the readiness on the part of the Spanish generals to oppose
13 Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins, G03; Churchill, Hinge of Fate, 441-14.
4 Leahy, I Was There, 111; Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins, 610.
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
a forcible entry.46 Fears of German air attacks against the
invasion convoys were also overstated by those who coun-
seled against the North African strategy.
The Royal Air
Force, however, believed that German air action in the
Mediterranean could not be greater than they had met in
the Battle of Britain in 1940 when ships moved through the
English Channel despite the greater concentration of the
German Air Force in the northwest of Europe.47
Decision to Invade North Africa
When
the Marshall mission returned to Washington it
reported to the President its inability to modify the British
position-or its own-with regard to the course to be fol-
lowed in 1942. Roosevelt then ordered preparations to be
made for an invasion of French Morocco and
Algeria in
the autumn to coincide with a contemplated British offensive
from Egypt. Since in Great Britain military opinion
was
unanimous against an invasion of France in 1942 and mili-
tary opinion in the United States was not unanimous against
invading North Africa, the President made his decision in
accordance with his own predispositions.48 Preparations were
then set afoot to invade Africa in the autumn, as part of a
"nutcracker" operation designed to defeat the Italo-German
forces there by a coordinated Allied drive from the west
and a new British offensive westward from the east.
The Casablanca Conference and the Proposed Invasion
of Sicily
On October 19, 1942 the Eighth British Army, under
the command of General Bernard L. Montgomery, began a
general offensive at El Alamein against Rommel's forces,
and on November 8 a predominantly United States invasion
force, commanded by
General
Dwight
D. Eisenhower.
10 B. H. Liddell Hart,
Calculated Risk,
ther Side A the Hill ( London, 1948), 239-40; Clark,
47 Butcher. Mu
Threo Years With Eisenhower.
37.
18 Stimson and Bundv.
On. Active Service
425:
Leahv.
I Was
There, 111; Sher-
wood,
Hopkins, 460; Churchill, Hinge of Fate, 356.
