184
Operation Overlord: Part IV
The fight to enlarge the bridgehead along one of the roads near St. Lo,
14 July 1944.
were those that found shelter behind the sunken blockships.
All in all, there was an unloading loss of 140,000 tons of
supplies and 20,000 vehicles due to the gale, aside from its
seriously threatening to jeopardize the whole "Overlord" in-
vasion, which depended on a sustained and aggressive drive
inland, well supported logistically.
Although stubborn German resistance was mainly respons-
ible for the tardy progress made tactically before the break-
through late in July, the storm contributed substantially, in-
asmuch as the arrival of combat troops from England was
delayed
and the logistical support to those already com-
mitted to action curtailed.®
• London Gazette,
Supplement,
Taylor, The Last Passage, M5, 11p
5119-20;
Karig
Atlantic
Montgomery,
War,
Vormandy to Baltic,
352-53;
116.
Chapter 13
BREAKTHROUGH, ENCIRCLEMENT, AND PURSUIT
TO THE SEINE
The final phase of "Overlord" began
on
the eastern
(British-Canadian) sector of the Allied front on July 18, the
day American troops entered St. Lo some 40 miles farther
west. Just south of Caen, the Second British Army, under
General Sir Miles Dempsey, opened a powerful assault with
three armored divisions in the direction
of Bourguebus and
Lisieux, preceded by a massive air bombardment
of enemy
positions by 1,700 American and British heavy bombers and
scores of medium bombers. The purpose of this operation,
as
all previous operations around Caen,
was to contain the
bulk of German armor by feinting a strategic breakthrough
attempt toward Le Havre and the Pas-de-Calais while the
real breakout from the beachhead was sprung between St. Lo
and Perriers exactly one week later as it turned out.
The German Reaction
The Germans reacted aggressively, but fearfully.
They
dreaded a breakout toward the lower Seine and Rouen and
Le Havre.
They threw in the 21st Armored and 16th Air
Force Divisions, as well as elements of the 1st, 9th, and 10th
SS Armored Divisions, which were
rushed eastward
from
west of the Orne River in a strenuous effort to stem the
advance of the British and Canadian corps toward the high
ground south and southeast of Caen. They brought units
from as far west as the American Caumont sector and at-
tempted to stem the drive of I Corps eastward toward Troarn,
185
