92
Operation Overlord: Part III
in many respects not dissimilar in character from "Neptune,"
was in contrast staged against a coast not well fortified and
not securely held. The invasion of Sicily was launched from
a broad land base onto a small island. But the invasion of
France was to be staged, in the words of Shakespeare, from
the "precious stone set in the silver sea"-the small isle
that is Great Britain-unto the broad land mass that is the
continent of Europe.
There were two basic elements called for in the execution
of "Neptune"-
-tactical surprise and speed. Should the Allies
fail to gain a foothold in France there would be no hinter-
land into which to withdraw-the factor that saved the Rus-
sian Army in 1941 and again in 1942, and the German
Army from the time of its defeats at Stalingrad and El Ala-
mein to the end of the war. For the United States, Great
Britain, and Canada there existed none of that. The "siege
of watery Neptune" faced them-the fateful sea and dis-
aster. Perhaps a grander Dunkirk?
Invasion Problems
Taking the invasion problem very broadly, there were five
aspects the "Neptune" Joint Commanders had to consider:
One, how to assemble and embark the tens of thousands of
troops and their heavy equipment and weapons; two, how
to transport them across the Channel; three. how to break
the coastal crust of enemy defenses; four, how to fight the
battle against the enemy reserves; and, five, how to conceal
Allied strategic intentions from the German High Command?
To consider each of these aspects of the problem the
"Neptune" planning staff formed separate committees, each
committee being charged with certain specific studies. Thus
there was organized a committee for compiling a program
for the cross-Channel movement of ground force units. This
committee had to study the question of the number of men
5 Au As 110965/Ops, "Overlord" One, Notes for Meeting of Heads of Branches,
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
93
and vehicles that would have to be landed every day in
France in order to maintain the momentum of advance and
to reconcile that with the number and types of ships and
craft available, the loading
capacity of English ports, the
rate of unloading on the beaches and the rate of clearing
Training for "Neptune"
at Slapton Sands, Devonshire.
Troops of the
6th Engineer Special Brigade rehearse for the landing in Normandy.
The
brigade had the
mission
of dealing with beach
obstacles
on
D-day.
them, and the effect of adverse weather on these operations.
Another committee had to study the type of defenses the
assault troops would encounter and how they could be
breached by the leading infantry companies and combat
engineer units. It involved a study of enemy gun positions
in detail, the calibers of those guns, the tactical subdivision
of beaches, the objectives to be assigned to the airborne
troops, the exact missions to be assigned to British Com-
mandos and American Rangers, and detailed requirements
in air and naval support. The problem of how to develop
the battle after the initial objectives had been gained and
