155
The Invasion of France
154
Operation Overlord: Part IV
number of hours on the night before D-day, giving the im-
pression on German radar of ships approaching the Pas-de-
Calais coast. The Germans never suspected the artifice, and
they withheld their available naval units from attacking the
real invasion convoys farther west.?
Other night bombers
dropped dummy parachutists with machines that made noises
like the fire of small arms in order to create the false impres-
sion of an airborne invasion where none was contemplated.
Still another force of night bombers patrolled the skies in
the direction from which enemy night fighters could be
expected to attack the transport area off the coast of Nor-
mandy. These bombers carried equipment for jamming the
night fighters'
communication with
their ground control
stations which directed them to the target.®
German air reaction to the invasion was even more tardy
than their naval reaction. Not knowing whether they had to
deal with an all-out invasion or merely a large-scale raid of
the type of Dieppe, they did not send any planes against the
"Neptune" area until the
evening of June 6. About 150
German aircraft attacked the shipping ofishore, but they
were driven off by heavy fire from many antiaircraft artillery
guns, which had been brought ashore in the expectation that
the Germans would counterattack strongly with their air
force. 10
Naval and Air Force Bombardment
While the armada of ships was approaching the coast of
France, the attack on German defenses was begun shortly
after midnight on June 6 with a bombardment of 1,100
British and Canadian night bombers of coastal batteries
between Cherbourg and Le Havre. As day broke, about 1,000
American heavy
bombers dropped their bomb loads on
coastal targets during the 30 minutes before the ground forces
Bomber Offensive, 206.
Harower. Report of the Supreme Commander to the Combined Chiefs of
stol, 21ley and Air Ffects Committee 12th Army Group, Ffect of Air Power,
The assault waves head in for the beach on D-day.
The smoke in the
background is from naval gunfire supporting the attack.
assaulted the beaches. They were followed by medium and
light bombers attacking gun positions and machine gun nests.
Then the naval bombardment forces opened fire from many
guns all along the 50 miles of invasion beach, making con-
crete gun emplacements their main targets. The guns of eight
battleships and monitors,
22 cruisers,
and about 100 de-
stroyers and gunboats took part in the bombardment." By
concentrating the air and naval bombardment on coastal
targets it was hoped to neutralize the German first line of
defense, thereby making it possible for the
ground troops
to assault the beach defenses against a minimum of oppo-
sition from artillery and machine gun fire. Since the Germans
had decided after the Dieppe raid to defeat an attempted in-
vasion on the beaches, their system of defense lacked depth.
If the beach defenses could be penetrated quickly, there would
I Stacey, Canada's Battle in Normandy, 47.
