Operation Overlord: Part IV
140
attacked the submarines with considerable success. From
then on the submarine menace began to decline, and by
the time the European continent was invaded a year later
Allied sea power had been restored to a position of su-
The carriers, both American and British, were greatly
aided in their offensive operations by the high quality of
aircraft with which they were provided. These consisted
mainly of United States Navy planes, which were superior
to those the Royal Navy had.' The independent Royal Air
Force had paid little attention to the design of naval air-
craft, so that naval air development in Great Britain suffered
in consequence. In the United States, however, where no
independent air force existed between World War I and
World War II, naval aircraft specialization proceeded without
interruption. 10 The carriers proved a most valuable weapon
in the operations to clear the Germans from the ocean lanes
between the Americas and Great Britain.
The Contribution of Radar
A great contribution to naval air warfare was made by
British science in the development of ASV radar, first put
into Britain's Coastal Command aircraft in April 1943. With
this radar device, airplanes were able to detect submarines
some 50 miles away and to attack them before they could
get close enough to Allied ships for torpedoing. Submarines
were instead forced to surface and to fight it out with the
attacking planes. They were thus deflected from their main
mission of destroying Allied convoys.
The sea war preparatory to the invasion of France proved
completely successful. Whereas more than four million tons
of Allied shipping were lost in 1941'2 and more than double
that amount in 1942, losses in 1943 had declined to a little
• Owen Rutter, "The Fleet Air Arm," Brassey's Naval Annual—1944, 145.
in Naval Warfare," Brassey's Naval Annual—1946, 121.
11 A. P. Rowe, One Story of Radar (Cambridge, England, 1948), 159-60.
Sea Power and Air Power
141
more than three and a half million tons and to slightly less
than a million and a half tons in 1944.13 The submarine was
defeated by a combination of escort carrier, naval aircraft,
and airborne radar. But just when the victory was won, the
Germans came forth with a new threat to Allied sea power-
the submarine fitted with a Schnorkel, or breathing periscope.
However,
before this
new device
could become a danger
to Allied sea communications the war was over and it was
no longer of any use to anybody—in the Second World War.
Preparatory Air Operations
Air operations that could specifically be considered
as
preparatory to the "Overlord" invasion were begun by the
Eighth United States Air Force and Bomber Command of
the Royal Air Force early in 1943, upon instructions from
the Combined Chiefs of Staff. Until the Casablanca Confer-
ence of January of that year the United States and British
strategic air forces operated more or less independently of
each other, as far as the choice of targets went. The Con-
ference therefore decided that better strategic results would
be obtained if the air forces conducted their bombing on a
single plan. In accordance with this decision, five strategic
targets were selected for assault in a given order of priority.
The targets selected were: Submarine
construction yards,
aircraft manufacturing plants, systems of transportation, oil
refineries, and factories engaged in the production of war
materials. 14
When the offensive against German submarine pens failed
to bring remunerative results, antisubmarine warfare, as we
have seen, was turned over to the Allied navies and their air
arms. The strategic air forces were thereupon directed to
defeat the German Air Force-at its source in the factories
manufacturing aircraft and aircraft parts, so that Allied air
superiority could be established over France during the in-
Economy, 2.
Suesten Some Survey,
ure, ra War of strategic Bombing on the German War
