44
Operation Overlord: Part I
ordinate tactical air operations with the ground and naval
commanders during the invasion. These officers retained their
posts, under the over-all command of
the Supreme Allied
Commander, throughout the invasion.
Whereas "Overlord" was the concentric name given to all
planning and preparations in connection with the invasion
of France and to the first three months (D+90) of the
actual campaign,** Headquarters COSSAC gave to the first
phase of the invasion the name "Neptune," and the three tac-
tical Commanders-in-Chief collectively became known as the
Neptune Joint Commanders. Their expansion of the strategic
wout has
expected that by D+90, the conclusion of "Overlord " Allied armies
drive to the Rhicked the Seine,
Paris, and commenced regrouning for a
Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay, R. N., was named Allied Naval Com-
mander-in-Chief Expeditionary Force. Here with
Admiral Kirk,
U.S.N.
Commander Western Naval Task Force, he is aboard the U. S. S. Ancon
in March 1944. The Ancon was the headquarters ship for Task Force
"O" and V Corps.
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
45
"Overlord" plan into a combined tactical plan of the three
services was called the "Neptune"
plan. This plan dealt with
the marshaling and embarkation of the invasion forces in
England, the crossing by the invasion armada of the Eng-
lish Channel, the assault on the Normandy beaches, and the
Air Marshal Leigh-Mallory, Allied Tactical Air Commander, presides
at a squadron briefing in France, September 1944.
struggle to expand the beachhead. The multifarious complex-
ities of the "Neptune" plan and the preparations for its ex-
ecution are narrated in Chapter 6 of this work.
Coordinating Strategy, Tactics and Technique
The strategic plan to invade western Europe was, as we
have seen, inseparably linked to the tactical feasibilities of
invading, across a sea, a heavily fortified and well-defended
Before COSSAC submitted the Overlord Outline Plan for
consideration to the British Chiefs of Staff Committee and
