62
Operation Overlord: Part Il
General Devers and his staff had also intended that the
logistical functions of the First United States Army Group
should not be the responsibility of its general staff but of
Headquarters Services of Supply, commanded by Lieutenant
General Courtney H. Hodges. who commanded the
U. S. First Army (after August 1,
1944) and General
Sir Miles Dempsey, commander of the
British Second
Army.
General John C. H. Lee, which was the supply command in
the European theater, functioning under the policy super-
vision of Headquarters ETOUSA. They favored a Services
of Supply liaison group at General Bradley's headquarters,
responsible for logistical policy and planning not to General
Bradley but to General Lee. 14
This, and similar organiza-
U. S. Army Organization in Europe
63
tional plans, contravened the well-established practice in
United States military organization of unity of command
functions and of vesting in the commanding
general of
command the responsibility for all the normal functions of
that command. The delay witnessed in the appointment of
chiefs of technical services for the First United States Army
Group handicapped detailed planning for the employment
of these services in accordance with the requirements of the
tactical plan for American ground forces. 15
General Eisenhower and Logistical Planning
General Eisenhower took the first step toward restoring
the principle of unity of command functions in the European
theater immediately upon arrival in London in January 1944.
He authorized the appointment of chiefs of technical services
at First United States Army Group headquarters and made
provision for the assignment to them of the necessary officer
and enlisted personnel. This principle was extended to a still
wider field of command relations in a directive issued by
General Eisenhower some weeks after his arrival in Eng-
land. It concerned the planning responsibility of Head-
quarters Services of Supply, or Headquarters Communica-
tions Zone as it was renamed later, to the First United States
Army Group. The former was instructed to conduct its log-
istical planning for the forthcoming invasion in conformity
with the requirements of the latter, under the general direc-
sary by the plan that the Commander-in-Chief of 21 Army
Group would do the ground forces' tactical planning not
merely for the British-Canadian forces but for all Allied
forces, delegating detailed planning for American troops to
the Eir telenatin States Army Group. The logistical planning
for the "Overlord" invasion was therefore organizationally
1 ETOUSA,
Ge Dece, be Octo
December 1943. Raymond G. Moses to the author, 9 May 1945.
18 SHAEF (44) 23, 10 March 1944.
