Operation Overlord: Part 1
12
The Pas-de-Calais Plan
The "Arcadia" Conference reaffirmed earlier strategic de-
cisions and canvassed future operational possibilities. It did
not make decisions on specific operations for the future that
lay immediately ahead. In the United States, the most pressing
problem of the day—in the winter of 1941-1942—was
mobilization and the conversion of the economic life of the
country to a full-time war footing. After the conference,
therefore, when it came to a consideration of the question
of the priority of military operations against one or another
of the points on the enemy's strategic periphery, the weight
of military opinion in the United States was that the strength
of the Allies could not effectively be employed in the Medi-
terranean. Military opinion,
therefore, tended to favor a
concentration of force in the British Isles and an invasion
from there of France. The position of the United States Army
authorities was based on logistical factors: The shorter dis-
tance from the United States to Great Britain than to North
Africa and the shorter distance from England to the Euro-
pean continent than from any point in North Africa to
Europe. Northern Europe was favored over southern Europe
also because of the absence of high mountain barriers.15
In northwestern Europe itself, the area most suitable for
an invasion was considered the Pas-de-Calais coast of France,
some 18 to 20 miles across the Straits of Dover from England,
from where operations could be developed eastward into the
industrial Ruhr.
The above concepts were embodied by the United States
War Department in April 1942 in an operational plan which
called for an invasion of France at the narrowest point from
England. The intention was to establish a beachhead near
Calais, expand it toward Dunkirk and Ostend (in Belgium),
thence to mount a drive inland. Some 48 Allied divisions
were to be employed in this operation, tentatively set for
15 Eisenhower, Crusade in Europe, 45.
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
13
the spring of 1943. The period between the spring of 1942
and 1943 was to be employed for the accumulation of
large stocks of supplies in England and for the shipment of
United States ground and service forces. 16 General George C.
Marshall, United States Army Chief of Staff, headed a dele-
gation to Great Britain to put the invasion plan before the
British authorities and to gain their acceptance of it. The
authorities in Britain concurred in the plan to make an
invasion of France in 1943 the principal effort of the war.lT
For operations in 1942, principally in the hope that it
would draw off German troops from the Russian front, the
War Department planners proposed
a small-scale assault
on the French coast to take place that summer. The invading
force was to consist primarily of British and Canadian units,
owing to the nonavailability of trained United States Army
units at that early stage of mobilization. It was considered
not improbable that that operation might involve a total
loss of the force in an effort to help prevent a collapse of
the Russian Army, a contingency some military authorities
thought very likely.?s The
British Government's counter-
strategy of an invasion of North Africa, to coincide gener-
ally with its offensive from the Middle East, was viewed by
the War Department with disapproval. The President, on the
other hand,
considered such
operations
as necessary and
wise in a strategy of harassment and attrition.
Quite independently of the United States War Department,
British planners,
who had been studying at close hand the
problem of invading France since 1940, came forth with a
projected plan of an assault on the Pas-de-Calais at about
the same time the War Department did. It was conceived,
however, more
as
large-scale foray
than a permanent
landing. 19 It was rejected by the higher strategical planners,
name
• Sherwood
Roosevelt and Hopkins, 519-20. This undertaking was given the
17 Eisenhower, Crusade in Europe,
18 Sherwood,
19 Kenneth
Roosevelt and Hopkins, 520; Churchill, Hinge of Fate, 315.
nawards.
Operation
operation received
Neptune
1946),
The code.
Sledgenammer
The proposed
