Operation Overlord: Part I
32
selected for its good beaches, its distance from known Ger-
man Army reserves and fighter aircraft fields, its good ter-
rain for airfield construction, and its proximity to the port
of Cherbourg, a desirable first Allied objective. The proposal
to make the Normandy area of France the Allies' strategic
invasion route to Europe was first put forth by the Com-
bined Commanders in February 1943, in a plan they called
"The Selection of Assault Areas in a Major Operation in
Northwest Europe."10 It remained the basis of subsequent
strategic planning, and all tactical planning and techniques
were henceforth developed with an eye to overcoming Ger-
man defenses and resistance in the Normandy coastal area.
And it was there that the Allied invasion of Germany's so-
called "European Fortress took place on the now historic
day of June 6, 1944.
First Planning Headquarters
The invasion of western Europe had all along been, as we
have seen, the strategic center of gravity of Allied thinking
and planning. Whatever other essential operations might be
carried out, the weight of military decision gravitated to the
English Channel. Consequently, a decision was taken at the
Casablanca Conference (in January 1943) to form an Anglo-
American planning headquarters headed by a supreme Allied
planning officer who would be responsible to the Combined
Chiefs of Staff. This headquarters was to have the sole task
of planning the invasion of Europe from England and was
to supersede the Combined Commanders, mainly a British
body, which had been responsible to the Chiefs of Staff Com-
mittee of the War Cabinet. In February, Lieutenant Gen-
eral Frederick E. Morgan, British Army, was appointed
supreme Allied planning officer with the title of Chief of
Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander (designate). The
appointment of a general to command the "Overload" inva-
sion was side-stepped at the Casablanca Conference. Briga-
10 C.C. (42) 108 (P.S.O.'s Draft), 5 February 1943.
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
33
dier General Ray W. Barker, United States Army, was ap-
pointed as General Morgan's deputy. The Allied planning
headquarters soon became known by its short title of COS-
SAC, the abbreviated form of General Morgan's title." It
General
Morgan,
British
Army,
planner and deputy chief of staff, SHAEF.
chief
"Overlord"
was the direct progenitor of Supreme Headquarters Allied
Expeditionary Force (SHAEF), commanded by General of
the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower, United States Army.
Headquarters COSSAC was saved much time and energy
by inheriting the work of the earlier planners, particularly
of the Combined Commanders. General Morgan stated, after
11 COSSAC (43), 1st Meeting, 17 April 1943.
