102
Operation Overlord: Part III
The function of the Build-up Control Organization was to
allot ships and landing craft to specific units embarking for
France and to keep the ground force commanders advised
of the availability of ships so that they could plan the move-
ment of their troops to the assembly areas. It controlled the
cross-Channel movement of troops through the Movement
Control Organization and the turn-around of vessels through
the Turn-round Control Organization.20
The Control Tug Organization served as an agency for
regulating the cross-Channel movement of tugs employed in
towing barges, the individual parts of the artificial harbors,
and other nonautomotive craft. The Control Repair Organi-
zation was responsible for the economical
and equitable
distribution of repair and salvage work. In each of the im-
portant naval ports, such as Portsmouth, Plymouth, Rosyth,
and others, the Admiralty had functioning repair and salvage
Craft.
. which did the actual repair work on damaged
The ever-present shortage of ships and landing craft of
all kinds was a determining factor in planning
"Neptune"
as well as the wider "Overlord." Although the landing craft
building program in both the United States and Britain was
accelerated in anticipation of "Neptune," the problem was
never quite solved. In the search for ships, even Irish cattle
boats were considered as troop carriers, although they were
without galleys and bunks, could be taken up for only one
trip, and their use threatened to interfere with the food
supply for the British people.21 Among the larger craft ex-
pected to be available on D-day were 10 APA's, 471 LCA's,
176 LCI's, 770 LCT's of various categories, 204 LST's, 120
LCVP's and 144 LCP's 22 There were to be also some 330
091 A En/NTO/
/302,
rol Oroanin.
(BUCO),
Organization and Procedure in Build-up Con-
1944.
committer
Minutes
22 COSSAC (
15 Decemher 1019
of Berthing and Assembly Sub-
COSSAC/034 November
Coacmate
Shippo March
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
103
smaller craft, besides derrick scows, pile driver scows, cargo
floats, floating dry docks, and Rhino ferries.
In order to facilitate the flow of troops, equipment, and
supplies southward to south English ports,
the
"Neptune"
planners divided the south coast of the country into two
parts, American
forces moving from the general area of
the northwest to ports on the western half of the Channel
coast and British and Canadian forces from the northeast
to the eastern half of the coast. Thus the area running east
from Portsmouth was made to serve British-Canadian forces
and that running west from Poole was made to serve Amer-
ican forces. The central coastal sector, between Poole and
Portsmouth-Southampton, was used by both British-Canadian
and American units, but each utilizing certain specific routes
and facilities. 23
Air Supply
Emergency supply by air was prepared for, in case of
the destruction of one or both of the artificial harbors by
enemy aircraft. Plans called for a daily air lift of 1,000 tons
of supplies from D-day to D+14, to be increased to a daily
lift of 3,000 tons by D+30. Certain airfields in the
United
Kingdom were specifically designated from which the sup-
plies, such as rations, motor fuel, and ammunition, would
be flown. Special air strips in Normandy were to be con-
structed to receive them and airborne engineer aviation bat-
talions flown in at the earliest possible moment after the
landings in France to construct the necessary landing strips.24
Petroleum Supply
All the petroleum products used by the Allied forces went
into a common pool in Great Britain. The introduction of
bulk gasoline and oil into France was planned by oil pipeline.
But that was not considered feasible until about two to three
28 COSSAC/3169/Sec,
Supply
Division
Responsibilities Planning
** 10.
of overlord,"
of U.K.
Coast November
• For 3.
Operational and
NILU
Ain 1 Tine 1944
U.S. Air Force (Rear), No. 3306, Outline for Emergency Supply by
