34
Operation Overlord: Part 1
the war, that actually "little original work was needed" on
his part and that of his staff to develop either the strategic
or the tactical aspects of the invasion plan. 12 COSSAC went
on to unfold more completely the work that was begun in
1940, picking up where others had left off. The findings by
the Combined Commanders,
that the Normandy area
of
France was, under the existing conditions, the most suitable
strategic invasion route, were adopted by COSSAC as its
own and incorporated in its invasion plan, which it com-
pleted on July 15, 1943, under the name of "Overlord Out-
line Plan."3 Two weeks later, this plan was issued as a more
complete document by the British members of the Combined
Chiefs of Staff-the officers comprising the Chiefs of Staff
Committee under the authority of the War Cabinet. 14 The
Overlord Outline Plan was then taken to the Allied war con-
ference meeting in Quebec, in August. It was there discussed
by the Combined Chiefs of Staff as a body and, with some
added suggestions, approved and submitted to Roosevelt and
Churchill for their consideration. The heads of state concurred
in the recommendations of their military advisers, making
the strategic "Overlord"
plan the basis for future planning
by lower tactical commands.
Initial "Overlord" Plan
The "Overlord" plan was prepared on the basis of two direc-
tives issued by the Combined Chiefs of Staff, the second of
which was determined by decisions taken at the Washington
conference in May 1943,15 setting the date for the invasion
of France for May 1, 1944. COSSAC was instructed to plan
for an invasion of France with 29 divisions available for the
assault as well as the build-up. The initial assault on the
beaches and the immediate follow-up was to be carried out
12 Frederick E. Morgan, Overture to Overlord (New York, 1950), 65.
13 COSSAC (43) 28, 15 July 1943.
14 C.O.S. (43)416(0), 30 July 1943.
15 The
"Trident"
Conference
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
35
by seven infantry and two airborne divisions. Given these
forces,
COSSAC
planners estimated that success could be
achieved if on D-day (the day of the invasion) the Germans
had 12 divisions in reserve in France,
no more than three
of which were within striking distance of the Orne River and
General Ray W. Barker, American deputy on the "Overlord" planning
staff, with General Morgan who headed the planners.
the city of Caen. The assault on the beaches was considered
the critical period, on which the success of "Overlord" would
depend. Once firmly established in a beachhead, the Allied
armies would need sufficient port facilities through which to
ship reinforcements at the rate per month of three to five
divisions with their supporting units.
It was the object of the invasion, the Overlord Outline plan
stated. to mount and carry out an operation, with forces and
10 Dwight D. Eisenhower, Report by the Supreme
Commander to the Combined
note of tan on.
Onerations in Europe of the Allied Expeditionary Force
(Washington, 1946), 1.
