Operation Overlord: Part IV
162
southeast of the area designated in the "Neptune" plan. The
underwater obstacles were much less dense there and gun
emplacements were light. In the sector originally selected,
it was found later, the shore defenses were more heavily
manned. Combat engineers cleared obstacles and mines ex-
peditiously, and with little interference to the infantry and
their mobile support weapons progress inland was compara-
tively easy. Contact was quickly established with the 101st
Airborne Division, and by the end of D+1 VII Corps had
rounded out a beachhead some six miles deep and was pre-
paring to resume its operations to cut off the Cotentin Pen-
insula and to link up with V Corps to the south in the area
of the Vire estuary. The naval forces in this area did not
fare so well, however. An extensive enemy minefield that
had not previously been discovered was responsible for the
sinking of several destroyers, troopships, and LST's, and
artillery fire, aimed at the transport area and line of departure,
accounted for others. 23
The Fight for Omaha Beach
The first wave of troops of the Ist Infantry Division and
its attached regimental combat team of the 29th Division
touched down on Omaha beach at 35 minutes past six,
five
minutes after the appointed H-hour. The amphibious tanks,
which were relied upon to neutralize machine gun nests and
shore batteries not destroyed by the aerial and naval bom-
bardments, floundered in the sea and sank, only a few reach-
ing shore, where they were destroyed on the water's edge.
Tank dozers that were to have cleared the beach obstacles
were put out of action by heavy artillery and mortar fire,
and the special engineer parties, whose task it was to clear
and mark gaps through the minefields and obstacles, suffered
heavily, losing most of their equipment, such as bangalore
torpedoes, buoys, and poles for marking lanes. The assault
U78 FUSA, After Action Report: A QXE, Re
AN AXE, Report 033"-39
"Neptune"; War Department,
The Invasion of France
163
infantry was pinned down to the beach and the heavy surf
of the incoming tide was covering the obstacles before they
could be destroyed, thereby endangering the troops that were
coming in behind the first wave. The combination of deadly
enemy fire-scarcely any damage was done to defenses on
Omaha by naval bombardment and aerial attack?-and the
rapidly rising tide seriously threatened
the success of the
assault on that beach. The demolition parties suffered 41
percent casualties on D-day,25 and of the 16 50-yard gaps
which it was planned to clear only five were
cleared all
the way into the beach-and these were inadequately marked.
The result was that during the high tide that followed the
initial assault only one effective lane through the underwater
obstacles was in use.
Despite the strenuous exertions of the surviving engineers
to blow up the steel obstacles and to clear mines their efforts
went largely unrewarded. Few of the assault landing craft
carrying infantry and vehicles got past unscathed. Having
no other alternative, many of the coxwains of the landing
craft drove ahead, straight into the vertical steel obstacles.
But although many assault craft were lost, most of them got
through.? And it is that that saved the day. Despite this
indifferent method of invading the beach, some infantry
companies and platoons were put out in waistdeep water
and in the struggle for their lives dropped their mortars,
bazookas, and machine guns; others landed on the wrong
sectors of the beach; and others still were virtually destroyed
as they reached the shore.
The course of the battle on Omaha was naturally condi-
tioned by the difficulties the initial assault waves encountered.
The whole of "Neptune" was predicated on a rapid and
aggressive push inland to create space for the follow-up and
build-up divisions and service troops.
But all along
the
("Nentine" eachdon GaVase, Stop!
Supplement,
PA1.
5116; United
nam Beachhem, a
" Infantry Journal, LVI (June
Beachhead, 44.
