182
Operation Overlord: Part IV
Purpose of Allied Strategy
The concept of the breakthrough and destruction of the
German forces west of the Seine had for its purpose the
development of a wide pincer movement by the First and
Third United States Armies, under 12th Army Group, to-
ward Laval and Le Mans, followed by a swing northeast-
ward. Simultaneously, the Second British Army and the First
Canadian Army which, like the Third United States Army,
was scheduled to become operational late July-early August,
were to commence a new drive southward from Caen in
order to cut the German east-west escape routes. Afterwards,
the Allied armies would press on to the Seine and Paris,
bringing to an end, at about D+90, the. "Overlord" cam-
paign.®
On the naval side of operations during this period, steps
were taken to protect the vulnerable eastern end of the
"Neptune" area where attacks were feared from enemy naval
units sallying forth from Le Havre. A naval protecting force,
called "Support Squadron, Eastern Flank," was formed late
in June, commanded by Commander K. A. Sellar, Royal
Navy. It operated by a double line of patrols made up of
some 76 gunboats, support landing craft, and vessels carry-
ing antiaircraft guns.
Behind these, patrols of fast motor
launches kept a careful watch on the eastern sea approaches
to the cross-channel traffic for enemy torpedo boats that
might have slipped past the static patrols.?
earlier, the Eastern and Western Naval Task Forces were
withdrawn from French waters and in their place established
ashore two flag officers who controlled naval units in Nor-
mandy. In the eastern half of the beachhead, Rear Admiral
J. W. Rivett-Carnac set up his headquarters as Flag Officer
British Assault Area on June 25, and two days later Rear
RecoTt 19 the Combined Chiefs of St 18-91; Munro,
• Edwards, Operation Neptune,
Report.
433-225.
183
The Beachhead Widened
Admiral J. Wilkes hoisted his flag as Flag Officer West, in
the American portion of the beachhead.®
The Artificial Ports and the Storm
The assembly of supplies proceeded all this while at a fair
pace, and good progress was made on the
construction of
the artificial ports, until an unheralded storm broke on June
19, disrupting unloading operations over the beaches and
halting construction on the ports.
Both the American and
British ports were all but completed on June 19, work on
the American port having progressed more rapidly
LST's were being unloaded at the
rate of one an
whereas it took some 12 hours to unload over the beach
where the ships had to go onto the sands at high tide, dis-
charge their cargo at low tide, and then haul off at the next
high tide. But because that port ("Mulberry" A, as it
called) was constructed in a place exposed to the winds it
suffered irreparable damage and had to be abandoned. It has
also been said that the very rapidity of its construction con-
tributed to the inability of "Mulberry" A to withstand the
buffeting it received. The harbor and port off the
beach area ("Mulberry" B) was set down inshore
Calvados reef, which gave it greater protection, and it rode
out the storm with no noticeable damage. The reef did much
to break the force of the seas on the harbor, and most of the
supplies were thereafter unloaded there.
The storm that broke loose on the invasion fleet on the
19th was the worst in about half a century on the Normandy
coast. Considerable damage was
done to landing craft, and
the artificial port in the American coastal sector was wrecked
largely
waves.
was suspended. The craft that managed to ride out the storm
8 Great Britain, The London Gazette, Supplement, p. 5122.
