Operation Overlord: Part IV
164
four miles of Omaha beach the assault force was immobilized,
the first four or five waves lying where they had fallen. It
was even thought for a while that succeeding units scheduled
for Omaha would have to be landed on the adjoining Gold
beach, where enemy resistance was not so strong. But by
noon of D-day this became unnecessary, as small groups of
men, no bigger in size than squads and
slowly to break through the thin crust of the German de-
fenses and to find gaps through which they could move in-
land. V Corps reserves were committed much earlier than
had been planned and destroyers moved inshore as far as
the depth of water would permit and literally blew a path
up the beach exits for the troops, blasting away at the lowest
pillboxes? Thus by one o'clock in the afternoon a general
advance began up the slopes of the beach and the village
of Colleville-sur-Mer had been taken. Soon, St. Laurent was
occupied, and by six in the evening the commanding generals
of the Ist and 29th Divisions went ashore. Concerted enemy
action against Omaha had practically ceased and the work
of organizing the beach to receive
progressed satisfactorily. Air action was negligible. Only a
few bombers came over the transport area at midnight, their
bombs causing no damage. By then, a shallow beachhead,
about one mile deep at the point of farthest penetration near
Colleville and about five miles wide straddling the coastal
road was in Allied hands.
The Landings on the British-Canadian Beaches
The assault on the adjoining beaches went very
according to plan. Resistance was, by and large, no greater
than was anticipated. The preliminary bombardment was for
the most part fairly effective and because the sea, though
still rather stormy, had somewhat abated at the later H-hour,
fewer assault craft were casualties.
'ANCXF, Report on "Neptune".
Action
Supple, 4, B1
5116; FUSA,
Thompson,
The Invasion of France
165
On Gold beach, the British 50th Division landed its lead-
ing elements at twenty-five past seven.
Heavy enemy fire at
first pinned down the assault waves. But with close support
fire from amphibious tanks, which, instead of being launched
from out at sea were beached right behind the infantry, the
inland
suffered
little delay.
Supported
by
the
8th
Armored Brigade and Royal Marine Commandos, the divi-
sion quickly moved inland to cut the Caen-Bayeux highway,
and by the end of D-day had
lished its forward
positions on
Creully, some five miles south of the coast. The Royal Ma-
rines, operating on the
division's west flank were one
a half miles short of their objective-the village of Port-en-
Bessin, where contact was to be made
V Corps, but on the east flank, contact
Canadian 3d Division. which came in on Juno beach 28
The Canadians set foot in France at eight o'clock, some
15 to 25 minutes
past the
beat on Juno beach, causing the
line of departure and casualties among the amphibious tanks.
It greatly handicapped the assault engineers, who now had
less time in which to blow up the beach obstacles and to
clear mines. Resistance from the enemy was stiff, and a
stubborn contest
ensued
which survived the naval and aerial bombardments and the
Canadian infantry which attempted to clear the beach exits.
Past the beach, past the dominating ground just beyond it,
the infantry regiments
and their
steadily inland toward the Caen-Bayeux road, encountering
heavy mortar and artillery fire. As night began to fall, the
3d Division had reached a line running through Lantheuil,
Le Fresne, and Villons-les-Buissons, just north of the high-
way.29
to Baltic, 49-
28 Eisenhower:
• Report to eAtined Crie
Karl?,
riefs of Staff, 23 Monte ToO, Norman 97.
Normanth ten Re, 956 Kate eAtined Cares .
Combined
Staff,
Montgomery,
