Operation Overlord: Part 1
26
Low Countries approximately 1,370,000 men,50 which the
Western Allies could not hope to defeat that year. There was
also no possibility of establishing by either the spring or the
summer of 1943 Allied air superiority over the Continent."
Other strategic decisions soon followed. At the third Allied
war conference 2 in Washington in May 1943, agreement
was reached to carry the war to the Italian mainland after the
seizure of Sicily. The strategic objective was the forcing of
Italy out of the war, the tying down there of German divisions
that might otherwise be sent to Russia or to reinforce northern
France and Belgium, and the taking of the Foggia airfields on
which to base a strategic bomber force to be used to bomb
Germany from the south. 3 The invasion of northern France
was, for purposes of planning and preparation, set for the
spring of 1944.
"Overlord" to be Allied Main Effort
Despite the decision to invade Italy, the invasion of
France from England remained the center of gravity of Allied
planning. Priority of Allied resources went to that front, and
the Italian front, even after it was opened, was relegated to a
position of secondary importance in Allied strategy. A num-
ber of Allied divisions with combat experience in the Medi-
terranean were in advance designated to be withdrawn from
the line in Italy late in 1943, regardless of the situation that
might then exist. They were to be shipped to Great Britain to
meet the requirements of the "Overlord" invasion. The same
was true of shipping and landing craft. A number of ships
and invasion craft were in advance of the Italian campaign
ordered earmarked for transfer from the Mediterranean to
England to help overcome the serious shortage of vessels of
all types that threatened to compromise the
invasion of
50 Ibid., 110, n. 30.
51 Arnold, Global Mission, 397.
52 This conference was known as "Trident."
3 Marshall, The Winning of the War in
Janche
64 Italy was invaded on
Europe and the Pacific, 18.
September 9, 1943. The operation was called "Ava-
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
27
France. The Western Allies' greatest single strategic weakness
was a shortage of specialized invasion ships and craft, which
forced them to cancel, curtail, or postpone military operations,
since most of these operations were of an amphibious nature
in their initial stages. The size of the North African invasion
was curtailed on account of a shortage of ships and craft;
landings planned as far east as Tunisia, to cut off the Ger-
mans' route of reinforcement and supply from Italy, had to be
abandoned. For the same reasons that the invasion of France
could not be undertaken in 1942, it had to be postponed from
1943 to 1944.
The invasion of France on a grand scale as a strategic con-
ception was at all times uppermost in the minds of all Allied
planners. It was at last launched as the final heavy blow
against an adversary who had been seriously weakened and
deprived of considerable offensive strength. In the meantime,
the Western Allies had gained time during which to devise the
tools and techniques with which to overcome German coastal
defenses and to iron out a strategic invasion plan that would
be tactically feasible. Most of the inventing, designing, testing,
and experimenting, as well as the selection of the strategically
most suitable area for the "Overlord" invasion, was conducted
in Great Britain under the direction of the Chiefs of Staff
Committee and the War Cabinet.
The development of the
strategic "Overlord" plan and the evolvement of cross-Chan-
nel tactical and
logistical invasion techniques forms the
subject of our next chapter.
