166
Operation Overlord: Part IV
Farther east, on Sword beach, assault landing craft lowered
their ramps at seven twenty-five, the prearranged H-hour,
and the British 3d Infantry Division began to fight its way
onto the soil of France. About half of its amphibious sup-
port tanks, launched several miles out at sea, reached shore
abreast of the leading infantry, and, meeting only moderate
opposition at first,
the division advanced rapidly toward
Caen, a major objective, and the Orne, there to establish
contact with the 6th Airborne Division at Benouville, on the
river's east bank. Leaving a brigade
of Commandos
to
capture the coastal town of Ouistreham, the 3d Division
steadily pushed on southward, breaking up counterattacks
of the German 21st Armored Division and by evening link-
ing up with the airborne force. By midnight, a line was
reached running through Bielville and Benouville.
Consolidating the Beachhead
As the 6th of June was drawing to its end, Allied armies
had established a narrow beachhead in France but had not
achieved all the D-day objectives. The gap between Omaha
and Gold beaches had not been closed; nor that between
Utah and Omaha, across the swamps of the Vire estuary.
In some sectors the drive inland was not sufficiently deep.
The weather, too, was a cause of anxiety.
tives
Thus the objec-
after D-day remained the rapid build-up over the
beaches of combat troops, heavy equipment, and food and
ammunition; the seizure by the First United States Army of
Isigny and Carentan, linking up Utah and Omaha into one
continuous beachhead; and the thrust across the base of the
Cotentin Peninsula to the
west shore in order to isolate
Cherbourg preliminary to a drive northward to capture it.
The objectives of the Second British Army were the develop-
ment of the bridgehead southward across the Caen-Bayeux
highway, to link up with the First Army at Port-en-Bessin,
and to capture the city of Caen and the high ground to the
south.
The Invasion of France
167
From the 7th to the 12th of June the fight for the con-
solidation of the beachhead
went on without let-up. On the
12th, the 101st Airborne
Division fought its way
into the
town of Carentan from the Utah area, and there made con-
tact with the 29th Infantry Division driving in from Omaha,
On D+2, reinforcing troops wade ashore.
to the east. Across the marshes of the Vire one continuous
beachhead was established, stretching from the vicinity
Ste. Mere-Eglise, on the Cotentin Peninsula, to Caen, on the
Orne. The fight was bitter-the Germans offering stubborn
resistance and the Allies applying unremitting pressure.
The Attack Inland
As Allied forces attacked inland the Germans retired,
making the Allied
advance
as costly
as possible.
Their
strategy was to concentrate
their defenses on
the
flanks:
