Len
14
Operation Overlord: Part I
as well as by some of Britain's foremost tactical officers,20
as tactically impossible of achievement. The heavy German
defenses and big gun concentrations in
the Pas-de-Calais,
and the nearness of German reserves,
would have defeated
an Allied landing, especially as in 1942 the Allies had not
yet the necessary shipping and, more particularly, the spe-
cialized landing craft for the landing on a defended coast of
tanks, artillery, motor vehicles and similar heavy mechanized
equipment. The attempt would have involved the greatest
of risks. It would neither have advanced the Allied cause
nor aided the Russian Army. A defeat in France in 1942,
Britain's military specialists and War Cabinet felt, might
set the ultimate victory back for years.?1 The abortive ex-
pedition to seize Dakar in September 1940 had taught the
lesson that no strategic plan can be undertaken before its
tactical possibilities had first been explored. Adequate in-
formation about the condition of the beaches, tides, and
shore defenses proved to be a necessary prerequisite to any
successful amphibious invasion. Dakar also taught the im-
portant lesson of the need for an ocean-going ship capable of
landing
tanks and
armored
beaches. 23
vehicles on
well-defended
No "Second Front" in 1942
The forces available for a cross-Channel operation were
meager. The United States Army was in no position to
make more than the modest contribution of two and one-
half infantry divisions and one armored division to the in-
vasion force.?* And the United States heavy bomber force in
Great Britain was in the summer of 1942 still in its ex-
perimental stage of operations25 The Eighth Air Force be-
Am Alf these
of Ramsay, Commander-in-Chief
gene ate tea a one or hover
Free French and British forces.
to Pointblank
• (Chicago,
1949), 2091
Air for, Roosevelt wa His 55ope: Torch
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
15
gan its raids over Europe on July 4, when six heavy bombers
participated in a Royal Air Force raid on targets in Holland. 26
They flew their first independent mission of 12 bombers in
a raid over Rouen on August 17. Because of the heavy
antiaircraft and air fighter defenses no missions were flown
over Germany. The Germans, on the other hand, had dis-
posed in France and the Low Countries in 1942 about 25
divisions?7 A heavy
concentration of
coastal
batteries
guarded the Pas-de-Calais, the stretch of coast the Germans
considered as the gateway to Germany. In 1940 they had
29 big guns there,
ranging from 170-mm to 380-mm in
caliber. 28 The Germans were in a position to repel any in-
vasion on the scale suggested. They had more than the re-
quired number of troops with which to challenge an Allied
attempt to establish a beachhead on the Continent in 1942
without withdrawing troops from the Eastern front.29 The
objective actuality failed to sustain the position of the pro-
ponents
of a 1942 cross-Channel invasion, or
"Second
Front." All the facts argued against such an undertaking.
Opposition to it centered principally in Great Britain, where
virtual unanimity existed on the subject between the defense
staffs and War Cabinet.
British opposition was based on a sound knowledge of
amphibious operations and of the peculiar
characteristics
of the English Channel. Research in the capabilities and
requirements of cross-Channel operations had been in prog-
ress in Britain since 1940. Both the strategic and tactical
aspects had been under expert scrutiny.
Ways and means
were sought of breaching heavily defended coasts and of
landing in
reasonable safety large infantry and
armored
forces on beaches held under enemy fire. The responsible
military authorities in Great Britain rested their case, to a
2u Cenroe C
Marshall,
Marshall, H. H. Arnold,
Arnold.
King
Philadelphia,
na Enes, f, King, The War Reports of
27 Sherwood,
Roosevelt and Hopkins,
5221
Churchill.
28 Churchill.
Hinge of Fate, 334.
Their Finest Hour,
273.
29 Butcher, My Three Years With Eisenhower, 23.
