CROUET
1943,
Churchill.
Pound,
part laid the foundation for
Operation "Overlord."
Seated:
Standing, left to
right: General Somervell, General Arnold, Admiral
Brooke, Air Marshal Portal, Admiral Mountbatten.
Casablanca
Roosevelt
and Prime
King,
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
25
landed on the Atlantic beaches of French Morocco and the
Mediterranean beaches of Algeria. Although the Allied ad-
vance was not as rapid as anticipated, there existed after a
couple of months of the campaign little doubt in the minds
of the Western statesmen as to the outcome. With victory
in North Africa in the offing,
Roosevelt and Churchill met
with the Combined Chiefs of Staff at Casablanca in January
1943 to consider the next military steps. The battle of El
Alamein and the invasion of North Africa, together with the
Russian defense of Stalingrad, marked a turning point in the
whole war. From the strategic defensive the Allies went over
to the strategic offensive; and the question of the exploitation
of the victories thus far won became of paramount importance.
As the next step, British military and political heads pro-
posed exploiting the African victories northward across the
Mediterraneon. As soon as the Germans and Italians could be
cleared from North Africa an Allied invasion of Sicily and
Italy, they reasoned, would eliminate Italo-German power
from the Mediterranean and reopen the Suez Canal route to
the Persian Gulf and India. Such a campaign, if successful,
had the added advantage of forcing Italy out of the war. It
was the more cogent as the shortage of shipping for an inva-
sion of France on a large scale in the spring of 1943 had not
yet been overcome. Declining to accede to recommendations
of the ranking United States Army authorities that further
Mediterranean operations should not be undertaken owing to
their "diversionary" character, 4ยบ the Casablanca Conference
decided on an invasion of Sicily. It directed that the Supreme
Allied Commander in the Mediterranean plan the operation
for July 1943. The decision to exploit the gains made in North
Africa were made by Roosevelt and Churchill on the basis of
the existing realities of the situation. The Allies did not have
sufficient technical equipment to stage an all-out invasion of
France in 1943. The Germans had stationed there and in the
40 Baldwin, Great Mistakes of the War, 33.
