Chapter 8
DECEPTION
A scheme to deceive the Germans of the Allies' true
strategic intentions formed, as we have seen, an integral
part of "Overlord." A stratagem was devised,
designed to
deceive the Germans as to precisely when and where the
main invasion effort would take place.'
The "Fortitude" Plan
Several deceptive projects were considered by the planners,
such as sham invasion threats to Norway, the Bay of Biscay
coast, and the Pas-de-Calais. The purpose of these threats
was to force the Germans to retain their defensive troop
dispositions in western Europe exactly where they were, by
providing them with evidence that the invasion preparations
opposite Normandy were not the only preparations. Since
the threats had to be made to appear plausible, "Overlord"
planners decided not to maintain a threat to the Bay of Bis-
cay coast of France, owing to a shortage of aircraft carriers
to provide close support to assault forces. Efforts were in-
stead concentrated on feigned threats to Norway and
the
Pas-de-Calais, and more particularly to the latter, because
it was in that area that their own estimate of Allied inten-
tions led the Germans to conclude that an invasion would
take place. The Western Allies were favored in their threats
to widely separated areas of the Continent by the possession
of sea power, which provided them with interior lines
communication in relation to western Europe.
Because
of
their short cruising radius, this advantage did not apply to
1 Eisenhower, Crusade in Europe, 231; COSSAC (43), 3rd Meeting, 4 May 1943.
124
Deception
125
the tactical air forces. For amphibious operations any con-
siderable distance from land bases carrier-borne aircraft was
required.
The
"Overlord" deception
plan
was given the
name
"Fortitude," and was divided
into "Fortitude North," for
Norway, and "Fortitude South," for the Pas-de-Calais.
The
intention was, in view of the plan to mount the main—
and only-assault on the Normandy
coast,
to have
the
German High Command make faulty strategic troop dis-
positions? The Germans had for some time given evidence
of their own expectations by making the Pas-de-Calais the
most heavily fortified sector of the entire western European
coastline and by stationing there the bulk of their combat
divisions for the defense of the occupied countries.
The
Allies were anxious to have the Germans continue in their
belief, and they were ready to provide them with evidence
to support it. Specifically, the Germans were to be shown
plausible outward signs of the accumulation in Great Britain
of an Allied force of about eight divisions for an invasion
of Norway and of an even greater force of some 50 divisions
for an invasion of the Pas-de-Calais. To give added credence
to the threat to Norway, preparations were simulated on a
airborne force to invade the Stavanger area of that country.*
Still other evidence was provided of an intended seaborne as-
sault on Denmark.
In order to contain the German forces in Norway
to prevent their reinforcing the Normandy area, the threat
to the former was developed about a month before D-day of
"Neptune." Besides the
dummy glider concentrations on
Scottish airfields, there was assembled in Scottish and North
English ports a great concentration of shipping. An acceler-
ated offensive against enemy submarines off the Norwegian
6256/0p5. 113 Portitude: t tor
Plan "Fo
"Fortitude,"
13 February 1944, amended by SHAEF,
1980 , to Mete 6 Augur: 1903.
Maron tota " Military Review, XXIX (Feb-
