50
Operation Overlord: Part 1
200 feet long rising up and down with the tide on pillars.
Steel pier roadways linked each pierhead to the shore, being
carried on concrete or steel floats.+3 Protection to the piers
and small vessels during rough weather was provided by
blockships, which consisted of obsolete ships that sailed to
the site of the harbor and were sunk in 2½ fathoms or less.*4
Determining Soil Trafficability on the Beaches
Since the "Overlord" invasion was planned to take place
over beaches, the solidity of the soil had to be determined
to find out whether heavy trucks, tanks, bulldozers, artillery
pieces, and other mechanized equipment could pass over
them. Geological surveys were therefore made to determine
the nature of the soil on the Normandy beaches. Daring night
raids were carried out by specially-trained and specially-
equipped units of Combined Operations Command and the
Royal Navy, bringing back samples of the subsoil. So as not
to arouse German suspicions as to the particular stretch of
coast in which the Western Allies were interested, raids were
carried out far from the Normandy area. 45 The condition of
the sea bed near the invasion coast had also to be determined
if the artificial harbors were to be sunk in the correct depth
of water, or, in the first place, if they were to be correctly
designed.
"Pipeline Under the Ocean"
The armies of the United States, Great Britain, and Canada
are, in the main, mechanized and motorized armies. They
are armies on wheels. The problem had, therefore, presented
itself at quite an early date in the ""Overlord" planning of how
to provide a steady flow of motor fuel to the increasingly
growing ground forces on the Continent, not to mention the
vast needs of the tactical air forces that would be established
there. The problem was solved by the British defense serv-
13 ANCXF,
oN peration
Appendix
Mayad end es (Short Title: ON), 10 April
manize wanahras
(London, 1946).
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
51
ices, which began making experiments on an idea suggested
by Lord Louis Mountbatten, Director of Combined Opera-
tions Command, early in 1942, that an oil pipeline be laid
from England to a point in France. Tests were made by the
Ministry of Fuel and Power with specially-designed flexible
Huge rolls of wire matting destined for the beaches of Normandy.
armored pipe in the Thames and the Bristol Channel. Each
of the pipes constructed was capable of supplying about 250
tons of gasoline per day. It was planned to begin laying
the submarine pipe about a fortnight after D-day, when mine-
sweeping of the English Channel was expected to be com-
pleted. By D+75 it was planned to have about ten pipes in
operation, delivering to storage tanks on the French side of
the Channel approximately 2,500 tons of gasoline per day. to
The laying of the oil pipeline shortly after D-day was called
16 ANCXF.
Part
ANTI
Operation
Neptune-
Orders
short
narrative
Title:
the
ON)
April
of petroleum
arve such
ment of
meierse add athen piers, see conald Banks,
warfare, se
ac airheld
