U3
18
Operation Overlord: Part I
This was not the case in Great Britain. The sea had been
the primary concern of the English for some four centuries
and the English Channel for a good many more. Military
strategy and capabilities were intertwined with naval strategy
and capabilities. British thinking and planning along those
lines had been traditional
and
were well conditioned by
history. Only naval-minded
men of the continental nations
appreciated the point of view of the responsible military
planners in Great Britain. Army authorities did not ap-
preciate their views until much later in the war.36 When
the British War Cabinet decided it could not undertake an
invasion of France in 1942 with the limited resources avail-
able to the Allies, it knew that such an undertaking was
physically impossible-if it was intended that it should
achieve success. The British Government's position is best
illustrated by the reply Winston Churchill made to a request
of the Soviet Government that a "superhuman" effort be
made to start a "second front" on a scale sufficient to force
the Germans to withdraw from the Russian front 40 di-
visions.37 The Prime Minister replied that by
"superhuman
effort" he supposed the Russians meant an effort "rising
superior to space, time, and geography."38
The British Decision for 1942
As we have noted earlier, the Washington Conference of
December 1941-January 1942 did not make any decisions
on specific combined operations for 1942, other than the
British offensive from the Middle East, which was already
under way when the conference met. Since the United States
had only just become a belligerent, and no combined of-
fensive could be undertaken in the immediate future, the
conference was confined to reaffirming the grand strategy of
o Fisenhower,
Get 194s, Mar3-10:
Eurono
Gio the Mission, 304:
and the Pacific
Roosevelt and Hopkins, 562; Churchill, Hinge of Fate, 332.
Grand Alliance, 461.
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
19
the war and to the pooling of resources. But by the summer
of 1942 the moment was opportune for a consideration of
specific Allied operations. The drive of the Eighth British
Army from Egypt had carried its forces into Libya, where
they engaged the mixed Italian-German units under Field
Marshal Erwin Rommel. Decisions were needed on where
to carry the war next; to settle the controversy over an in-
vasion of France that year; and to make plans for an invasion
in 1943, to which British planners had by this time given
the name
"Overlord." To settle these issues, a second war
conference was held in Washington in June 1942 between
Roosevelt and Churchill and their military staffs. And it was
at this conference that Churchill, in a note to the President
dated June 20, presented the final decision of the British
War Cabinet against attempting to invade France from
England that year. 39
In setting forth the meaning of his government's decision,
the Prime Minister declared that the Allies should not at-
tempt to land in France unless they were going to stay there.
A sacrifice invasion, especially one
consisting mainly of
British
and Commonwealth
troops,
was unthinkable. No
responsible statesman could go before his people with such
a proposal. He then asked President Roosevelt whether his
military chiefs had devised a plan that could succeed. If
so, what was it? What forces and shipping did they propose
to make available? Who was the general who was prepared
to command such an enterprise? If the responsible military
authorities in the United States, he said, could produce a
plan that offered any reasonable chance of success and of
relieving
the pressure on
the
Russian
front, the British
Government would welcome it and share to the full the risks
and sacrifices which it involved. And if there was no plan
in which the responsible heads of government could
place
their trust, should the Allies stand idle and do nothing until
1943? Some other offensive operation should be preposed,
3* Churchill, Hinge of Fate, 381-82; Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins, 589-90.
