156
Operation Overlord: Part IV
be no secondary defensive line upon which the Germans
could fall back. The only defenses they had erected in the
interior, at the base of the Cotentin Peninsula, consisted of
thick poles about 10 to 12 feet long, sunk into the ground
some 75 feet apart, as an antiairborne measure, a device the
Germans learned from the British when they invaded the
island of Crete in 1940.
The massive aerial and naval bombardments which pre-
ceded the beach landings failed, however, adequately to
neutralize the coastal defenses.12 The heavier batteries were
only temporarily put out of action, thanks to the enormous
thickness of the concrete casements; the smaller gun posi-
tions and the troops manning them were scarcely reduced
in their effectiveness. The gun positions put out of action
amounted to no more than 14 percent of the total known
to have been erected in the invasion area. 13 This was felt
Keenly by the assault troops, particularly on Omaha and
Juno beaches 14
The Paratrooper Attack
The actual invasion of French soil began in the small hours
of June 6, while Royal Air Force Halifaxes and Lancasters
were bombing the Normandy coastline. Somewhere between
40 and 50 minutes before one o'clock on that memorable
morning, pathfinder troops of the British 6th Airborne Divi-
sion landed on the eastern flank of the "Neptune" area!
They were followed by paratroopers of the United States
82d and 101st Airborne Divisions who landed on "Neptune's"
western flank, placing navigational aids in position for the
main airborne forces.16 Then the main airborne units began
to arrive over their targets, the 6th Division beginning to
Y Cand a Bate Normate 3 Montgomery, Vortan
was prepared er Action the eve Es
Whieh sAvelates.
1944 (no date). This report
The Invasion of France
157
drop its parachutists at two in the morning in exactly the
assigned area of just over one square kilometer near Benou-
ville, east of the Orne River. Some seven hours later the
division seized its initial objective-the bridges over the Orne
and the Caen Canal. 17
At about the same time-at half past one in the morning,
to be exact-the 101st Division began dropping its leading
units southeast of the village of Ste. Mere-Eglise. The path-
finders had not succeeded in locating the exact areas selected
for the landings and the division was dropped over a large
area, some 25 by 15 miles, and found it difficult, as a result,
to assemble for concerted action. About 1,500 of its para-
troopers were either killed or captured and approximately
60 percent of the equipment released from
the transport
planes was lost when the bundles fell into swamps and woods
and could not be located,18 The villages of Poupeville and
St. Martin-de-Varreville, behind Utah beach, were quickly
seized, however, and when additional elements of the divi-
sion were brought in by glider on the evening of D-day its
initial objectives the western ends of the causeways leading
Carentan highway and
Ste.
Mere-Eglise,
The transport planes flew in over the west coast of the Co-
tentin Peninsula, made a straight run to the landing areas,
released their paratroopers, and passed out of the east side
of the peninsula. Widely dispersed astride the Merderet River,
the division failed to occupy the river's banks and to de-
stroy its bridges. Large numbers of troops were
isolated and
forced to fight uncoordinated battles, so that the initial ob-
jectives of gaining control of the river
and of sealing off
to Bitchower, Report to Combined Chiefs of Staff, 23; Montgomery, Normandy
3 United States
war
Department, Utah Beach to Cherbourg (Washington
10470, 19
