88
Operation Overlord: Part III
with extreme flexibility the many variable military, political,
and social situations that would arise. In liberated countries,
governmental functions were to be restored to the govern-
ments-in-exile. In Germany, however, military government
was to be exercised through a central authority, if one existed.
In the absence of a central German government, or if Allied
policy should dictate the elimination of central organs of
administration, United States and British military govern-
ment would be exercised through state and county bodies.º
Displaced Persons
The most serious problem to face army group commanders
was considered that of displaced persons. Long and compre-
hensive studies were conducted over a period of months to
determine the extent and implications of that problem. A good
deal of thought had been given in order to prevent the prob-
lem reaching unmanageable proportions. The COSSAC staff
was able to determine that when hostilities ceased there would
be some 21 million displaced persons in Europe. Many of
these would be nationals of Italy, Poland, and the Soviet
Union returning to their homes and would therefore not
become a charge on American and British authorities. Some
nine million people, however, were expected to be found
moving in the path of the advancing Allied armies. About
four million were thought to be nationals of the countries in
which they would be found, the remaining five million being
displaced from the countries of their nationality. The problem
of providing food, housing, and medical treatment to these
millions of people was considered staggering. 11
In order partially to meet the situation, plans were laid
for canalizing the movement of the displaced persons along
predetermined routes and avoiding at all cost the employment
of military force. The spread of communicable disease was to
Civila tive s
System Sent wor
A Hope That Failed
89
be prevented by spraying people with DDT powder at selected
checkpoints. Temporary camps were to be constructed along
the main routes of movement and shelter and food provided
wherever possible at intervals of a day's walk. 12
For an Allied entry into Norway, several American and
British units were held in readiness. The German garrison of
about 225,000 men was expected to offer little, if any, re-
sistance. The American components of the Allied force
was
a combat team of the 5th Infantry Division and the 99th
Infantry Battalion (Separate), the last-named composed of
American soldiers of Norwegian descent or birth. 13
But the Germans Fought On
Operation "Rankin" was never carried out. The conditions
-on which it was built failed to materialize. Ger-
man retreats in the face of Russian offensives were conducted
ably and their defensive battles and counterattacks fought
with tenacity. Strategic bombing failed to accomplish more
than a fraction of what was expected of it—or promised by
its more sanguine advocates. As a weapon of dread it failed;
as a weapon affecting military operations and the war's dura-
tion it was limited. As the time for staging
the Hitler government.
showed, of the enemy's capabilities. It was based, in the main,
on general probabilities and
perhaps on the thought that
reverses can be endured only so long and no longer. It was
a hope at best-perhaps a wish—but a hope that did
not
come true. When, instead of signs appearing of German in-
tentions to relax their hold on western Europe in order to
Force for
12 Ibid
AG 30m/2, 19433 SoA
of U.S.
Task
SHAEF.
AG 370.5-24:
GO USA
U.S.
AG
"Nightlight,"
8 May
1944.
