Operation Overlord: Part 1
36
equipment established in the United Kingdom, and with target
date May 1, 1944, to secure a lodgment on the Continent
from which further offensive operations could be developed.
To accomplish this object, the planners considered it neces-
sary for the lodgment area to contain several major ports to
permit the entry of reinforcements. Since, however, it was
considered certain that ports would be defended to the last,
and, if abandoned, would either be severely damaged or
blocked, the decision was taken to rely chiefly on supply over
beaches for an extended period. The planners at COSSAC
had arrived at their decision as a result of the experiences
which had been gained from the costly raid on Dieppe in
August 1942.
Lessons of the Dieppe Raid
The Dieppe operation was undertaken to secure informa-
tion about the system of defense the Germans had estab-
lished in France and to devise means of overcoming it. It
was very costly in human life—2,000 out of a total Canadian
force of about 6,000 were either lost or captured' but it
taught the important lesson that the German system of de-
fense was built primarily around ports and only secondarily
around beaches. The raid had also underlined the fact that
a cross-Channel invasion, to have permanent results, must be
on a very large scale and undertaken only after intensive
preparations and training. It revealed, besides, the need for
concentrated fire support from warships and aircraft in the
early stage of an amphibious landing18 and that the equipment
available to the Allies at the time was only suited for a land-
ing on a lightly-defended coast. That the logical landing
place is the wrong place to land was another of the lessons
that was not lost on the planning staffs
COSSAC.19
at Headquarters
n Bother, MY Tave Ye45), With Eisenhower, 67; C. P. Stacey, Canada's Battle
18 Edwards, Operation Neptune, 25.
18 Maund, Assault from the Sea, 114.
37
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
Planning a Landing at Normandy
The "Overlord" invasion plan called for an assault on the
beaches of Normandy. Other beaches facing England had,
by a process of elimination, been rejected as an invasion
route. The beaches in the Pas-de-Calais, pre-invasion studies
showed, had the highest capacity for passing vehicles and
supplies inland, but were located in the most heavily fortified
stretch of enemy-held coast and too close to the main Ger-
man reserves and air fighter forces. The Normandy area, on
the other hand, though somewhat less desirable from the
point of view of the capacity of the beaches and the distance
from England (some 100 miles as against the Pas-de-Calais'
18 to 20) was held by the Germans in comparative weakness.
Inland, the terrain was suitable for the development of air
strips and airfields, a requirement that was considered essen-
tial within the very first days of the landings. Enemy fighter
bases within striking range of the landings were scanty. There
were no substantial reserves of ground forces in the immedi-
ate area. It was stipulated in the "Overlord" plan that the
early tactical objectives of the invasion would be the con-
solidation of a reasonably large beachhead and the capture,
from the land side, of the port of Cherbourg and the ports
in Brittany.
The invasion was conceived in several phases. The pre-
liminary phase began in 1943 with an accelerated bomber
offensive against strategic targets-aimed at weakening Ger-
man resistance.
The preparatory phase
was planned as a
bomber offensive just prior to the invasion
against com-
munications leading into the Normandy coastal area.
The
assault phase, i.e.,
the actual landing of the infantry and
armored forces, was planned for three infantry divisions and
several tank regiments landing simultaneously from their in-
vasion craft.
This was to be preceded by a bombardment by
strategic bombers of tactical coast defense installations. Air-
