76
Operation Overlord: Part Il
General Bradley
(center),
commander
12th
Army
Group,
with
his
army
commanders:
General
Hodges
(left),
First Army, and
General
Patton (right), Third Army.
nominal existence of the Headquarters First United States
Army Group was to be just one more piece of evidence to
the Germans that additional large Allied ground forces
were being assembled and trained under its command in
England for an invasion of the Pas-de-Calais coast of France,
where the German High Command still expected the main
"Overlord" assault to take place. By mid-July, as 12th Army
Group units were crossing over to Normandy, the Germans
still thought of the Normandy invasion as a mere diversion-
ary effort, aimed at forcing them to divert their attention
from what was to them the real danger area-the Pas-de-
Calais-and to rush reinforcements to Normandy from there.
The Pas-de-Calais was the Germans'
most heavily defended
area of the entire European coastline held by them. Since
the German High Command did not know the specific in-
vasion plans of the Allies they built their defenses on what
Command Relations and Responsibilities
77
they thought their adversaries would be most likely to do.
Their logic and their estimate of the situation led them to
conclude that the Allies would invade with their main forces
across the Straits of Dover because the sea route,
being
shorter, would require less shipping and because from the
Pas-de-Calais the route is short and direct to the Ruhr, center
of Germany's industrial
and military strength and prize of
any strategically well conceived military campaign. The prize
was the greater since by the summer of 1944 Allied strategic
bombing had not materially reduced the Ruhr's effectiveness
as a center of military resources and power.
Nominally, therefore, the First United States Army Group
remained in existence-but on paper only—until October
18, 1944,18 when the strategic deception had successfully
served its purpose and there was no longer any need to keep
it in operation. When the American army group was renamed
12th Army Group, General Bradley formally assumed com-
mand of the latter. To command the nominally still extant
First Army Group, on July 21 was named Lieutenant General
Lesley J. McNair, and after his accidental death, due to faulty
bombing by American planes during the fighting around
St. Lo, the command went on August 10 to Lieutenant Gen-
eral John L. DeWitt.
Additional Armies
As the campaign in France progressed and the beachhead
United States
Army,
George S. Patton, Jr., became operational under 12th Army
Group. That same day General Bradley relinquished com-
mand of the First United States Army to Lieutenant General
Courtney H. Hodges and, upon instructions from the Supreme
18 ETOUSA, General Order No. 104, 18 October 1944.
