132
Operation Overlord: Part III
Allied policy in the freed countries. No national who had
willingly cooperated with the German occupation forces or
had acted with hostility toward the Allies was to be retained,
or placed, in office. All political prisoners were to be re-
leased, except those against whom there was evidence of
anti-Allied activity. In certain specified
zones, however,
political activity would be controlled by ordinance, if the
military situation warranted. Allied policy called for the
lifting of restrictions on freedom of speech, assembly, and
religious worship.®
Military Government in Captured German Territory
In German territory, Allied authority was to be exercised
by means of military government. Although in its technical
aspects conducted much in the same
way as civil affairs,
military government implied the imposition of the command-
er's will on the populace from the Supreme Allied Com-
mander on top, down to commanding generals of divisions.
Again, as in the case of civil affairs, the routine conduct of
administrative and technical services was to be left to ac-
ceptable civil functionaries, wherever that was possible.
It was planned that once Allied armies entered Germany
the Supreme
Allied Commander would
become Military
Governor as well. All powers of government would emanate
from him and he would be able, if he so desired, to delegate
some of his authority to army group commanders. Basic
enactments of the Supreme Commander's would be pub-
lished in the Official Gazette and would become law in Ger-
man territory immediately upon publication.
The main framework of military administration planned
for Germany called for the direct control of local German
police forces by Allied military government detachments.
Economic aid measures were to be confined to the preventing
" FUSAG,
Affairs
Operations in
Standonal
orces), 19 April
Operatio 1944.
"Overlord" (to accom-
Northwest
pure 13 Pemedy 140r Combined Civil
The Problem of Government
133
of paralysis in civil life and the spread of disease. Food and
shelter for displaced persons was to be provided by
the
Germans from their own stocks. No food and clothing was
to be imported for the German population except where
necessary to prevent interference with military operations or
to safeguard the health of Allied troops. If and when neces-
sary, military commanders were authorized to requisition
labor and to take whatever measures would be needed to
increase agricultural production.®
Basic Relief Requirements
An important phase of civil affairs planning
was the
emergency supply of food and the provision of shelter to
the civilian populations of western Europe. This task was
delegated to the military establishments,
which had the
necessary shipping and distribution machinery.
The long-
range program, however, was intended for Allied civilian
agencies. The Supreme Commander was therefore made
responsible for the distribution of economic aid in liberated
countries
during
the early stages of
the
invasion of the
Continent. 1º Gradually, when such countries as France and
Belgium, for example,
had come under the control of their
own national governments, the economic aid program would
be entirely taken over by the United Nations Relief and
Rehabilitation
Administration
(UNRRA),
which
founded for the purpose in November 1943. The work of
military and UNRRA
in the sphere of economic aid
during the transition from a military to a civilian respon-
sibility was regulated by an agreement between the Com-
bined Chiefs of Staff and the rehabilitation organization."
Large stocks of food were set aside for civilian aid in
western Europe. Allied planners estimated that during the
8 Ibid.
10 resent Tanklin D. Roosevelt to Secretary of War Henry I. Stimson,
1 AAC
War Department, Cable W-42278, 27 May 1944.
tation Administration
Agreement y
With United Nations Relief and Rehabili-
