Chapter 4
ALLIED COMMAND RELATIONS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES
International Command Relations
It was the general consensus that the system of Allied
command relations established for "Overlord" would be an
important factor in its success. The problem of unified com-
mand under a coalition never was simple. History afforded
proof of it. Before "Overlord"
planning
was too far ad-
vanced, however, experience in international command had
been gained in North Africa and in the invasions of Sicily
and Italy. Those campaigns had proved that, where the will
exists, several independent nations can work together under
a single command. As in most things, it was the rare qualities
of patience, tact, and an understanding of others that in the
end achieved the unity
required for
victory.
By D-day
(June 6, 1944), the Allied chain of command was firmly
established.
Since the senior United States Army tactical command in
Britain was under the administrative jurisdiction of Head-
quarters ETOUSA, the question arose early whether its
tactical planning should come directly under the Allied
Headquarters COSSAC or should be conducted through
ETOUSA as an intermediary link in the planning chain of
command. Although the question was not definitely settled
until the autumn of 1943, the earliest proposal for an Allied
system of command relations came from Lieutenant General
Frank M. Andrews, Commanding General of Headquarters
ETOUSA, shortly before he met his death in an airplane
crash early in 1943. The general proposed that planning by
66
Command Relations and Responsibilities
67
the senior United States and British tactical commands should
be carried out under the immediate control of COSSAC and
not through intermediaries. For administrative support the
former would draw on the resources of ETOUSA and the
latter on the War Office. These proposals were accepted by
General Morgan, at the head of COSSAC, and by the Com-
bined Chiefs of Staff. 1
Planning for the naval part of the invasion was delegated
to the Allied Naval Commander-in-Chief; for the tactical air
forces, to the Commander-in-Chief Allied Expeditionary Air
who would plan in detail and execute "Overlord" under the
over-all direction of the Supreme Commander. Since
work of these officers and their staffs was based on the
strategic Overlord Outline Plan, the contents of this plan
were made known to those directly concerned and a thorough
examination of it begun.? As soon as it was formed, the
First United States Army Group was made a party to
planning when COSSAC formally established
Staff.3
Command of Allied Ground Forces
seen by COSSAC, did not consider that the Supreme Com-
mander would take personal charge of the ground operations
in the early phases of the campaign, but that he would en-
trust it to the Commander-in-Chief 21 Army Group, although
he would personally review and approve major operational
plans.* The reason for this was that the area of operations
Organization
1 COSSAC (43).
1st Meeting,
April
Play 198 cross-Channel
Operations
Annex
5 A us( 190/65/Ops, "Overlord" One, Notes for Meeting of Heads of Branches,
3 COSSAC to FUSAG, 21 October 1943.
* COSSAC (43) 38 (Final), 20 August 1943.
