96
Operation Overlord: Part III
Studies revealed that weather forecasts would be correct on
approximately 75 percent of the occasions, but no more.
Assuming that the weather was already fine on D-day it
was not possible to forecast the likelihood, or otherwise, of
a break in the weather beyond D+2. Research into the
records of weather conditions in Normandy during several
previous decades showed that the average length of a quiet
spell was approximately eight days. Owing to the specific
tide and moon conditions required for D-day, it could not,
however, be assumed that D-day would necessarily fall in
the early part of a quiet spell. It could, for example, fall on
the fifth or sixth day of an anticipated eight-day spell of
good weather. So nicely had all these elements to be bal-
anced in the selection of D-day that neither scientific fore-
casting ability nor the law of averages could give a reason-
able assurance of favorable weather on or after D+3.
Taking all these factors into account, D-day was finally
selected on May 8, at a conference attended by the Supreme
Commander, his three tactical Commanders-in-Chief,
other high military and meteorological advisers. June 5 was
selected as the day of the great invasion of France, allowing
for a postponement to June 6 and only in extreme
neces-
sity to June 7. Should adverse weather prevent a reasonably
successful "Neptune" on any of the above three days the
invasion would need to be postponed for a fortnight. Once
D-day had been definitely agreed upon, H-hour was selected
so that the assault troops would land on the incoming tides,
below the enemy beach obstacles, and clear the obstacles
and mines before the rising tide covered them. Since tide
conditions were known to vary somewhat from beach to
beach, and since on several of the five beaches selected for
the assault defense obstacles were known to be in place far-
ther down than in the others, the assault as a whole had to
be staggered, so to speak. Five different H-hours were se-
lected, extending from 6:30 to 7:45 in the morning of D-day.
7 SCAEF, 18th Meeting, 8 May 1944.
97
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
Other Invasion Problems
Other ramifications of the "Neptune" plan included re-
search and decisions on a program of airfield construction
in Normandy,
beginning with D-day or D+1; the build-up
of balanced forces of combat and service troops; the antiair-
craft defenses of vital invasion harbors and depots in Eng-
land; enemy naval, air, and ground capabilities; assault train-
ing for the troops; the evacuation of casualties and prisoners
of war; and a number of kindred subjects. The build-up of
United States air and ground forces and vast stocks of sup-
plies and equipment figured prominently in the preparations
for the launching of "Neptune." Of these many strands was
the cord of the invasion plan fashioned.
American Troop Build-Up
The bulk of American combat troops began to arrive in
the United Kingdom late in the summer of 1943. Except for
the Air Force, which was established on bases generally in
East Anglia and farther south in the eastern half of England,
the Americans were spread into the west of England and
Northern Ireland. During the twelve months between mid-
the United Kingdom from the United States.
housing
and hospitalization, provided. The hospital plan
alone for American troops, for example, called for 94,000
beds in permanent hospitals-which
Provision had to be made for some 64 million feet of stor-
age and shop space. About 20,000 freight cars and 1,000
locomotives had to be shipped to the United Kingdom. The
American Air Force, in addition, needed more
airfields, a number of which had to be built and the re-
mainder acquired from the Royal Air Force.® The British
8 Marshall, The Winning of the War, 10.
