Operation Overlord: Part IV
160
blocked by antitank walls and ditches. Artillery and mortars
were sited to deliver indirect fire on the beaches from posi-
tions farther inland.21
The leading wave of Allied troops touched down on French
soil at six-thirty in the morning of D-day. In the First Army
sector, VII Corps assaulted Utah beach with the 4th Infantry
Division and V Corps assaulted Omaha beach with the lst
Infantry Division. On the Second Army front, XXX Corps
landed on Gold beach with the 50th (Northumbrian) Infan-
try Division and I Corps landed on Juno beach
Canadian 3d Infantry Division and on Sword beach with
the British 3d Infantry Division, H-hour varying from seven
twenty-five to eight o'clock. The immediate objective of the
five leading assault divisions was to push westward from
Utah beach across the inundated area, link up with the two
airborne divisions, and cut off the Cotentin Peninsula, at
the same time driving southward on the remainder of the
front to capture the main east-west Carentan-Bayeux-Caen
highway.
By and large, the invasion proceeded according to the
plan, except for Omaha beach, where, because of the un-
anticipated presence of the additional German infantry divi-
sion in the line, considerable difficulty was encountered.
Generally poor weather also added to the greater difficulties,
the high seas hurling many of the smaller landing craft onto
the beaches and swamping others before they could beach.
Numbers of soldiers were drowned while wading through
the breakers and those who reached dry land were in most
instances exhausted beyond the ability to fight inland. Some
of the amphibious tanks, launched about a mile and a half
offshore from their landing craft, had trouble because of the
high waves, and they went down to the bottom of the sea.
Only on Utah and Sword beaches did they come in safely,
providing local support to the assault infantry. In one in-
21 Marshall, The Winning of the War, 32-33.
The Invasion of France
161
stance, poor judgment led a local tank commander
to
launch his tanks about three miles from shore, only two or
three reaching the beach; in
another, the commander had
the landing craft sail right up
to
the beachline, and dis-
embarked his tanks directly
on the beach. Individual judg-
ment and initiative by lower commanders counted for much
in the early hours of the battle for the
beaches,
but even
of the tanks that got ashore the majority
was destroyed by
mines and enemy antitank fire. Considerable damage, higher
than had been allowed for, was done to the smaller of the
invasion craft—to those that came
within range of enemy
shore batteries, but the losses to ships and larger landing
craft were, on the whole, smaller than had been expected.
The weapons that were
most effective in close support of
the assault troops were the rocket-firing craft, destroyers,
and
craft
carrying
self-propelled
guns (LCG's),
which
blasted the beaches as the infantry and engineer demolition
units approached the shore.22
Landings on Utah Beach
On Utah beach, the landings of the 4th Infantry Division
were made against slight opposition. No small arms fire was
received as the first waves of assault infantry landed.
The
amphibious tanks, which had been launched from their land-
ing craft about a mile and a half from shore, came in safely.
Only occasional fire from distant artillery batteries was re-
ceived during the early hours of the invasion. The ease with
which this landing was made is attributable to one of those
fortunate errors of fate so common in history: Because of
the early loss of the control vessels, which guided the land-
ing craft to their assigned beach sectors, and the clouds of
dust which the naval bombardment had thrown up obscuring
the beach (owing to the absence of dominating ground), the
landing was made about three-quarters of a mile to the
2 ANCXF,
hower, Report
Report oi
pothe Combined
"Neptune" hiefs of Staff,
Gazette, Supplement, p. 5117; Eisen-
