170
Operation Overlord: Part IV
SS Armored Divisions and the 17th SS Armored Grenadier
Division-were located in that area, and two, the 2d and
11th Armored Divisions, were known to be en route there.
The Costly Struggle for Caen
On the front of I Corps, progress toward Can was very
slow. The Canadian 3d Division, pushing down from the
northeast, was counterattacked on D+1 near Authie, and
the division was forced to withdraw from its forward posi-
tions and reorganize. The British 3d Division, pressing in on
Caen from the north, on the left of the Canadians, was also
engaged in heavy fighting and made little headway.
tremely sensitive to the safety of this strategic city,
Germans began to reinforce its defenses almost from the
very beginning of the beach landings and brought troops
there from other sectors southwest of the Seine.
elements of three armored divisions were defending the gen-
eral area of Caen, aside from infantry: The 12th SS (*Hitler
Jugend'') and 21st Armored Divisions and the Panzer Lehr
Division. But Allied strength was gradually being built up
in an effort to seize Caen and to engage the German armored
units in that area in a move to keep them from being sent
to oppose the operations of the First United States Army
farther west. The 6th Airborne Division and the 1st Com-
mando Brigade stubbornly resisted all enemy efforts to dis-
lodge them from their bridgehead on the east bank of the
Orne between Caen and the English Channel. Reinforced by
the 51st Infantry Division, the Second Army commander was
preparing to employ these forces in attacks on the eastern
outskirts
of Caen while the remainder of I Corps attacked
from the north and XXX Corps thrust from the west in an
attempt to invest the city. Next to the struggle on Omaha
beach, the fight for Caen was the most bitter and costly of
the entire "Overlord"
campaign. The Germans rushed all
the armor they could spare into that area, except that from
The Invasion of France
171
the Pas-de-Calais, where their Fifteenth Army was awaiting
an invasion across the Straits of Dover. At the end of the first
five or six days of fighting the Germans had concentrated on
the eastern half of the Normandy front, extending roughly
from Caen to Caumont and held by the
Second British
Army, some 520 tanks, roughly the equivalent of four full
armored divisions, and 43 infantry battalions. On the west-
ern half of the front, extending from Caumont westward to
the Cotentin Peninsula and held by the First United States
Army, were disposed about 70 tanks, equivalent to about
half a division's strength, and about 63 infantry battalions.3l
Completion of the Battle of the Beachhead
Logistically, operations between
6th and 12th fell
considerally behind schedule, although during that time some
326,000 troops, 54,000 vehicles,
and 104,000 tons of sup-
plies were brought ashore over the
beaches. The heavy seas
that prevailed during most of this period, the initially slow
progress on Omaha, the need for the beach organizations
to function in close proximity to the fighting, the priority
given to the shipment to France of combat troops in place of
service troops, and the loss of some supplies to the sea ac-
counted for the slower rate of logistical build-up. To help
tide over a shortage of small arms ammunition,
supplies had to be flown in on June 10. But, on the whole,
by the time the invasion area was consolidated into one con-
tinuous beachhead, the United States and Royal Navies had
moved key personnel ashore and were operating the beaches
as regular harbors.
Salvage units were established, both
ashore and afloat, to provide emergency repairs to ships and
landing craft.
On D+1 the first convoy of blockships arrived and their
scuttling as breakwaters off the beaches, as protection to
the artificial ports and the ships at anchor, was begun. On
D+2 the
first units of the artificial ports began to arrive
a1 Montgomery, Normandy to Baltic, 113.
