Operation Overlord: Part 1
vocated what came to be known as the Mediterranean strategy
for land operations and a cross-Channel strategy for heavy
bomber operations in the initial stages of an Allied offensive
against Germany. The cross-Channel strategy for an invas-
ion by ground forces they favored only in the final phase of
the war, when Germany would be weakened by harassing
oftensives against her periphery and the Allies had gained
strength by devising the means with which an invasion from
England could be undertaken.
British Strategy and the U. S. Concept
The United States Army chiefs and the Secretary of War,
in general with but lukewarm support from the Navy and
President Franklin D. Roosevelt,
were advocates of the
cross-Channel strategy during the very outset of a cam-
paign against Germany as a means of reaching and destroy-
ing the center of her strength. They recommended an in-
vasion of the European continent at the "most direct point"
in 1942. They considered operations in the Mediterranean
as at best diversions, holding forth no prospects of decisive
results. To the British Government, however, a full-scale
invasion of the Continent at an early date was more a ques-
tion of its feasibility than of opposition in principle. The
timing, as the British authorities saw it, was based on the
degree of preparedness of the Allies to launch a successful
invasion. The British defense chiefs were indifferent to
premature amphibious operation across the English Channel.
They considered such an operation as at best unduly danger-
ous and at worst as reckless rather than bold. They believed
in the necessity of a cross-Channel invasion at a later date,
when Allied resources would be equal to the task.' British
and icon or stay
chapter
chapters 4-6;
and wight
War
Arnold
after thewed
revised
Ng hon: He
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
defense authorities had begun to make preparations and to
plan for such an invasion as early as 1940 and 1941. We
shall return to this theme in chapter 2 of this work.
The strategy of both the United States and Great Britain
was determined by their geography and history: Great Brit-
ain's, largely by her insular position and historic imperial
and Commonwealth ties; that of the United States, by her
traditional isolationism
from global affairs (outside
the
Pacific Ocean) and from areas in which she had little or no
direct interest.
Since Great Britain, like the United States, is by tradition
not a military nation, her war strategy, when attacked, has
been, first, to defend the British Isles, then her vital oversea
possessions and spheres of influence, which she was able to
do by the exercise of superior sea power, and finally, to go
over to the offensive. Until she garnered all her resources
for a final engagement, however, Britain's offensive actions
were directed mostly at the enemy's periphery—at distant
points-in
order to
weaken
his
communications
and to
force him
still further to
disperse his
military
resources.
This strategy was the foundation of Britain's victory over
Napoleon?
British defense chiefs
employed it also in the
Second World War.
The battle of El Alamein, in Egypt,
and the Allied invasion of North
Africa in the
autumn of
military
Years
Bryant
maal states a ade
945).
