2n0
VO
20
Operation Overlord: Part 1
was Churchill's answer. And he revived the proposal for an
invasion of North Africa in 1942 in the light of the im-
possibility of an invasion of France that year. In British
eyes-—military as well as political-an invasion of the north-
west coast of Africa was both strategically wise and tactically
feasible. It was intended to catch the German and Italian
forces facing the Eighth British Army in Libya in the rear
and squeeze them from east and west, either to destroy them
or drive them out of the whole of the north coast of Africa,
thereby freeing the Mediterranean Sea of the enemy. 40
Grave News from the Middle East
Until the time of the Washington Conference in June 1942,
the English Channel versus Mediterranean Sea controversy
was, to some extent, conducted in an academic atmosphere.
With the British Middle East offensive proceeding rather
successfully, the Western Allies were left a free choice in
the selection of an area for a strategic
counteroffensive.
Even though an invasion of France in 1942 had to be ruled
out, there existed, it could be argued on some grounds, no
urgency in conducting a counteroffensive in the Mediter-
ranean. But as the discussions were in progress, grave news
reached Washington. The British in Libya had suffered
an
unexpected and severe defeat at the hands of Rommel's
Afrika Korps, and Tobruk, which had withstood siege for
well nigh eight months, had fallen. The Eighth British Army
was in retreat along the entire front, falling back on the Nile.
The Allied position in the Middle East had taken a grave
turn.
Not only were
British
Middle East resources-in
themselves very valuable to the Allied cause-
endangered,
but a flanking threat was created to the Russian armies in
the Caucasus and on the Volga.
The
Allied supply route
through the Persian Gulf to Russia would be cut. The Ger-
10 With permission of Harper and Brothers, publishers of Roosevelt and Hopkins.
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
21
mans had actually broken into Egypt. They merely paused
to regroup at El Alamein, just west of Alexandria. The British
position had become critical.
Prime Minister Churchill immediately left for London to
keep in closer touch with the situation, and the conference
adjourned without taking action. Churchill's proposal for
an invasion of northwestern Africa had now taken on an
air of urgency. If undertaken, it would threaten the German
line of communications and force them either to reinforce
the Afrika Korps and thereby weaken other fronts or to let
the Afrika Korps fight a two-front campaign and face the
possibility of complete defeat.
Roosevelt and the African Invasion
President Roosevelt favored a North African invasion.
He favored it for two reasons: With the Atlantic and Medi-
terranean seaboards of Africa in Allied hands the Western
Hemisphere, and more especially the Panama Canal, would
be secure and the Middle East oil resources and Persian
Gulf supply
route to Russia saved. The President's own
strategic predilections had all along inclined to a coordinated
Allied countermove
to German-Italian ambitions in the
Mediterranean. And in view of the impossibility of an in-
vasion of France in 1942 and the turn of events in Libya,
his attitude became more fixed in the face of objections to
Mediterranean
operations on the
part of the responsible
Army authorities in the United States, who were backed by
the Secretary of War and Harry Hopkins, the President's
intimate friend.41 The Army attitude is perhaps best stated
by the late General Joseph W. Stilwell, an able soldier, who
noted in his diary at the time that in the higher Army circles
they saw "no earthly reason" why the United States should
get involved in the Mediterranean. 42
11 Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins, 460, 520-21,
648: Churchill, Grand Alli-
49 Tosenh
rell, The Stilwell Papers (New York, 1948), 20.
