Operation Overlord: Part I
46
to the Combined Chiefs of Staff at Quebec, it had to be
satisfied that its plan was tactically possible and that there
existed the proper technological means by
which
victory
could be achieved. It also had to be satisfied that amphibious
invasion techniques were sufficiently far advanced in their
development to overcome the specific types of defenses the
Germans were known to have erected in Normandy. It also
had to be sure that the plan which it asked the higher au-
thorities to approve was logistically capable of support. In
this connection, the strategic planning of COSSAC and its
predecessors went hand in hand with the technological tac-
tical planning, designing, and experimenting. The formation
in Britain in 1940 of the Commandos and of Combined
Operations Command initiated the studies into the dual na-
ture of a cross-Channel amphibious invasion by mechanized
and motorized forces. The interlocking aspects of strategic
desirability and physical possibility were thoroughly examined
and tested. The raids conducted by Combined Operations
Command on enemy-held
coasts,
extending from the
Loften Islands in the far north of Norway to the Channel
Islands, tested old and new invasion techniques-including
weapons and assault boats that were either already in use
or in design. Much valuable information was gathered of
German defenses:-both as to type and extent—so that the
strategic route of invasion to the Continent could be selected
on the basis of least enemy defensive capabilities, or weapons
and equipment designed with which to pierce a preferred in-
vasion route, though it might be heavily defended.
The Development of Invasion Equipment
In June 1940, immediately following upon the evacuation
from Dunkirk, the Minister of Defence of Great Britain in-
structed the Chiefs of Staff Committee to prepare measures
for offensive operations against German-occupied territory
and to submit proposals for transporting and landing armored
33 Dalgleish, Second Front, 9; Edwards, Operation Neptune, 23-24.
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
47
cars and tanks on enemy-held coasts. At the same time, the
Minister of Supply was instructed to accelerate the design
and production of ocean-going ships capable of carrying
from 600 to 700 tanks and vehicles and landing them on
beaches.? The fashioning of invasion craft received added
impetus when a special department was organized in the
Admiralty to look after that phase of the naval program. In
October 1940, the first LCT, designed and built in Britain,
was already being tested. The much larger and more widely
used LST was designed in Britain late in 1940, after the
unsuccessful expedition to seize Dakar revealed the need for
an ocean-going ship that could land armored units on enemy
beaches. Experiments were begun with oil tankers employed
on Lake Maracaibo, in Venezuela. Because of their shallow
draft, these tankers were considered the most suitable for the
purpose. They had their bows cut off and a ramp fitted.
After successful experiments they were placed in mass pro-
duction both in Britain and the United States. In general,
invasion vessels fell into two main types: The larger vessels,
such as LST and LCI(L), mostly of British design and
development, were for sea-going purposes, and the
smaller
craft, such as LCM and LVT, largely of American design,
were used for ship-to-shore traffic. 35 The most important of
the landing craft and the most extensively used in all theaters
of operations was the sea-going LST, the production of which
constituted half the tonnage of the entire landing craft pro-
gram in the United States. 36
Other essential invasion equipment for breaking the crust
of German coastal defenses, principally the product of British
development and experimentation, were the assault engineer
tanks; tank-carried bridges for crossing antitank ditches; mat-
laying tanks, used for covering soft patches of clay on beaches
so that vehicles could pass over them; ramp tanks over
31 Churchill, Their Finest Hour, 247-48.
a Churchill, Their Finest Dry Land (New York, 1944), 51.
38 United
War Production
Civilian
Socid washingueh, 1944),
Administration, Landing Craft and the
