2n0
Operation Overlord: Part 1
16
considerable degree, on history—an effort to use past ex-
perience as a guide for future action. In 1801, in the
struggle against Napoleon, Nelson failed to capture an in-
vasion flotilla in French ports because, owing to his lack of
assault craft and equipment with which to overcome the
French defenses, he could not land on the beaches.30 The
expedition in 1940 to seize Dakar proved abortive for the
same reason—a lack of special craft and ships from which
to launch tanks, self-propelled guns, and similar offensive
weapons.
The Channel Poses its Problems
These considerations applied with even greater force to
the English Channel, a body of water the British knew well.
They also knew the strength of German defenses in France
and the state of military readiness for a cross-Channel in-
vasion of the Western Allies. In the face of a well-organized
defense, such as existed in the Pas-de-Calais, no invasion
could succeed without a plentiful supply of specially de-
signed landing craft and personnel well trained in their
handling. The Western Allies had neither in sufficient num-
ber. Unlike the crossing of a river, crossing the English
Channel involves the crossing of a sea. In the face of an
adversary having close at hand
naval, air, and military
power, an invasion could be undertaken only under the most
favorable of weather conditions. And that could be obtained
only during certain short periods of the year. "The English
Channel,"
writes an American naval officer and author,
"is a narrow, nasty piece of water. The tide rips through it
west-to-east on the flood, east-to-west on the ebb, directly
athwart the
simple north-south
France that looks so easy on the chart." 31
course from England to
Hitler, too, faced the problem of a cross-Channel in-
vasion in 1940. He had to abandon it because, although he
had
accumulated a sizable fleet
of self-propelled
river
a Water, Keis f Freurence: 1l: The Atlantic War (New York, 1946), 302.
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
17
barges,
the German admirals considered such an operation
unfeasible in the face of the Royal Navy and beach defenses
without special assault craft and training in assault tech-
niques. The admirals would not guarantee the success of an
invasion of England. Hitler and his generals came face to
face with the inescapable realization that the English Channel
was not a river but a sea, 32 and that if a large-scale invasion
operation failed the first time it could scarcely be attempted
again.33 This was not understood by most of the military
authorities of the continental nations, such as the United
States, Germany, and Soviet Russia, where the bulk of mili-
tary thinking and planning was centered in the Army staffs.
The sea was of only secondary or even lesser significance.
It figured largely as a route of conveyance of ground forces
to distant theaters of operations; seldom as a means of direct
offensive military operations. This psychology was a natural
product of a traditional and historical land-mindedness, a
land-mindedness based on a nation's having fought its great
wars on land, and seldom upon the sea. This virtual lack of
appreciation of offensive sea warfare on the
part of con-
tinental nations is best illustrated by an observation attrib-
uted to Field Marshal Clementi
Voroshilov,
a ranking
officer of the Soviet Army. In pressing the British defense
chiefs for an early invasion of France, he recognized the
difficulties of crossing the English Channel, he stated, but the
Russians, said he, had encountered similar difficulties in the
crossing of wide rivers but had nevertheless overcome them
because "they had the will to do it."34 In the United States,
the situation was not dissimilar. The Chief of Staff of the
Army, with commendable candor, owned that he had first
begun to acquire a knowledge based on oceans only in
1942-43. Prior to that he had had no acquaintance with
invasion landing craft, "except a rubber boat."35
32 Churchill.
Their Finest Hour,
33 Calearn Ciano. The
1939-1943 (New York, 1946), 338.
34 Sherwood, Roosevelt
and Hopkins,
783.
784.
