Chapter 2
CROSS-CHANNEL INVASION: STRATEGY AND
TECHNIQUES
The Preparations Begin
Soon after the evacuation of the British Army from Dun-
kirk in late spring of 1940,1 both the political and military
leaders in Great Britain became preoccupied with the prob-
lem of invading the Continent, there to fight the decisive
battles of the war. These leaders were untiring in their efforts
to develop a suitable strategic invasion plan and
to devise
the means with which to put the plan into operation. They
therefore decided to do first things first and set to work on
inventing and designing mechanized and motorized equip-
ment with which to overcome known enemy types of de-
fenses. Work was expanded on experimenting with amphibi-
ous invasion techniques.
British military thinking had for some time been moving
in the direction of mobility and mechanized warfare, a type
of armed contest especially suitable to the northwestern area
of the European continent. The British invented the tank—
or "land battleship," as it was at first called-in order to
restore some of the mobility lost to combat in World War I.
They were the first to organize motorized and armored regi-
ments for the same purpose? It was not surprising, there-
fore, to find the British in 1940 thinking in terms of large
mechanized and motorized
ground forces for employment
against the body of the German Army stationed in western
Bin and notection
and Air Force a quar
2 S.L.A. Marshall, Blitzkrieg (New York, 1940), 21, 23.
we a vacater to england.
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
29
Europe. Still less surprising was it to find them proposing at
the first Allied war conference in Washington ("Arcadia")
the organization and training of 40 Allied armored divisions
(of 15,000 men each), of which Great Britain would provide
about half. The proposals called also for large forces of the
other basic arms of the ground forces.?
A large-scale campaign in western Europe as the only way
which to deliver the final defeat on Germany was the
essence of British Government thinking. In 1941, the date for
a campaign in western Europe was set as the summer of
1943. The driving of the Germans and Italians from North
Africa, the seizure of Sicily, and the invasion of Italy would
all "fall short" of ending the war, it was thought, if the main
body of the German Army in the West were not defeated
on the Continent. And although much was expected from
strategic bombing, in the way of destruction of the German
will to continue the war, over-all strategic planning pro-
ceeded none the less on the reasonable assumption that an
invasion of France would meet with stubborn resistance from
the Germans.+
The fundamental problem that faced British
planners at
an early date, therefore, was the problem of landing suc-
cessfully a large motorized army
on the hostile European
shores.
That problem had first to be solved on the tactical
level of planning and correlated to any strategic plans that
might be under consideration.
The strategic plans under con-
sideration had, in turn, to be based on fundamental principles
of warfare, such as concentration of force in the offensive,
surprise, and the maintenance of the momentum of the attack
the better to gain both the tactical and strategic objectives.
To explore the problem of reconciling strategic invasion plans
to their tactical feasibilities and of devising the means of
overcoming the tactical difficulties to a favored strategic plan,
the British Chiefs of Staff Committee in 1940 directed its
3 Churchill Grand Alliance, 650-59.
4 Ibid., 656.
