94
Overation Overlord: Part III
the methods of delaying the arrival of enemy reserves was
the work of another committee. Still another, worked on the
strategic plan of deception, since it was considered vital to
the success of "Overlord" that the Germans retain the major
portion of their troops stationed in the West exactly where
they were; in the Pas-de-Calais, and
not move them to
Normandy, at least not until a beachhead had been firmly
established.
In addition, special studies were undertaken on such sub-
jects as airfield requirements in France, and the selection of
specific sites for their construction; of glider and transport
aircraft requirements; and for requirements of antiaircraft
artillery protection to vital installations.
Studies were made
on the most favorable period of the year for D-day and
H-hour;® the possibility of German employment of bacterio-
logical and chemical warfare; policy regarding anti-gas meas-
ures; and the laying out of the lines of communication.
When to Attack?
Some very fundamental factors had to be incorporated in
the "Neptune" plan in order to make it workable.* Questions
of supply had to be considered, and the logistical planning
and the accumulation of shidding conducted on a basic
requirement on the Continent of over one million tons of
equipment during the first 17 days of the invasion. Weather
conditions had to be taken into account for the D-day and
H-hour selected. The best time for H-hour was considered
about one hour after the beginning of daylight, allowing a
minimum of 30 minutes and a maximum of 60 minutes for
preliminary bombardment by naval and air forces. Another
factor in determining H-hour was the state of the tides in
the invasion area. It was determined that the best time for
the first troops to touch down from their landing craft would
be three hours before high water. This would expose the
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
95
intricate system of underwater obstacles and mines to view
and allow sufficient time for the blasting of paths through
them before the next waves of assault troops landed. Thus,
the day chosen for the invasion would have to have two
indispensable factors present in nice balance: The desirable
state of the tide would have to exist; and this had to be
about half an hour after the beginning of daylight. Into this
had to be injected a third factor, equally as indispensable
as the first two. On the night before D-day there had to
be moonlight, so that airborne troops could be landed near
critical targets.
The best time when the three conditions would be most
likely to prevail, studies of Normandy revealed, was the first
week in June. And in case of a postponement of D-day on
account of bad weather, and in order to retain the combina-
tion of the above three factors, a postponement of one or
two days would be possible once in each fortnight during
the summer months. Weather conditions for airborne land-
ings had also to be just right: To avoid wide dispersal and
excessive casualties a wind not exceeding 20 miles per hour
was considered desirable. Planners were willing to accept a
30 miles-per-hour wind, even though it involved considerable
risk to both paratroopers and gliderborne troops, but not a
stronger wind. There also had to be no fog over the landing
area for the airborne part of "Neptune" to be mounted.® In
general, a fairly long period of good weather following D-day
was considered necessary so that reserves of combat troops
and supplies could be built up over the beaches against the
possibility of a break in the weather which would interfere
with the required rate of build-up.
The staffs working on the "Neptune" plan considered it
possible to forecast the conditions required for D-day 24
hours in advance, also weather conditions immediately fol-
lowing D-day, but not the
duration of those
conditions.
521 A.
NJC 1001, "Neptune" -Meeting of
i Joint Commanders-in-Chief (en-
1943. December 1943.
