Operation Overlord: Part IV
158
the Cotentin Peninsula from the south in order to prevent
German reinforcements from entering it were not realized. 19
The main body of the division concentrated therefore on
consolidating a defensive base at Ste. Mere-Eglise, and by
the end of D-day, after receiving reinforcements,
the town
was captured and contact made with patrols of the 4th Infan-
try Division, which had in the meantime fought its way inland
from Utah beach against light opposition. On June 8, the
82d Division made contact with its regiments that were
isolated west of the Merderet and until positions were con-
solidated and exploited further, both the 82d and the 101st
Divisions were kept resupplied by air.
The Main Invasion Forces
The main invading forces that came to Normandy from
England by sea constituted 21 Army Group, commanded by
General Bernard L. Montgomery, which consisted of the
First United States Army of Lieutenant General Omar N.
Bradley and the Second British Army of Lieutenant General
Sir Miles Dempsey. Poised for the assault in their many land-
ing ships and landing craft along the western half of the
"Neptune" area was the First Army, made up of the Amer-
ican V Corps and VII Corps, and along the eastern half,
the Second Army, made up of the British I Corps and XXX
Corps. Facing them stood three enemy divisions between the
Vire and the Orne, the main "Neptune" area, and three in
the Cotentin Peninsula, on whose southeast coast was Utah
beach, separated from the main invasion zone by the Vire
estuary and marshes. An additional division stood just to
the east of "Neptune," between the Orne and Seine estuaries.
The enemy units not immediately in the Utah beach area
were engaged and contained by the 82d and 101st Airborne
Divisions, and attempted reinforcements from the east were
held off by the 6th Airborne Division. Of the three divisions
10 FUSA,
After Action Report:
MonSome y Ner Action Butt, War Department, Utah to Cherbourg, 30, 42;
The Invasion of France
159
holding the main "Neptune" area, one, however, was not
expected there on D-day. It was there, however,
on
maneuvers and on June 6 was deployed for action.20 The
presence of this additional division
complicated the whole
assault operation, and
on the Omaha
sector, where the
The Ist Division comes ashore on D-day.
These are troops of the
16th Infantry at Colleville-sur-Mer, on
Omaha Beach.
greater portion of its troops were in position, it created dur-
ing most of D-day a serious situation.
German shore defenses which Allied troops had to breach
consisted of vertical steel obstacles under water at high tide,
designed to break up formations of landing craft attempting
to reach the beaches.
To many of these were attached mines.
On the beaches themselves extensive minefields were laid and
barbed wire fences erected. Concrete gun emplacements and
pillboxes dominated the beaches and their sea approaches
from high ground farther back and
all beach
exits were
Raltic. 40
20 Liddell Hart, The Other Side of the Hill, 247-48; Montgomery, Normandy to
