Operation Overlord: Part I
38
borne troops were to be dropped to seize Caen, on the east
flank of the invasion, and Commandos were to seize impor-
tant crossings over the Orne River.
Once the beach defenses had been stormed and pene-
trated, the invasion plan called for a thrust inland
on a
line running through Grandcamp, Bayeux, and Caen. From
there, during what was called the follow-up and build-up
phases, the movement was to continue southward to acquire
airfield sites and southwestward to gain depth for a turning
movement over the Vire River and northward into the Coten-
tin Peninsula in order to take Cherbourg in the rear. While
the Cherbourg operation by a semi-autonomous force was
progressing, the main body of the Allied forces would con-
tinue their drive southward between the Vire and Orne
Rivers, the pace of the advance being more rapid on the
western flank and gradually slowing down from west to east
until it practically came to a standstill, in the form of hold-
ing attacks, on the extreme eastern flank, at Caen and the
Orne. This tactical conception had as its objective a swing
southeastward by the right arm of the Allied forces to the
Loire River until the entire front gradually faced eastward
instead of southward, the city of Caen, on the northeastern
extremity of the Allied front, serving as the pivot of the
movement. With the Allies' right flank resting on the Loire
and the left flank on the English Channel, the campaign
would then develop in an easterly and northeasterly direction
toward Paris and the Seine River. By the end of two weeks
of fighting
(D+14)
plated there would be three Allied
the Overlord Outline Plan contem-
armies in France-
-one
British army, one American army, and one Canadian army:
totaling 12 infantry and six armored divisions.
In order to facilitate the tactical movement of the separate
Anglo-Canadian and United States forces in their respective
zones of operations, and their lines of communication, the
"Overlord"
planners arrived at a simple scheme. They placed
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
39
the Anglo-Canadian ground forces on the left of the line and
the United States forces on the right. This meant that dur-
ing the first weeks of the invasion the British and Canadians
would be on the eastern part of the front and the Americans
on the western, facing south, except for the units driving
northward on Cherbourg in the Cotentin Peninsula. As the
Allied forces swung, pendulum-like, southeastward and east-
ward, Anglo-Canadian units would be on the north of the
line and United States units on the south, facing eastward.
To carry the invasion force from England to France on
D-day, the COSSAC staff estimated that an armada of about
4,060 ships and landing craft of all types would have to be
assembled. The available air forces were estimated at ap-
proximately 663
squadrons, the United States Army Air
Forces furnishing about 7,300 planes and the Royal Air
Force and Royal Canadian Air Force about 4,000.20 In
addition, the United States was to provide 1,140 gliders, for
the gliderborne components of the airborne divisions, and
Great Britain 1,600. Supplies to be landed on the beaches on
4,600 tons and
vehicles at 11,500.
The Quebec Conference Studies the Plan
This, in broad outline, was the plan that was submitted
by COSSAC to the Combined Chiefs of Staff and heads of
state at Quebec in August 1943. Some officers present felt
that the rate of advance forecast in the Overlord Outline
Plan was too optimistic. Field Marshal Sir Alan Brooke,
Chief of the Imperial General Staff, thought that a fiercely
resisting enemy, as in North Africa and Sicily, could slow
up an advance, particularly in the Normandy hedgerow type
of country. The initial assault forces were, moreover, to
have only a small margin of manpower superiority over the
Germans.* Other ranking officers held that for the opera-
20 These figures were for all types of planes heavys
and medium
reconnaissance, and others.
bombers,
