Operation Overlord: Part IV
176
the First United States Army sector between Caumont and
Carentan remained comparatively inactive, the Second British
Army commenced a three-pronged drive on Caen, the at-
tack going in on June 25, three days behind schedule on
account of the reduced supply build-up over the beaches.
Little progress was made, however. German counterattacks
of infantry and armor were responsible for the minor gains
made, while in some sectors British and Canadian units were
forced to withdraw from previously-gained positions. The
main east-west Caen-Avranches road was bitterly contested
by the Germans and they exacted a heavy toll in life. Since
the German strategists feared most a breakthrough at Caen
and a crossing of the Orne on a wide front, they concentrated
their heaviest defenses there: Seven and one-half armored
divisions (totalling more than 700 tanks) protected the 20-
mile stretch of the British-Canadian front between Caen and
Caumont on the last day of June. An estimated total of 64
infantry battalions also occupied the sector. On the remainder
of the Allied front, from Caumont westward to the Cotentin,
where the Americans were fighting, the Germans had 63
infantry battalions and about 140 tanks.
Regrouping of First U. S. Army and Continued Attack
Despite the small territorial gains made on the eastern
flank of the front, operations proceeded according
to the
strategic plan, which had as its principal aim the pinning
down of the available German reserves on the Second British
Army front, thereby permitting the First United States Army
to take Cherbourg and regroup for a drive to the Loire
against a minimum of opposition. The numerous tank battles
which the Second Army forced the Germans to fight and its
aggressive actions eastward and southward from the bridge-
head on the east bank of the Orne, further confirmed the
Germans in their belief that the main Allied threat lay where
they assumed it logically would.
2 Montgomery, Normandy to Baltic, 65, 113; Stacey, The Canadian Army, 184.
The Beachhead Widened
177
Once Cherbourg was in Allied hands, to be developed
as a major port of entry for troops and supplies, and the
bulk of the German reserves contained near Caen, the First
United States Army
was able to regroup its forces
for the
next phase of the campaign. This meant a breakout in force
from the
constricted
beachhead
southward and southeast-
ward toward
Vire, Mayenne, Laval,
Le Mans,
and points
farther east and south. It also meant a simultaneous break-
out along the west coast of the Cotentin Peninsula, swinging
into Brittany for a drive on Brest.
On the Second British
Army front, the seizure of Caen and the extension
of the
on the east bank of the Orne were major ob-
jectives. To the Germans, these had become the important
strongpoints to be held in order to contain the beachhead.3
In the Cotentin
Peninsula the attack jumped off at five
thirty in the morning of July 3, from a point just north of
the village of La Haye-du-Puits. The
VIII
Corps attacked with the 82d Airborne and 79th and 90th
Infantry Divisions,
making slow progress against
stubborn
resistance and local counterattacks. It
entered the village
four days later and on the
14th had reached the town
of
Lessay. There, the 82d Division was relieved by the newly-
arrived 8th Infantry Division,
and the advance halted by
order of General Omar Bradley the First Army commander,
so that positions could be
consolidated and the outcome of
action farther east awaited.
On the VII Corps front the attack was begun on July 4,
the 4th and 83d Infantry
Divisions leading
the southward
advance down the Carentan-Perriers road in order to cut the
German east-west communications from there to St.
on this front, too, progress was slow. The Germans countered
forces to the VII Corps front from the front of VIII Corps,
in an attempt to prevent exploitation
toward the rail and
road center of St.
LO.
After six
days of combat, and rein-
3 Hans Speidel, Invasion 1944 (Tübingen and Stuttgart, 1949), 142.
