Operation Overlord: Part I
48
which other vehicles could scale sea walls; tanks equipped
with flails for mine clearing; and amphibious assault tanks.a7
Another technological accomplishment was the
water-
proofing of vehicles. Vehicles had to be waterproofed to
prevent their getting stalled as they became partially sub-
merged when driven off the LST's and up the beaches. For
a while, virtually the entire tin plate industry in Great Brit-
ain was applied to the production of nothing but special
fittings for motor vehicles. 38
Artificial Harbors
A great technological development of the pre-invasion pe-
riod dealt with two artificial harbors, designed and built by
British engineers, to be erected off the Normandy coast, and
through which most of the supplies for the Allied forces in
France would flow, until the necessary port cities would be
seized and restored. The design and construction of the
artificial harbors became a necessity after the Dieppe raid,
which revealed the German determination at all costs to
deny to the Allies access to ports. Allied planners realized
that a sustained campaign on the Continent could not be
logistically supported over beaches alone. The capture of ports
therefore became a prime initial objective of the invasion.
Cherbourg and Brest were early points to be reached by the
ground forces, and for the logistical support of large armies
moving on Germany the port of Antwerp was considered
essential.* In order to overcome the initial lack of ports, the
"Overlord" planners in Great Britain revived an idea
first
put forth by Churchill in the First World Wart and decided
to build two prefabricated harbors that would be towed to
the French shore piece by piece and there assembled as soon
as a toehold had been gained on the "far shore." Although
some ranking officers, when they first heard of it, considered
37 Bernard L. Montgomery, Normandy to the Baltic (London, 1947), 24.
38 Edwards, Operation Neptune, 100.
30 SHAEF, Cable FWD-14764 (SCAEF Message No. 81), 13 September 1944.
40 Churchill, Their Finest Hour, 245
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
49
the project as "completely fantastic,"" it was approved by
the Combined Chiefs of Staff, meeting in Quebec in 1943,
and then turned over to the technical experts of the War
Office and Admiralty for construction.
The harbors consisted of hundreds of individual units and
Most of the supplies would come through artificial harbors, until the
necessary port cities would be seized and restored.
consumed in their construction some three million tons of
materials, mainly concrete, steel, and lumber. When towed
to the French coast some days after D-day, about 300 sea-
going tugs were used in the operation,* and to put the
harbors together a total of 20,000 officers and men were
employed. Each port was planned to cover some three square
miles, with moorings for seven ships and 12 coasters,
be-
sides two piers for LST's. Each harbor was made up of con-
crete caissons and a pierhead consisting of a floating pontoon
1 Eisenhower, Crusade in
Enterprise
Huronean
27 Operations, United States Army, American
Europe (Paris,
1945), 29.
