84
Operation Overlord: Part III
situation that would make a return to the Continent possible
was referred to as "Rankin" conditions.
The disintegration of the German military and home fronts
was considered by the COSSAC staff under three possible
conditions, depending on the degree of disintegration. These
stages of disintegration were designated by letters of the
alphabet from "A" to "C," beginning with the least degree
of enemy breakup. Condition "A" was thought of as a situa-
tion whereby western Europe could be invaded with forces
somewhat less than those required for "Overlord," resulting
from Russian operations gradually sapping the Germans
strength. Condition "B" was considered one when signs
would appear of a voluntary German withdrawal from France
and the Low Countries. The third and last condition-
"Rankin" -Case "C," as it was called—was thought of as one
of a complete military collapse on all fronts and internal
disturbances leading to a downfall of the Hitler government
and a suing for peace.
Of the three aforementioned conditions, the one
most
likely to result from the pressure that was exerted on the
German Army and on Germany as a whole by strategic
bombing was condition "C." And planning for a landing in
France under such conditions, either late in 1943 or early
the following year, received the highest priority. In
the
summer of 1943 this was considered the most important
business facing the COSSAC staff." A preliminary plan was
completed in time to be submitted in August to the Combined
Chiefs of Staff gathered in Quebec.
COSSAC planners based their calculations on several pre-
mises. Constant reverses on the Russian front, in the Medi-
terranean, and in the Battle of the Atlantic-the war against
the submarine-were expected to cause the Germans to
"draw in their horns" in France and in Norway. Since France,
it was held, was of military value to them chiefly because of
A Hope That Failed
85
its submarine bases, a serious reverse to their submarine cam-
paign alone, which had begun to set in by the summer of
1943, would bring about a reversal in the German decision
to occupy France. The United States and Great Britain would
then be prepared to land on the Continent, even if only
token forces were available. In the event of things going so
badly for the Germans that a complete collapse was threatened
and a cessation of hostilities appeared in sight, Allied forces
would immediately sail for the Continent, enter Germany,
and seize strategic centers of government, systems of com-
munication, airfields, and other vital areas. In the event a
complete collapse did not take place, but German resistance
had been so weakened that a landing on the Continent could
safely be made with small ground forces, the Pas-de-Calais
and the Le Havre areas would be seized, from which further
advances by the ground forces would be covered.*
These calculations and courses of action were incorporated
in the "Rankin" plan® which COSSAC submitted for the con-
sideration of the Combined Chiefs of Staff at the Quebec
Conference. With a few added recommendations of their
own, the Combined Chiefs approved the plan. They thought
that greater reliance should be placed on air power as a
means of impressing the German civilian population, should
the domestic situation deteriorate so badly that firm measures
would be needed to restore order.® The preliminary plan was
thereupon expanded into a more comprehensive
plan, serving as a basis for further detailed planning by
the British and United States army group comanders.®
The "Rankin" plan called for an
SSAC (43) 40 (Final),
23rd Meeting: Rankin
30 August 19
October,
130 October 1943.
COSSAC (43) 70. Operation
Operation "Rankin" -Directive for Case
