208
Operation Overlord: Part IV
Italy for the invasion of the French Riviera at a time when
the benefits to "Overlord" of the "Anvil" operation were
doubtful, might well have been employed for a sustained drive
to the north and northeast.
Similarly, the decision not to invade France in 1942 was
sound. Those among the Allied policy makers in both Britain
and the United States who took a stand against an invasion
that year "were correct in their evaluation of the problem,"
to use the words of the Supreme Commander after the war.
Their stand was grounded on reality; on a thorough knowl-
edge of Allied and enemy capabilities; on a true estimate of
the essential requirements of an amphibious cross-Channel
invasion; and on an awareness of the uncompleted develop-
ment of the special impedimenta without which the invasion
could not have been undertaken. The wisdom of the post-
ponement of such an operation has long since been admitted
by the most influential of its former proponents.! Sight must
not be lost, however, of the fact that despite differences of
opinion and temperament among the strategic policy makers,
the war witnessed the most complete unification of military
effort ever achieved by allies. The strategic direction of all
armed forces, the allocation of manpower and munitions, and
the administration of occupied areas were all accepted as
international responsibilities. In this lies one of the great
lessons of the war.
A review of the war brings us also to another conclusion,
namely, that no one single service or arm could by itself
have won the war, as was frequently claimed, no matter how
modern that service or arm might have been.
To have built
up the Allied armed forces with reliance on a single service
would have been a most injudicious decision. It might have
proved fatal in the end. There was no single way to victory.
The invasion of France in 1944, which began the last phase
of the Second World War, ended in victory only because all
Ti: amall, The Win So the War, 10; Eisenhower, Crusade in Europe, 68.
Afterthought
209
three services- sea, land, and air-were integrated into one
team.
Strategically, the invasion of France was carried out, with-
out major deviation, according to the
"Neptune" and "Over-
lord"
plans. Although the advance inland from the beaches
was at first slow, after the breakthrough at St. Lo the advance
was much more rapid than had been anticipated. The deteri-
oration of the German field forces in Normandy was worse
than any one could have foreseen. By D+90 Allied armies
not only stood on the Seine, as was forecast in the plans,
but had
advanced to the Marne and the Meuse, entered
Belgium, and were approaching Germany.
On the tactical side,
the principle of mass was applied
throughout the "Overlord" campaign. At every chosen point
of attack overwhelming manpower and material force was
pitted against numerically weaker forces.
That is how the
battle of the beaches was won and the breakthrough at St. Lo
achieved. The strategic deception aided the Allies in main-
taining their numerical superiority, for without it the Ger-
mans would have been able to mass superior numbers in
these tactical battles. As a result, despite unfavorable weather,
initial heavy casualties (particularly on Omaha beach), and
a slow advance inland, the battle went against the Germans.
On the whole, Allied casualties were lighter than the planners
had expected. There were few surprises encountered.
The
years of research and study of enemy-held coasts and hinter-
lands, of weather conditions, and of a multitude of other
related subjects proved their essential value. The numerous
invasion techniques that had been developed and tested be-
tween 1940 and 1944 in Great Britain and the United States
stood the test of war. Patience, endurance, perseverance, in-
genuity, devotion to detail,
and careful planning
won the
day. The caprices of chance were reduced to a bare minimum.
This was as it should have been,
for across the English
Channel the Allies faced an adversary who at the art and
science of war was no amateur.
