107
106
Operation Overlord: Part III
the Felixstowe and Newhaven areas and the region Dover-
Deal-Ramsgate, the latter figuring prominently in connection
with the strategic deception.33 All told, close to 1,500 heavy
and light antiaircraft guns were allotted to the defense of
embarkation ports and their surrounding areas.31 The heaviest
concentration of 324 guns was in the Solent-the Portsmouth-
Southampton-Isle of Wight region. Plymouth was alloted 100
guns, Newport 84, Cardiff 56, and so on down the line to
include every port of any significance. The coastal areas of
Yarmouth, Lowestoft, Ipswich, Harwich, Deal, and Hast-
ings had erected, besides, nearly 100 dummy antiaircraft
gun positions.
Prisoners of War
With regard to enemy prisoners of war, Allied policy
called for their evacuation to the United Kingdom for at
least the first weeks of operations. For the later period,
prisoner-of-war camps in France were planned, some pris-
oners to be employed on internationally authorized types of
labor, and the rest going to the United States or the United
Kingdom for the duration of the war. The types of labor to
which enemy prisoners of war could be put by Allied mili-
tary commands had to be approved in each case by Supreme
Headquarters. 35
There was also a policy adopted for the repatriation of
Allied prisoners of war freed by the Western Allies. Amer-
ican, British, and Canadian soldiers were to be returned to
rear installations of their respective
national armies. Na-
tionals of France, Belgium, Soviet Russia, and others were
to be categorized as displaced persons and placed under the
jurisdiction of civil affairs officers on the staffs of the various
military commanders. 36
88 Ibid.
IOr
2 Great
Go To day) 1g/40217/13/G(Ops), Air Defence
Minutes
Meeting Held
October to
38 21 A.Gp (Rear), Administrative Instructions (U.S.) No. 19, 23 July 1944.
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
Evacuating Casualties
The invasion planners also established a policy with re-
gard to the evacuation of Allied
casualties. All casualties
were to be shipped or flown to the United Kingdom from
D-day to D+3. From D+4 to D+14 those requiring more
than seven days' hospitalization would be moved to the
United Kingdom, the remainder being treated locally. Dur-
ing the period D +15 to D +49, only cases needing more than
15 days' treatment would be moved from France, and from
D+50 forward only patients needing treatment of 30 days
or more. American soldiers requiring six months, or more,
of hospitalization were to be evacuated direct to the United
States.?7 The plan of sending forth and timing of hospital
ships was laid out in such a way that they would normally
arrive off the Normandy beaches soon after daybreak, load
by day, and be well clear of the assault area before night-
fall.38
Anticipated casualties were based on the assumption that
of ships and landing craft sunk during the passage to France
42 percent of their troops would be casualties.
Of vessels
damaged, only 12 percent of their troops would be casualties.
Casualties among airborne troops were expected to reach
25 percent.39
Strict instructions were issued by Supreme Headquarters
to all Allied commands taking part in the invasion on the
use of the Geneva Red Cross. 40 No unit but a military medi-
cal unit could display the Red Cross or any
symbol re-
sembling it. Hospital units
and hospital trains and ships
were directed to keep away from military targets. In order
to avoid enemy attacks on medical installations,
for the maximum use,
wherever possible, of separate rail-
37 COSSAO/1719/A, Weekly Conference-Co-ordination of A/G-1 Subjects, 26
Octob
per va
13% 0028A
"Neptune" -Naval Orders (Short Title:
/2706/SD
Lended
)SSAC / 2706/2/SD,
Estimate e on
19 May Casualties,
25
the Geneva Red Cross, 26 October 1943.
the
Principles
September
Governing
