CROUET
PREFACE
This work is a history of the years of planning and preparation
for the invasion of western Europe and of the staging of that in-
vasion from England in the summer of 1944. It is to a consider-
able degree based on primary sources,
which were accessible to
me during my wartime military service in France and Germany
on General Omar N. Bradley's staff as historian of Headquarters
12th Army Group, under whose command came the First, Third,
Ninth, and Fifteenth United States Armies. Readings in postwar
published works supplemented the primary material. These works
are given in the bibliography appended to this study.
I have not confined myself in these pages to an investigation of
the role played by the armed forces of any one single nation in
the western European alliance. The approach is that of the military
campaign itself, the problems it posed in diplomacy, strategy, and
tactics, and how the interrelated aspects of these problems were
resolved both in the planning stages and in the operational stage.
To Brigadier General C. R. Landon, wartime 12th Army Group
Adjutant General and my immediate superior during my tour of
duty at that headquarters, I am indebted for creating an atmos-
phere that was conducive to historical work while military oper-
ations were still in progress. Other members of the headquarters
staff provided assistance and came forth with valuable suggestions.
Major General A. Franklin Kibler and Brigadier General Ray-
mond G. Moses were particularly helpful in this respect.
For personal counsel in preparing this work I owe thanks to
Dr. Dwight E. Lee, Chairman of the Department of History and
International Relations at Clark University, and to Dr. H. Donald-
son Jordan. Their suggestions were at all times constructive, and
I learned much from them.
The basic plan of this work is,
first, to indicate the strategic
problem posed by an invasion of the European continent from
the British Isles and the complex tactical implications bearing on
IX
