152
Operation Overlord: Part IV
The passage from England to the transport area was un-
eventful. Heavy seas were running in the English Channel,
with waves as high as five or six feet. A strong wind was
blowing from the west.* It swept the tides up the beaches
earlier than had been expected and did not augur well for
the assault infantry. But from the Germans there was scarcely
any interference with the convoys during the crossing on the
night of June 5-6. Steps to protect the convoys were taken
early in 1944, and shortly before D-day the plans worked
out by the Admiralty and Britain's Coastal Command were put
into effect. Large numbers of aircraft patrolled the two ap-
proaches to the English Channel, keeping submarines sub-
merged. Coastal waters around the Brittany Peninsula, where
the German submarines were concentrated, were heavily
mined. The number of surface patrol ships of the Royal Navy
was increased, particularly in the eastern part of the English
Channel and the North Sea, from where the bulk of German
destroyers and torpedo boats were expected.
The German Reaction
German naval forces first reacted to the invasion on D-day.
Throwing caution to the winds, their submarines made direct
for the Channel from French west coastal ports, and others
were rushed from southern Norway. They were successfully
dealt with by Coastal Command, which forced the submarines
to surface and fight back, preventing them from reaching the
convoy lanes between England and Normandy or the assault
area. During the important period from D-day (June 6)
to the 10th of June not a single submarine succeeded in inter-
fering with cross-Channel traffic. Only a few, fitted with the
Schnorkel, managed to penetrate the English Channel after
D + 4, but their successes were negligible.~ Enemy surface ships
attempting to reach the "Neptune"
area were quickly brought
4 ANCXF,
Branch,
'Nentine
I Repor or the commander, Western Naval
peratic
(под. D) :
XXVIB (lovem, ** 1astal Con
"Coastal Command in the Victory in Europe," Military Review,
The Invasion of France
153
to action by Royal Navy ships and planes and driven off.
Only the small torpedo boats managed to slip through the
protective screen of warships and caused some damage to
Allied shipping. But their effectiveness was not great."
The landing craft head for the shore,
the U. S. S. Augusta,
with
General Bradley aboard, in the background.
The slow reaction of German naval units to the amphibious
armada on the night of June 5-6 was in large part due to
the confusion into which the German radar system was
thrown by a tactical deception operation carried out by the
Royal Air Force's Bomber Command. Squadrons of Lan-
casters, equipped with a special type of metalized paper
called "window," simulated the reactions in the enemy coastal
radar stations which a large convoy of ships would produce.
The bombers dropped bundles of "window" in the Boulogne
area while circling in a series of overlapping orbits for a
• Ibid.
