70
Operation Overlord: Part Il
tive/Special Operations. This was an Anglo-American or-
ganization,
under the control of Supreme Headquarters,
which conducted espionage, promoted armed opposition to
the German occupation authorities and carried on other
related activities.
Appointment of Supreme Commander
Until December of 1943, invasion planning on the high-
est levels was conducted by COSSAC in the name of the
Supreme Commander-to-be. On the 10th of January 1944,
the Combined Chiefs of Staff named General Dwight D.
Eisenhower, until then Supreme Allied Commander in the
Mediterranean theater
of operations, as Supreme Com-
mander of "Overlord." On the 14th, General Eisenhower
arrived in London to take up his new duties as well as to
assume command of United States forces in Great Britain,
relieving General Jacob L. Devers as Commanding General,
ETOUSA.' Some days earlier, General Bernard L. Mont-
gomery arrived in England from Italy to take command of
21 Army Group and to assume the responsibilities of ground
force commander for "Overlord."
The appointment of the Supreme Commander was
wel-
comed on all sides, since it helped to crystallize command
responsibilities more firmly, and the personality of the com-
mander was brought to bear on problems which only he
could solve. The feeling was, in political as well as higher
military circles, that the successful functioning of the allied
coalition would in large measure depend upon the personality
of the Supreme Commander. 10
COSSAC Became SHAEF
On January 15, 1944 Headquarters COSSAC was re-
Report, 7 February 1944.
Generterranean Theater
the Eisenhower,
Command Relations and Responsibilities
71
designated Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force
(SHAEF), and General Eisenhower's title announced as
Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force. As his
Chief of Staff, both at Supreme Headquarters and at Head-
quarters ETOUSA, General Eisenhower named Lieutenant
General Eisenhower in Africa before his
appoint-
ment as Supreme Commander SHAEF, with his chief
of staff, General Walter Bedell Smith.
General Walter Bedell Smith, United States Army. General
Morgan was retained at Supreme Headquarters as one of
several Deputy Chiefs of Staff.
Although General Eisenhower assumed the duties of Su-
preme Commander as soon as he arrived in London, holding
