197
Breakthrough, Encirclement, Pursuit
196
Operation Overlord: Part IV
in the direction of Alençon and Argentan. If the two armies
could link up between Argentan and Falaise the pocket would
be closed.
The Canadian operations moved forward at moderate
speed, advancing to within five miles of Falaise on August 9.
There the Germans succeeded in halting the advance, Falaise
not being captured until the 17th. Meanwhile, the Third
Army ordered XV Corps to change its axis of advance point-
ing northeastward from Le Mans to Chartres and wheel north
to seize Argentan. After regrouping, the corps attacked on
August 10. It overcame fierce initial resistance and entered
Alençon the following day. On the 12th, forward elements
were converging on Argentan. All this while, the First
United States Army and the Second British Army directed
their operations to driving in the enemy salient from the
west and northwest. All along the front the fighting was bitter,
the Germans attempting at all cost to disengage their armor.
But on August 19, two days after the Canadians broke into
Falaise, the encirclement was made complete when Ameri-
can forces made contact with the First Canadian Army at
Chambois on the Dive River, some eight miles east of the
Falaise-Argentan road.8
A last desperate attempt to break the Allied cordon was
made by the Germans on August 20. They attacked westward
with elements of the Fifth Armored Army toward Trun and
Chambois outside the pocket, while other units attacked east-
ward from inside the pocket. Although the Germans managed
to get some of their tanks through they failed to effect an
organized breakout. After this, the battle of the "Falaise
Pocket" was virtually at an end. The Germans lost 100,000
men in prisoners alone. Only scattered groups of individual
soldiers,
with no semblance
of organization, managed to
following divisions
& Several
2d Armored DiVision.
mom undi can the thin pendied Dis on, ex-
days before the
the canadian Arm 35 sto Poiso
The first unloading of freight cars on a specially constructed ramp
in the harbor of Cherbourg during August 1944.
escape through the ring. The collapse of the Normandy front
was now complete, essentially the result of the German stra-
tegic manpower shortage and a shortage in motor fuel which
particularly began to tell at this time. Another fundamental
cause of the defeat was Hitler's readiness to stake much on
single bold moves, which, owing to his inferiority in troops
and materiel, could not be sustained for long.'
While the battle of the Falaise Pocket was raging, the much
broader strategic
"Overlord"
encirclement
continued
un-
abated. From Le Mans, where XV Corps was abruptly turned
north toward Argentan,
the Third United States
Army's
remaining XII and XX
Corps drove
northeastward and
eastward toward Chartres and Orleans and to objectives on
one count tole sive
considered
Mortain lies order m
the e
freeing
-dinate 95-96.
De, ember,
