104
Operation Overlord: Part III
weeks after the invasion had begun, the length of time it
was thought it would take to complete mine clearing. Until
that time, plans were laid for a fleet of tankers to shuttle
back and forth between England and France, delivering
petroleum products to the small French port of Port en
Bessin. Special oil construction engineers were to be moved
to France on D+1 to erect storage facilities.25
Artillery Ammunition
Estimates of ammunition requirements called for the liberal
use of artillery shells, since both General Bradley and Gen-
eral Montgomery were proponents of the heavy concentra-
tion of field artillery in support of infantry. General Bradley
had impressed his own army group planners with the idea
that there was to be "no skimping" on artillery ammunition
_"or the Allies," as he put it,
"would have to pay for it
in lives. "26 General Montgomery had demonstrated the im-
portance he attached to the role of artillery during the battle
of El Alamein, which he conducted.
In the case of the American combat units, a shortage
existed in artillery shells both just prior to the invasion and
during "Overlord" itself. The shortage was particularly felt
in shells for the 155-mm and 8-inch howitzers, the weapons
most widely employed in direct support of infantry. Some
of the ammunition suffered, in addition, from certain de-
fects.?7 Particularly disconcerting was the range performance
of the same type shell manufactured by different firms: They
did not fire at uniform ranges. Before they could effectively
be used in combat they had to be tested, for otherwise the
danger existed of firing into friendly troops or not register-
ing on the target.?8 Since similar difficulties had been experi-
19421 ACp/5410/30/Q(Plans), 4 April 1944; 21 A.Gp/5541/12/Q (Plans), 8 May
28 FUSAG, Artillery Section, Memorandum for Record, 20 March 1944.
7 12 A.Gr
October 107
Memorandum, Colonel Simon's Report on 105-mm Ammunition, 10
28 21 A.Gp/15062/3/WTSFF, 105-mm Ammunition, 15 February 1944.
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
105
enced in the campaign in North Africa, all 105-mm howitzer
shells stored in Great Britain for use by American troops
were ordered tested and segregated in lots based on their
performance.29 Additional difficulty
was encountered with
the
powder
increments
used
with
artillery
shells:
They ranged widely, anywhere from 300 yards over the
required range to 300 yards under.30 Because the problem
of separating these artillery shells and their powder incre-
ments had not been solved at the point of origin, i.e., in the
United States, field artillery units were allowed to employ,
in one active theater at least, British ammunition. In Italy,
some 10,000 rounds of British 4.5-inch shells were fired by
American field artillery units. This type shell had the added
advantage of being made with a small smoke increment,
which made it easy to pick up the shell burst and to deter-
mine with accuracy whether the shell had registered on the
target or not. Some officers were of the opinion that the
ammunition used by the British Army was in that respect
superior to that used by the United States Army.31
Antiaircraft Defense
A prominent place was given by Allied planners to the
antiaircraft defense of important invasion embarkation ports.
Concentration of the available antiaircraft guns was based
on the relative importance of the port or installation area.
To the more permanent static defenses operated by Britain's
Antiaircraft Command were added the mobile antiaircraft
units of both 21 Army Group and the First United States
Army Group until their departure for France. The impor-
tant Portsmouth-Southampton and Portland-Weymouth areas
were given top priority, followed by the Bristol Channel area,
20 SHAEF/16575/5A/GCA, 105-mm Howitzer Ammunition, 17 March 1944.
30 Tord
31 TIN
Artillery Officer
Fifth United States
Brigadier General T
Brigadier
• Pale
Aroun Artillery
TE Lewis STates Army
SHAEF/16607/1A/Arty
tion in U.K. for
Defense
Embarkation Ports and Concentra-
