220
Operation Overlord
Eisenhower, Dwight D., Crusade in Europe. New York, 1948. The Supreme
Commander gives an account of the strategical and tactical problems of
the war as he saw and understood them.
Ford, Corey, and MacBain, Alastair, Cloak and Dagger. New York, 1945.
A description of the
secret operations of the United States Office of
Strategic Services behind the enemy lines.
Fuller, J. F. C., The Second World War. London, 1948. A general work
on the campaigns of the war in all theaters of operations.
Fuller, J. F. C., Armored Warfare. London, 1943. The author discusses
the effect of mechanization on the composition of armies.
Garnett, David, War in the Air. Garden City (N. Y.), 1941. A survey
of Royal Air Force operations during the first years of the war.
Gavín, James M., Airborne Warfare. Washington, 1947.
The
wartime
commanding general of the American 82d
Airborne Division discusses
airborne operations in the European war.
Great Britain, Air Ministry, Atlantic Bridge. London,
1945. An official
account of the role played in the war by the Roval Air Force Transport
Command.
Great Britain, Air Ministry, Coastal Command. New York, 1943.
effectiveness of the airplane in defeating the submarine menace in co the
waters is related in this survey.
Great Britain, Combined Operations Command, Combined Operations.
New York, 1943. The official story of the Commandos who raided the
enemy coasts and tested invasion techniques.
Guingand, Francis W. de, Operation Victory. New York, 1947. A per-
sonalized review of the war in Africa and western Europe by the Chief
of Staff of the Eighth British Army and 21 Army Group.
Harris, Arthur, Bomber Offensive. New York, 1947. Marshal of the
Royal Air Force Harris tells of the work of Bomber Command, Britain's
strategic bomber force, over which he presided.
Karig, Walter, Battle Report: II, The Atlantic War. New York,
1946.
A vivid history of naval warfare in the Atlantic by a
Navy commander.
United States
LaFarge, Oliver.
The Eagle in the Egg. Boston,
1949. A
history of the United States Army's Air Transport Command.
popularized
Leahy, William D., I Was There. New York, 1950. A record of events.
as recorded by the Chief of Staff to Presidents Roosevelt and Truman.
The book is based on the author's notes and diaries made at the time.
Liddell Hart, B. H., The Other Side of the Hill. London, 1948.
in retrospect, as seen by the ranking German Rentals who fought in
the West. The work is based on the au horman generals th the generals.
Macmillan, Norman, The Royal Air Force in the World War,
London, 1942-1944. A work on the Britione in the Woe Second World
War. The story is carried forward to mid-1941.
Marshall, George C., The Winning of the War in Europe and the Pacific.
221
Appendix IV
New York, 1945. The biennial report of the United States Army Chief
of Staff to the Secretary of War for the period July 1943 to June 1945.
Marshall, George C., Arnold, H. H., and King,
Ernest J., The War
Reports of Marshall, Arnold, and King. Philadelphia, 1947. A collection
of war reports by Generals Marshall and Arnold and Admiral King.
Maund, L. E. H., Assault from the Sea. London, 1949. A study of the
equipment and tactics employed in amphibious operations during the First
and Second World Wars, written by a rear admiral of the Royal Navy.
Miksche, F. O., Paratroops. New York, 1943. The author discusses the
organization and tactical employment of airborne troops.
Mitchell, William, Winged Defense. New York, 1925. The claim is made
by the author that aircraft
are dominant in both the military and
economic life of an industrial nation.
Mitchell, William, Skyways. Philadelphia, 1930. A work on military and
civil aeronautics by a leading proponent of strategic bombing.
Montgomery, Bernard L.,
Normandy to the Baltic. London,
1947. The
Allied ground forces commander during the campaign in France reviews
that military operation.
Morgan, Frederick E., Overture to Overlord. New York, 1950. This book
presents a personal account of the preparatory planning for the invasion
of France.
Morison, Samuel Eliot, History of United States Naval Operations
World War II: I, The Battle of the Atlantic. Boston,
1947. This volume
contains a record of all United States naval operations in the Atlantic
from September 1939 to May 1943.
Munro, Ross, Gauntlet to Overlord. Toronto, 1945. The author tells of
the part played in the western European war by the Canadian Army.
Patton, Jr., George S., War As I Knew It. Boston, 1947. The personal
story of the Commander of the Third United States Army.
Puleston, W. D., The Influence of Sea Power in
World War II. New
Haven, 1947. Written by a captain of the United States Navy, this work
deals with the influence sea power wielded over the land
campaigns
during the war.
Reynolds, Quentin, Dress Rehearsal. New York, 1943. The raid on Dieppe
in August 1942, as told by a journalist.
Rowe, A. P., One Story of Radar. Cambridge (England), 1948. A British
scientist's account
wartime
radar development in Britain
and the
part it played in winning the war.
Seversky, Alexander P. de, Victory Through Air Power. New York, 1942.
A leading proponent of strategic
bombing, the author contends that the
emphasis in modern war has shifted from the sea and ground forces to
the air forces.
Sherwood, Robert E.,
Roosevelt and Hopkins, An Intimate History.
New York, 1948. A partial record of the diplomacy and strategy of the
war, based on the private papers of Harry Hopkins, President Roosevelt's
confidant.
Shugg, Roger W., and De Weerd, H. A., World War II. Washington, 1946.
A concise history of the principal military campaigns of the war,
