68
Operation Overlord: Part Il
stricted that only the commander on the scene could devote
all his time to the fluid conditions of the day-to-day battle.
Only an over-all ground commander could make rapid de-
cisions, coordinate attack and defense, fix army boundaries
and secure the lines of communication for the combat forces.
As soon, however, as the Supreme Commander had estab-
lished his headquarters in France, the Commander-in-Chief
21 Army Group would hand over his duties as over-all
ground force commander to him. Once this general principle
had been decided upon, it became necessary to determine
the proper setting for the First United States Army Group
during the various changes in the chain of command. A di-
rective from COSSAC in the autumn of 1943 outlined the
responsibilities of the two army groups. This was later sup-
plemented and modified in some of its details by further
orders from the Allied headquarters.®
The general framework
of command planned
for the
ground forces was as follows: 21 Army Group, protected
during the Channel crossing by naval units and supported
by tactical air forces, would invade France with the First
United States Army and the Second British Army. Until
about D+60 it would be the only army group headquarters
engaged in the fighting. Meanwhile, the First United States
Army Group would move from England to the Continent and
prepare to become operational on or about D+60 with two
armies: The First and Third United States Armies, the
former being removed from the command of 21
Army
Group and replaced by the First Canadian Army. Since the
Commander-in-Chief 21 Army Group would be the over-all
ground force commander, the First United States Army
Group was to come under his tactical control until the Su-
preme Allied Commander took over personal direction of
the ground battle at the end of the "Overlord"
5 COSSAC (43) 75, 29 November 1943.
operation—
1400/5SC (4) 0 3ung
14 Fabuary
1944; SHAEFF (44)23, 10 March 1944;
SHAEF/-
Command Relations and Responsibilities
69
about D+90. After that, the First Army Group would be
detached from the command of 21 Army Group and the two
would become co-equally subordinate to the Supreme Com-
mander.
During the planning period, therefore, the work of the
First United States Army Group came under the jurisdiction
of 21 Army Group. But the responsibilities of the former
began only with D+15, inasmuch as ground force planning
for American units for the first fortnight of the campaign in
France was the responsibility of the First United States Army,
which worked independently under 21 Army Group super-
vision. Responsibility for mounting the invasion was, in the
case of American forces, delegated to Headquarters ETOUSA
to be carried out, under its policy direction, by Headquarters
general, the mounting of the invasion included such things
as concentrating the troops and their equipment into as-
sembly areas, moving them forward to marshaling areas and
from there to the ports of embarkation to be put aboard in-
vasion ship and craft. The loading schedules, which desig-
nated the order in which specific units should be called
forward and to what beaches they should be transported.
were prepared by the armies and army groups.
In order to integrate administrative and logistical planning
for United States forces with that for British and Canadian
forces, a staff of officers from the First United States Army
Group, headed by Brigadier General Raymond G. Moses,
was placed at 21 Army Group headquarters in January 1944.
General Moses was named deputy to the 21 Army Group
general staff officer in charge of administration and supply.?
ground movement, missions were appointed to armies and
army groups by Headquarters Special Operations Execu-
f U.S. Forces
18 Jambarary 1944.
1944; SHAEF, AG-322, Organization
