148
Operation Overlord: Part IV
Theory was not tempered by past performance. And because
the theory appeared logical, the claims of decisiveness (and
even exclusiveness) for the new arm could be challenged
only with difficulty. By and large, Allied strategic bombing
fell short of its great expectations in the extent of its con-
This is a part of Western Task Force on D-day, with the French coast
in the background, as seen from the headquarters
ship
Ancon.
tribution to the disruption of German war economy and the
destruction of German morale.
inflicted
Although
physical
damage
upon German cities
was
extensive, in their total
effect upon the outcome of the invasion of western Europe
the strategic
air
forces
either the Allied
contributed
navies
therefore,
or
armies.
something less than
"Overlord" occurred,
"before the time when the lack of means would
have rendered further resistance physically impossible."3l
si Strategic
Economy 14
Bombing Survey, Effects of Strategic Bombing on German War
Chapter 11
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
On June 5, the day before D-day, the invasion assault
forces sailed from south English ports, where they had for
some time previously been gathering,
United States forces
sailing from southwestern England and British-Canadian
forces from southeastern England. They sailed for a single
rendezvous
area—area "Z"-about 13 miles south of the
Isle of Wight.
To keep the convoys from getting lost, at every important
change of course a reference vessel was posted, minesweepers
dropped lighted buoys on the outer limits of channels that
were swept along the English coast, and the convoys were
guided by other navigational aids to their rendezvous area.
From there, the five assault forces turned south to begin
their voyage across to France. Five swept channels, one for
each assault force with its naval escort, led from Area "Z"
to a point farther south where each channel was divided into
a "slow" lane and a "fast" lane. Along the slow lane moved
the LT's, while the big transports and warships sailed along
the other until they all reached a point about eight to 13 miles
oft the coast of France, called the transport area, which was
selected for its distance from enemy coastal defense batteries.
There, the transports carrying the assault troops and their
cquipment anchored and lowered their landing craft, such
as LCVP's and LCM's. Once the troops and guns on these
craft were loaded they were taken by control boats in pre-
149
