188
Operation Overlord: Part IV
The 29th Infantry Division enters St. Lo, late in July 1944.
Armored Divisions and the Ist Infantry Division thrust for-
ward to exploit the breakthrough, the 3d wheeling to the right
(westward) in an attempt to cut off the enemy forces be-
tween Perriers and Lessay and the 2d and Ist exploiting by
way of Canisy in a southeasterly direction.
As in the case of the bombing preceding the Caen offen-
sive a week earlier, the bombardment on the 25th of July
did not seriously disrupt the German defenses. It had, how-
ever, an awful effect on the morale of those who survived,
though not so bad as to lead to a collapse of the front with-
out hard fighting by numerically superior infantry and arm-
ored forces. Many of the enemy soldiers were stunned and
dazed. Weapons not destroyed had to be dug out of the
craters and cleaned before they could be used. Communica-
tions were badly disorganized. Faulty bombing by a number
of American bombardiers, however, resulted in the bombing
of friendly troops which were in line in forward positions.
The 9th and 30th Infantry Divisions in particular, and the
Breakthrough, Encirclement, Pursuit
189
143d Tank Battalion and some artillery installations suffered
heavy casualties?
Once VII Corps broke through
the enemy defenses, a
coordinated attack was launched
on the west coast of the
Cotentin Peninsula on July 26 by the American VIII Corps,
employing the
8th,
83d,
and 90th Infantry
Divisions and
the 4th Armored Division.
Lessay
was
occupied that day.
And on the morrow, as the Germans began a general with-
drawal in order to escape entrapment by the VII Corps from
the east, the 4th Armored Division took Coutances and linked
up with
the latter corps
a day
later.
Armored
units were
pushed forward to maintain the momentum of the offensive.
The coastal city of Granville fell to the 6th Armored Division
on July 31 and meeting
with only desultory opposition the
advance reached
Avranches, through which the Germans
were falling back on Brittany.
On the left (east) flank of the breakthrough, the American
XIX Corps advanced south from St. Lo toward the Caen-
Avranches road and V Corps moved forward against heavy
opposition south of the Cerisy Forest. Along the entire Allied
from east of the Carentan-St. Lo-Vire highway and the Vire
River progress was slow. The Germans had established their
main defenses at Caen, but the hinge of their defense line
was at Torigny and Caumont, farther west, and there they
were attempting to pivot and reform the front.
But before
the month of July was out, V Corps captured much-contested
Torigny and the British XXX Corps broke the hinge in the
vicinity of Caumont. Allied forces were ready to wheel west-
ward into the Brittany Peninsula and to exploit southeastward
in a pendulum-like movement turning
on
Caen.
It
meant
detaching forces for a simultaneous drive westward on Brest,
and southward to capture Rennes and Nantes on the Loire
to seal off Brittany. Other forces would advance on the arc-
shaped axis Vire-Domfront-Alencon-Chartres and the
Seine
Report, Bradley and Air Effects Committee 12th Army
