192
Operation Overlord: Part IV
A French Army unit, equipped with Sherman tanks, comes ashore from
an LST during August 1944.
throw into the battle, the German situation on the front west
of the Vire River had completely
deteriorated
and
their
position became hopeless. The Third United
States Army
drove ahead against slight resistance, one spearhead lunging
forward to Rennes, reaching the mouth of the Loire, farther
south, on August 6; another column drove on Fougeres,
Laval, and Le Mans. Armored spearheads of VIII Corps,
followed by infantry, were dispatched to the Brittany Penin-
sula and there the ports of Brest, Lorient, and St. Nazaire
were besieged during the first days in August. Heavy columns
of tanks, supported by tactical aircraft, drove the Germans
into headlong retreat on the Third Army front, the main body
of American strength having been thrown into the battle to
trap the German forces in Normandy and to prevent their
escape east toward the Seine.
The first hinge of their front at St. Lo-Caumont destroyed,
the German High Command determined on a strong stand on
Breakthrough, Encirclement, Pursuit
193
the next key point of their defense, so as to deny the Allies
access to the Channel coast beyond Caen and Le Havre and
the Pas-de-Calais.
This pivotal point was the main north-
south highway running from Caen to Falaise and from there
to Argentan. After the loss of Caen, the Germans principal
rail and road communications ran
through the last-named
two towns, and they kept a large force of armor there. The
"Overlord" front had now
become
the Germans' most im-
portant active front, and
they
began
moving
infantry
divi-
sions from their Fifteenth Army guarding the Pas-de-Calais
and depleting their Bay of Biscay and Mediterranean coastal
garrisons.
But none of these measures affected the strategic
outcome of the campaign. Most of the German
units were
understrength, a number arrived too late to affect the tactical
battle
owing to transportation difficulties
and
harassment
from French resistance forces, and
they were
all thrown
straight into the battle individually in
order to stem the
Allied tide rather than handled as a solid tactical reserve.
And to give the Germans no respite, and to close the wide
pincers which the First and Third United States Armies were
developing from the south, General Montgomery
directed
the First Canadian Army to mount an offensive on Falaise
down the main road from Caen. From the west, the Second
British Army was applying heavy pressure on the concen-
tration of German armor which guarded the sector Caen-
Falaise.
The German Counteroffensive
At this stage of the campaign the Germans did the unanti-
cipated. They did not disengage their forces west of their
"hinge" -the line Caen-Falaise-Argentan-in order to escape
the envelopment which had become evident. They launched,
instead, a major counteroffensive on the First United States
Army front between Domfront and Vire, * in a bid to reach
the Gulf of St. Malo due west in order to cut the Allied front
a a development of these operations and the German reaction to them
