130
Operation Overlord: Part Ili
tions. At Headquarters COSSAC, a specialized staff was in-
stalled charged with the task of working out specific policies
and procedures based on political directives from the Com-
bined Chiefs of Staff. This staff prepared policy directives
for the guidance of army group commanders; examined in
detail the problems of military control in each of the coun-
tries that would be freed from enemy occupation; investi-
gated the problems of the restoration of national admin-
istrations; assessed economic aid requirements and the re-
habilitation of freed areas; and formulated the requirements
in civil and military government stafls.? There were also
formed "country"
sections, which functioned on a terri-
torical basis, conducting research in the politics, economics,
finances, and so forth, of each country that was to come
under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Commander. As each
of the western European countries was freed of German
occupation it was planned to have a military mission sent
to it representing Supreme Headquarters, through which
Allied policies would be communicated to the various na-
tional authorities.
In the case of tactical ground force commanders-from
army group down to division level governmental affairs
policy was linked with that of military necessity. This meant
that the prime objective of the military commander would
be the taking of necessary measures for the effective control
of the civilian population so that it would not interfere with
operations against the Germans. Among the more important
measures authorized was the lawful use of local resources by
military commanders, both for their troops and the populace
in their areas of operations. The restoration of industries
and agriculture was authorized only to the degree to which
military objectives required it. Organizationally, the com-
manding generals of divisions, corps, armies, and army groups
had on their organic staffs a civil affairs and military govern-
Affairs Operations in Northwest Europe, 13 December 1943.
Julyined
1942
Civil
131
The Problem of Government
ment officer who gave policy advice and looked after the
execution of orders.
Civil Affairs Detachments
For the day-to-day functional conduct of civil affairs and
military
government, special
detachments,
containing
variety of experts, were
formed
and trained both in the
United States and Great Britain. These detachments were of
several types, their composition depending on whether they
would be attached to a lower or higher command. Counted
among the experts were fiscal officers, public health officers,
communications officers, and the like.
Policies Employed in Liberated Territory
All civil affairs planning for countries freed of German
occupation was based on the expectation that some form of
acceptable civil administration would exist and that full use
would be made by Allied commanders of such administra-
tion. This meant that civil affairs detachments assigned to
a commander and responsible for a particular town or region
would exercise their authority through the
national civil
administration of that town or region. In order to facilitate
the contact between the Allied military and the national civil
authorities, liaison officers representing the civil administra-
tions were to be attached to the civil affairs detachments.
Headquarters for ultimate decision if they could not be re-
solved by subordinate commanders.5
Good will and cooperation between military
authorities
and the civilian populations was made the foundation of
SHARF, -
August
1944.
Field Hailbook
Affairs,
rs, the Field 1e sed ation), 26
