74
Operation Overlord: Part Il
command post at Uxbridge. Although less desirable a post
from the point of view of coordination with the ground and
naval commanders, Uxbridge was selected because it was
the seat of Fighter Command of the Royal Air Force and
center of communications to airfields in Great Britain.'
Naval Operations Plan
The naval command formed for the invasion consisted of
two task forces, under the control of the Allied Naval Com-
mander-in-Chief Expeditionary Force, Admiral Sir Bertram
Ramsay. These task forces the Western Task Force, com-
manded by Rear Admiral Alan G. Kirk, United States Navy,
and the Eastern Task Force, commanded by Rear Admiral
Sir Philip Vian, Royal Navy-were charged with the re-
sponsibility of transporting and protecting the invasion
fleet from England to France and to safeguard the sea
lanes between the two countries. Both of the task forces
were in turn subdivided into lettered assault forces, cor-
responding to the first letter in the name of the beach in
France they were to assault. Thus the Western Naval Task
Force was divided into Assault Force "O," to assault Omaha
beach, and Assault Force "U," to assault Utah beach, in
the area to be invaded by American ground units. The East-
ern Naval Task Force was divided into Assault Forces
"S," "J," and "G," whose mission it was to assault beaches
Sword, Juno, and Gold, respectively, in the area to be in-
vaded by British-Canadian
units.
Sword and Gold were
designated as the British beaches and Juno as the Canadian
beach. There were, in addition, two follow-up naval forces,
called Force "B," which was to sail for the American beaches,
and Force "L," which was to sail for the British-Canadian
beaches. These two naval forces were assigned the mission of
transporting the ground forces that would land behind the
initial assault units. Whatever combat units were set aside
for landing in France after the follow-up forces were known
14 Montgomery, Normandy to Baltic, 39-40.
Command Relations and Responsibilities
75
as the build-up forces, to be transported by a regular system
of convoys and shuttle service.
Naval maintenance
and repair facilities were provided
for British-Canadian naval units by the Admiralty and for
American naval units by a special command formed for that
purpose in July 1943, called Landing Craft and
Bases,
Europe (LANCRABEU), commanded by Rear Admiral
John Wilkes. Extensive facilities were provided this com-
mand by the Admiralty. Over-all administrative and logist-
ical command of American naval units and bases in Europe
was in the hands of Admiral Louis Stark, Commander Naval
Forces, Europe (COMNAVEU) .15
The Cover Plan
The invasion of France, in addition to other factors, de-
pended for its success on a strategic stratagem, or cover
plan, as it is known in military quarters. As part of this
stratagem, which is discussed at greater length in Chapter 8,
the name of the First United States Army Group was, on
July 14, 1944, changed to 12th Army Group. Although ac-
tually this amounted merely to a change in name of the same
command, technically it meant the activation of a new one.
Except for those
units specifically
excepted, all personnel
and organizations that were then assigned and attached to
the First United States Army Group were declared trans-
ferred to 12th Army Group. The phrase excepting certain
units from transfer to the jurisdiction of 12th Army Group
from the First Army Group
was inserted in the activation
orders as part of the stratagem, 17 which was intended to make
the Germans believe, or to confirm in their minds other
feigned evidence, that the First United States Army Group
was not replaced by the 12th Army Group but continued to
exist as an additional command to the latter. The continued
15 Karig, The Atlantic War, 291-92.
Cable
W-61630, 7
13 Was De arment, Cape were 7 ey
July 1911:
114 July
ETOUS 4.14
General Order No.
17 ETOUSA, General Order No.
73. 14 July 1944
