108
casualties.
Operation Overlord: Part Ill
heads and port facilities and piers for the evacuation of
Recreation Facilities
In planning the many details of the invasion,
not even
off-duty activities of Allied troops were left out of account.
The facilities which the American, British, and Canadian
armies provided for the recreation and entertainment of their
soldiers were to be made available to all soldiers, regardless
of nationality, whenever a unit of one national army oper-
ated under the command of another. Each national army,
however, was expected to maintain its own permanent rest
facilities in its own rear areas. 41
Assessing German Strategy
In the matter of assessing German strategic moves, once
"Overlord" was begun, the general conclusion was reached
by the higher planning stafts that the pattern of German
strategy would be based on inflicting an early and decisive
defeat upon the "Neptune" invasion forces so that the initia-
tive could be regained once more on the Russian front. For
that reason it was held that the Germans would retain mini-
mum defensive forces on the Eastern front, in the Balkans,
and in Italy in order to build up sufficient forces in France
with which to defeat the Western Allies in Normandy. The
Germans, it was thought, would almost certainly take grave
risks elsewhere in order to defeat "Overlord. »42 In no case,
however, was it considered possible for the Germans, in view
of their commitments
elsewhere, to transfer to the north
of France more than eight divisions from other fronts.
The possibility of the employment by the Germans of
biological agents and poison gas was given serious study.
Despite the fact that the Germans had been
ub cos 16/er Minutes of Second Meeting for Co-ordination of A/G-1
Reinforcements A gainst
Lo on Can do ta potten on
109
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
experiments with it for some time,43 their research in bio-
logical warfare had not advanced to a stage where they
might consider it a practical weapon. As for poison gas,
the available evidence indicated that German preparations
were defensive rather than offensive.4 In any
Western nations were prepared for immediate retaliation if,
contrary to the
available evidence, the Germans were to
resort to biological and gas warfare. 45 Allied troops were
therefore provided with anti-gas equipment as a protective
measure. Plans were laid for moving unit gas reserves to
France from D+ 4 forward. Strategic reserves were kept in
readiness in Great Britain to be employed, upon instructions
from the Supreme Commander, whenever the need arose
for retaliation. 46
German military strength in France and the Low Coun
tries just before D-day consisted of 60 divisions all told, 10
of which were armored divisions, under the over-all com-
mand of Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt as Commander-
in-Chief West. Of the total, 42 divisions were located in the
coastal area stretching from Holland to Brittany. In the "Nep-
tune" invasion area
the Germans had 10 divisions, while
their greatest strength, consisting of the Fifteenth Army, was
stationed in the Pas-de-Calais.47
Considerable enemy naval strength was anticipated during
the invasion, but nothing that could not be overcome by the
Allied naval forces assigned to that task. Approximately
125 submarines were expected to be employed against "Over-
lord," 11 destroyers, and an unspecified number of motor
of this naval
torpedo boats
and minesweepers.
however, was expected in Normandy waters dur-
ing the first weeks of the invasion. It was anticipated that a
Warfare-
Tox
T X XII
207.
Warfare,
The Mil
"Bacterial
Military
Otice
Surge hen
rch
1933)
A/4344 (
(Marcv.v.
2), 81i8l
10, Sitemen ans.
Wal
rohine
1944:5 June
1944.
1944;
War
i Subcommittee,
the
JIC (
(44) 231(0) Fin
war
al, Us 231(0) Final, 5
19441
A A. 0.
Detailed Chem
ical Warfare Instructions, 12 May 1944.
Combined
Chiefs of Staff, 17.
Report
