142
Operation Overlord: Part IV
vasion.
This offensive was inaugurated by the Combined
Chiefs of Staff in June 1943 under the name of Combined
Bomber Offensive, or "Pointblank," as it was more generally
known. Essentially, this offensive was a revised version of
the program inaugurated in January. As in the case of the
attacks on submarine pens, the destruction of aircraft fac-
tories was turned over to the Eighth Air Force. This was
because aircraft production in Germany was not concentrated
in single industrial areas, as was steel production, but was
scattered, so that it required very accurate precision, or
"pin-point," bombing for destruction. Since all of the United
States Air Force training and plane construction was based
on that technique, the Eighth Air Force was selected for the
task. The Royal Air Force's Bomber Command, having in
1940 abandoned daylight precision bombing as generally
unrewarding and having since then been specializing in night
"area" raids on concentrations of German industry,15 was
assigned the mission of carrying on its attacks on the indus-
trial Ruhr, in order to cut off the flow of steel products to
manufacturing plants.
Strategic Bombing
Results
The Combined Bomber Offensive began somewhat tardily.
Its results, in terms of damage to German aircraft produc-
tion, were inconclusive. By June 1943, a year after it began
to operate from England, the Eighth Air Force was not yet
fully built up; nor had it fully matured in experience. During
the second half of 1943, seven major attacks- not a high
figure were made on aircraft production installations, with
a monthly
average of no more than 700 tons of bombs
dropped. 16 The reasons for the small number of major day-
light raids, and the inadequate results, were two: Firstly, the
Eighth Air Force was able to go on bombing missions only
in clear weather, when the target was unobscured by cloud,
15 Harris, Bomber
Bets of Strategic Bombing on German War
Sea Power and Air Power
143
and in the autumn and winter that was not frequent. Secondly,
basing its operations on the theories of Douhet, theoretical
founder of strategic bombing, and of Brigadier General Oscar
Westover, Assistant Chief of the United States Army
Air
Corps in the 1930's, which claimed that heavily armed planes
could always get the best of the faster pursuit
planes17
that no weapon could prevent the accomplishment of a bom-
bardment mission,18 the United States Air Force failed to
provide a long-range fighter plane as an escort to the bombers.
Without such an escort American bombers were unable to
penetrate
the
German fighter defenses
without extremely
damaging losses to themselves. Until the summer of 1943
they confined their bombing to the
coastal areas of France
and the Low Countries, generally within cruising radius of
the short-range Thunderbolt (P-47) fighter. This
standard
American fighter plane had a range of about 300 miles
one way, after they began using extra fuel belly tanks in the
summer of 1943.19 When, with the commencement of the
combined bomber offensive,
American Flying Fortresses
(B-17's) and Liberators (B-24's) began to raid strategic
targets in Germany, they were on two separate occasions
badly defeated and the strategic results obtained were poor.
The German fighter planes had virtually prevented the un-
escorted daylight bombers from accomplishing their missions.
In a mass raid on ball-bearing plants in Schweinfurt in August
1943 the Eighth Air Force lost 16 percent of its attacking
planes, and in a second raid on the same target two months
later 30 percent of the attacking planes were lost.20
As a result, daylight attacks on the German aircraft in-
dustry and other important targets came nearly to a halt.
German strength in single-engine fighter planes rose sharply
from 381 manufactured in January 1944 to 1,050 in July.
The production of planes of all types, during the same period,
1 Douhet, Th
command of the
operations, 65.
20 Ibid.,
German War
Bo Point Sur, 7y, Effects of Strategic Bombing on
