218
Hq
SAC
SCAEF
SHAEF
SOE/SO
USFET
Operation Overlord
Headquarters.
Supreme Allied Commander.
Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force.
Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force.
Headquarters Special Operations Executive/Special Operations.
Headquarters United States Forces European Theater. During
the later stages of the war it replaced the name ETOUSA.
BooKs
Armstrong, Warren, Battle of the Oceans. New York, 1944. An account
of the wartime merchant marine of Great Britain.
Arnold, H. H., Global Mission. New York, 1949. The wartime memoirs
of the Commanding General of the United States Army Air Forces.
Ayling, Keith, They Fly by Night. New York, 1944. A work on airborne
divisions, their training and organization.
A dis Riber of. the , Blotd, and Sand, New York and London, 19 12.
A discussion of the importance of the Middle East oil region
warring alliances.
Baldwin, Hanson W., Great Mistakes of the War. New York, 1949. This
work calls attention to the military and political mistakes of the Allied
High Command.
Banks, Donald, Flame Over Britain. London, 1946. A personal narrative
of the development in Britain of petroleum warfare, such as the sub-
marine pipeline, flamethrowers, etc.
Bolitho, Hector, Command Performance. London, 1946. A general descrip-
tion of the work of Britain's Coastal Command in the war against German
submarines.
Bradley, Omar N., and Air Effects Committee, 12th Army Group, Effect
Air Power
Operations,
Western
Europe.
Wiesbaden
(Germany), 1945. A review of the effectiveness of air power in the land
campaigns.
Bradley, Omar N., A Soldier's Story. New York, 1951. An account of
the wartime experiences of the Commanding General of the United States
12th Army Group.
Brereton, Lewis H., The Brereion Diaries. New York, 1946. A personal
account of war events by the Commanding General of the First Allied
Airborne Army in western Europe.
Brodie, Bernard, A Guide to Naval Strategy, Princeton, 1944. A historical
survey of the significance in war of the command of the seas.
Bryant, Arthur, The Years of Endurance, 1793-1802. New York, 1942.
Contains an analysis of traditional British strategy.
219
Appendix IV
Bryant, Arthur, Years of Victory, 1802-1812. New York, 1945. A study
of the problems Great Britain
faced in the Napoleonic wars and the
Second World War.
Burne, Alfred H., Strategy in World War Il. Harrisburg (Pa.), 1947.
A brief examination of land operations in the light of basic strategic
concepts.
Burton, Earl, By Sea and by Land. New York, 1944. A narrative of
various types of invasion craft and the people who manned them.
Butcher, Harry C., My Three Years With Eisenhower. New York, 1946.
The published diary of the Supreme Commander's naval aide.
Carse,
Robert, Lifeline. New York, 1943. A work on the role of the
United States merchant marine during the war.
Churchill, Winston S., The Second World War: II, Their Finest Hour.
Boston, 1949. III, The Grand Alliance. Boston, 1950. IV, The Hinge of
Fate. Boston, 1950. The British Prime Minister's account of the military
and political aspects of the war.
Ciano, Galeazzo, The Ciano Diaries, 1939-1943. New York,
1946.
These
diaries of Italy's Foreign Minister throw light on some of the military
problems that faced the Axis Powers.
Clark, Mark W., Calculated Risk. New York, 1950. The war in western
Europe and the Mediterranean, as seen by the commander of the Allied
15th Army Group and the American Fifth Army.
Clausewitz,
Carl von,
On
War. J. J. Graham, tr. 2 v. London, 1940.
A study on the theory and practice of war by the 19th Century Prussian
general.
Craven, W. F., and Cate, J. L., eds., The Army Air Forces in World War
II: I, Plans and Operations. Chicago,
1948. II,
Europe:
Torch to Point-
blank. Chicago, 1949. The first two volumes of a critical history
of the
trials, accomplishments, and failings of the United States Army Air Forces.
Dalgleish, John,
We Planned the
Second Front.
London,
1945.
The
author presents a bird's-eye
view of the planning for the
Normandy in-
vasion.
Emphasis is on the
work of the Royal Army Service Corps.
Dickens, Gerald, Bombing
and Strategy. London, 1946. An
admiral of
the Royal Navy examines the
role of strategic bombing in
the light of
the experience of the
Second World War. Argues against reliance on air
power alone.
Douhet, Giulio, The Command of the Air. Dino Ferrari, tr. New York,
1942.
The originator of the
theory
of strategic bombing
presents his
case for the supremacy of air power over all other methods of warfare.
Edwards,
Kenneth, Operation
Neptune.
London, 1946.
A narration of
the invasion of Normandy by
lieutenant commander,
Royal Navy.
Eisenhower, Dwight D., Report by the Supreme Commander to the Com-
bined Chiefs of Staff on the Operations in
Europe of the Allied Expedi-
tionary Force. Washington.
1946. A brief review of the war in western
Europe by the commander of the Allied forces.
