Operation Overlord: Part Il
56
forces in the same manner as 21 Army Group had been
planning for British-Canadian forces since early 1942.
The planning required estimates of the number of divi-
sions, corps, and armies that would be needed in the United
States sector of operations on the Continent during the vari-
ous stages of the campaign, and the type, number, and
priority of movement from England of ancillary units. Also,
estimates of requirements of ali types of ammunition, engi-
neer and signal equipment, requirements of the tactical air
forces, emergency and normal air transport, and so forth.
Specific planning was required on the organization of the
United States lines of communication from England to the
armies in the field and the establishment of rear service areas,
such as supply depots, repair facilities, permanent hospitals,
and the like.
Since Headquarters 21 Army Group had been working on
this phase of the invasion plan for more than a year, the
The American Assault Training Center at Woolacombe. England, where
the D-day divisions received special training in amphibious attack methods.
U. S. Army Organization in Europe
57
need for coordination of its work with a United States tac-
tical command became so pressing in June 1943 that pre-
liminary informal conferences were held between Headquar-
ters COSSAC and Headquarters ETOUSA, during
which
consideration was given, in the absence of a higher American
tactical command headquarters, to using Headquarters V
Corps for that purpose.
It was during these conversations
that Lieutenant General Frederick E. Morgan, Chief of Staff
to the Supreme Allied Commander (designate), first sug-
gested to Lieutenant General Jacob L. Devers, Command-
ing General of Headquarters ETOUSA, that an American
army group headquarters be formed at the earliest possible
date.? The subject was again broached at the Quebec Con-
ference, in August, this time with the United States members
of the Combined Chiefs of Staff. Field Marshal Sir Alan
Brooke drew attention to the need for an American army
group command in England, pointing out the importance of
undertaking its organization without delay if "Overlord" plan-
ning was to move into the next phase.3 The United States
Army chiefs agreed on the immediate need of such a com-
mand and the appointment of a commanding general so that
responsibility for planning for the tactical employment of
United States forces could be made firm and the work co-
ordinated with planning for British-Canadian forces. How-
ever, nothing much in a practical way was done at the time,
until General H. H. Arnold, Commanding General of the
United States Army Air Forces and a member of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, happening to be in London in September, was
approached by General Devers, who discussed the subject
once more. When General Arnold returned to Washington
capped and
delayed invasion planning.
General
212 A.Gp,
Carrier S
Sheet,
Adjutant
Armu Group,
