Operation Overlord: Part Il
86
self would be divided into three zones and placed under
military occupation. The United States, Great Britain, and
Soviet Russia would each occupy a zone. Mobile Allied
ground and air forces would at the earliest possible moment
be moved into Germany, the terms of surrender enforced, and
law and order maintained.
In general, American troops were expected to be disposed,
during the early stages of the operation, in the Rhine River
valley, northward from the Swiss frontier to about Coblenz.
From there northward to Hamburg and Lubeck were to be
disposed British and Canadian forces. For permanent occu-
pation, the three zones were marked out as follows: Southern
Germany, as far north as the Main River, going to the United
States; central and northern Germany, from the Main north
to the North and Baltic Seas, going to Great Britain; and
eastern Germany going to Soviet Russia. Berlin was marked
out as an international city, to be occupied and governed by
the United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union collectively.
Of the liberated countries, France and Luxembourg were
intended for United States occupation and Belgium, Holland,
and Denmark for occupation by Great Britain. Norway was
to be occupied by a joint British-American force.
January 1, 1944 was tentatively set as the most practic-
able date for the execution of "Rankin" -Case "C," by which
time it was thought that the United States would have in
Great Britain about 11 combat divisions and Britain and
Canada about 22, besides the Ist Polish Armored Division
and several brigades and battalions of French, Belgian, Dutch,
and Czechoslovakian troops. The most serious limiting factor
to an earlier fully-matured occupation
shipping.
of Germany was
Chaos Expected in Europe
Political and
military planners expected to find semi-
chaotic conditions even civil war-on the Continent as a
result of the breakdown of German morale and a German
A Hope That Failed
87
withdrawal from occupied countries. They speculated on the
possibility of the German High Command attempting under
such
conditions to take over centralized control of the
country from the tottering Hitler government, or that ultra-
radical groups would foist a revolutionary central government
on the country before the Allies had occupied it. In western
Europe, too, Allied planners expected to find conditions
bordering on anarchy once the German Army had left. They
foresaw a vast uncontrolled movement of people displaced
from their former homes and homelands and many soldiers
who would no longer be bound by orders of their officers.
Although the Allies planned to impose "stand still" orders
on the German Army as well as on the civilian populations,
it anticipated the face of central and western Europe to be
covered by a mass of moving people in all directions and
the two western zones of Germany swelled by Germans from
the eastern districts of the country
and by people from
eastern European countries retreating before the Soviet Army.
The domestic situation which the Allied planners expected
to find in western Europe was also considered not bright. The
civilian populations, it was thought, would at first welcome
the Allied troops enthusiastically and would cooperate whole-
heartedly with them. Later, however, friction and unrest
would arise unless the needs of the population for food, cloth-
ing, and shelter could be met without delay. After the first
flush of liberation, local politics and contending social move-
ments were considered likely to make themselves heard, com-
plicating the situation facing the Allied occupation author-
ities.9
In view of the anticipated political and social difficulties,
the strategic planners impressed the commanders of the Amer-
ican and British army groups designated as the supreme
military authorities in their zones of occupation in both
Germany and western Europe-with the need to act with
speed in the execution of the Rankin plan and to handle
• COSSAC (43) 60, Operation "Rankin" -Case "C," 30 October 1943.
