98
Operation Overlord: Part III
Vast stocks of equipment
figured in the preparations for
"Neptune."
These are power generators stored at Histon General Depot in England.
government turned over to the United States Army 40 per-
cent of the living quarters required and built 30 percent of
it, the remainder being built by United States Army engi-
neers. The British government also built 67 percent of the
new hospitals required for American troops and provided
an additional 10 percent from among existing hospitals.
Extensive storage facilities were erected for heavy equipment,
weapons, vehicles, ammunition, food, and petroleum stocks."
Cooperation between the United States and Great Britain
was extensive and the reciprocity of services real and last-
ing. The construction program of the British government for
the United States Army at one time employed 33 percent of
Britain's building manpower on that program. 10 The United
States Navy was provided with extensive dockyard and other
facilities.
• United States Army, American Enterprise in Europe, 218.
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
99
Training and Rehearsals
The United Kingdom served
also
as a training ground.
The first United States Navy amphibious training station in
England was opened in July 1943 at Appledore, Devon-
shire. Other centers, the largest of which was at Plymouth,
were opened
at short
intervals.
American
ground forces
trained in assault techniques at Slapton Sands, on the south
Devon coast; Canadians trained in the southeast of England.
Allied forces carried out a number of invasion maneuvers,
the larger of which bore a variety of code names, such as
"Duck," "Tiger," "Pirate,"
and others. Some of these ma-
neuvers were rehearsals by the teams of ground, naval, and
air units that were assigned to assault particular beaches in
Normandy. Others were rehearsals in loading and unloading
regimental combat teams and entire divisions into and from
their ships and landing craft. There were
saulting well-defended beaches exact replicas of the beaches
in France-under fire. Under the supervision of Combined
Operations Command the British military authorities had
constructed practically
every type of beach obstacle
and
coastal wall obstruction the Germans had. They then worked
out the equipment and techniques for destroying them.
Among the larger of the maneuvers, British troops staged
"Harlequin" in 1943, practicing the mounting of an invasion
force in the Dover-Deal-Folkestone area. Canadians staged
"Spartan" and "Pirate," maneuvers in assault landings and
the breakout from a constricted
beachhead.
"Duck"
and
"Tiger" were exercises by American troops and were based
on lessons learned from the invasion of Sicily, which had
revealed
certain tactical deficiencies
in
assaulting enemy
beaches. 11
The largest of the American exercises was "Duck." It
was an assault, under fire, of the Slapton Sands beaches by
215.
Bulletin Y6
Digest of Some Notes and Reports on Operation "Husky,"
(no day)
