Operation Overlord: Part Il
72
official conferences with his senior subordinates, such as the
ground, naval, and air commanders assigned to the "Over-
lord" operation," he did not formally assume command of
Supreme Headquarters until February 13. And it is on that
date, too, that Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary
Force was officially activated as the successor to COSSAC,
upon receipt of a formal directive from the Combined Chiefs
of Staff 12
Command Relationships Announced by Eisenhower
Soon afterward, the general plan of command relations
which had been formulated before the appointment of the
Supreme Commander was reaffirmed and made definitive
by General Eisenhower 13 That plan was for 21 Army Group,
consisting of the First United States Army and the Second
British Army, to assault the beaches of Normandy and se-
cure a reasonably deep beachhead. Once the beachhead was
wide enough for the introduction of additional armies,
First United States Army Group, comprising in the beginning
the First and Third United States Armies, would take the
field about D+60. The 21 Army Group would then be
compensated for the loss of the First United States Army
with the First Canadian Army, continuing, at the same time,
to be in direct command of the entire land campaign until
operation "Overlord"
was concluded. By that time it was
anticipated that the Allied ground forces would have ad-
vanced as far south as the Loire River, have wheeled east-
ward, pivoting generally on the city of Caen, and have ad-
vanced to the Seine River, halting there for regrouping for
a further advance on the Rhine. At this juncture the Supreme
Commander would take over direct command of ground
operations, relieving the Commander-in-Chief 21 Army
Group of the responsibility.
11 SHAEF /3207/1/Sec., Notice of Conference with Supreme Commander,
Maune 1914.
May 1941; °9/2067/1/60P10DS(4)
Command Relations and Responsibilities
73
As the Allied campaign in the West developed, and United
States ground forces began to preponderate, the Ninth United
States Army would be added to the First United States Army
Group. Some time later, during the post-"Overlord"
period,
the Fifteenth United States Army would be added to the
Army Group. Headquarters 21 Army Group would
con-
tinue until the end of the war to comprise the Second British
and First Canadian Armies.
American and British airborne divisions during the initial
stages of the invasion were to be integrated into their re-
spective national armies. Later, however,
they would
be
formed into the First Allied Airborne Army and placed under
the operational control of Supreme Headquarters. Tactical
air support to ground operations would be provided by the
Allied Expeditionary Air Force, consisting of the Ninth
United States Air Force, supporting the First United States
Army Group, and the Royal Air Force's 2d Tactical Air
Force, supporting 21 Army Group.
The Allied lines of communication were laid out in con-
formance with the Overlord Outline Plan drawn up
by
COSSAC. The British-Canadian line of communications ran
on the left of the Allied advance; the American, on the right.
On orders from Supreme Headquarters a corps or army of
one of the army groups could be placed under the other if
the tactical situation required it.
Several weeks before the day of invasion, the
tactical ground, naval, and
air
commanders moved
their
command posts to the south coast of England. Adequacy
of communications determined the location of these com-
mand posts. General Bernard L. Montgomery and Admiral
Sir Bertram Ramsay, the Allied ground and
naval com-
manders, established their
forward headquarters
at Ports-
mouth, where they were joined by a small tactical echelon
from Supreme Headquarters. Air Marshal Sir Trafford Leigh-
Mallory, the Allied tactical air commander, established his
