Operation Overlord: Part 1
10
the closing of the military, naval, and air ring around the
territory held by the Germans and their European satellites,
of extending aid to Soviet Russia, of occupying the North
African coastline in both the Mediterranean and Atlantic,
and of preventing the Germans and Italians from gaining the
Middle East. Because of a lack of resources for such an
enterprise, a decision was taken against an invasion of the
European continent in 1942.9
A byproduct of the conference was the organization in
the United States of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to replace the
old Army-Navy Joint Board. It was modeled on the already-
functioning Chiefs of Staff Committee in Great Britain. 10
Anxiety for the safety of the Western Hemisphere, and of
the Panama Canal in particular, led to a concern in the
United States for the security of the Atlantic coast of North
Africa-the "bulge" stretching north from Liberia and Dakar
to the Straits of Gibraltar. Since to the traditional forms of
attack by sea and land modern warfare had added long-
range aerial bombardment, the Panama Canal became vul-
nerable to air raids. Certain types of German bombers were
capable of reaching the "bulge"
of Brazil from the "bulge"
of Africa, a distance of some 1,800 miles. If the Germans
could acquire air bases in both these
places they could
threaten the Panama Canal. The Air Force was therefore
assigned as its primary task in 1940 the prevention of the
Germans gaining possession of air bases in the Americas.
This task took on added importance as a result of faulty
Air Force intelligence of German and Italian air strength,
which estimated that the two axis partners had in excess of
their European requirements about 4,000 planes capable of
the Africa-Brazil flight.11 In 1941 American troops occupied
Dutch Guiana,
and with
air bases already
acquired
in
British Guiana the United States was capable of thwarting
an enemy attempt to gain a foothold in Brazil. Moreover,
Hopkins, 459.
• raven an a Plans Hopin, perations, 19-20,
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
11
as an extension of this strategy, planners in the United States
gave serious consideration to the forcible occupation of
Dakar, in French West Africa, in order to deny to the
Germans air bases on the "far shore." Dakar also figured
prominently in British strategy.
The British Government
was concerned over the safety of its sea communications to
the Cape of Good Hope. The threat of German submarines
based on Dakar, which was held by the pro-German French
Government at Vichy, could not be treated lightly, and a
naval expeditionary force was dispatched in September 1940
to seize the port of Dakar. The expedition was a failure, but
mainly on account of tactical deficiencies. 12
The above considerations-the concern of the United
States for the security of the Western Hemisphere and of
Great Britain for the safety of her sea communications—
led to a concord in strategic interests and to agreement on
the need for an Allied invasion of northwestern Africa. As
a corollary, the British delegation at the
"Arcadia" Con-
ference proposed a landing
the Mediterranean, in
Algeria and Tunisia, to provide flanking protection to the
proposed landings on the Atlantic coast of North Africa,
as well as for exploitation in a campaign to clear the Ger-
mans and Italians from the African shore of the Mediter-
ranean. Roosevelt and Churchill agreed on such a campaign,
and they directed their military staffs to prepare plans for it. 13
Simultaneously
with landings in northwestern Africa, the
British were making preparations for a counteroffensive in
the Middle East in the autumn of 1941, in order to prevent
its strategic oil resources from falling into the hands of the
enemy. The Germans had plans for a drive on the Middle
East through the Caucasus, linking up with other German
and Italian forces driving through Libya and Egypt. 14
12 L.E.H.
Maund,
Assault From the Sea (London, 1949), 71.
13 Cale,
"mundamental
Roses of Strategy," 24.
14 Churchill,
Grand Alliance, 553. The Germans called this plan "Orient."
