144
Operation Overlord: Part IV
rose from 1,525 to 2,475.21 Since this constituted a serious
threat to Allied invasion plans, ways had to be found of
circumventing the Eighth Air Force's reliance on the chances
of the weather and of fighting off the German fighter planes
which atacked the bombers.
The stalemate was partially
broken by the Eighth Air Force's turning toward the end of
1943 to radar flying, both at night and in inclement weather,
and by its adoption of bombing techniques successfully em-
ployed for area bombing by the Royal Air Force. As this
involved a complete change in the technique of bombing,
the conversion could only be gradual and "blind" flying
undertaken on a modest scale only.? There was also intro-
duced in March of 1944 the P-51 fighter, a plane with a
cruising radius of about 500 miles,23 which escorted the
Fortresses (B-17) and Liberators (B-24) to their targets deep
into German territory. But since this took place only about
three monthe before "Overlord," it did not materially improve
the strategic picture from the point of view of either the de-
struction of German war industry or the will of the German
populace to continue in the fight. The
over-all strategic
results of night "area" bombing were also not much better,
insofar as they related to the forthcoming invasion.
This
type of bombing, though very effective in hitting the particu-
lar targets selected for destruction, had as its objective the
pulverization of entire industrial areas, which invariably in-
cluded war industry as well as nonwar industry and other
nonmilitary structures, such as homes. Added to the intensive
development of manpower-saving machinery and the decen-
tralization of industry practiced
the Germans,
Allied
strategic bombing accounted for five percent only of the total
loss of German armament by the end of 1943. Prior to that
summer it affected both German munitions production and
the national output in general to an even lesser degree?*
21 Strategic Bombing Survey, Effects of Strategic Bombing on German War
Economy. 11
Bom 1926), 2
254erman War
Sea Power and Air Power
145
Despite the heavy night raids on steel plants, damage done to
German tank production was minor compared with the num-
ber of enemy tanks destroyed by the ground forces and
tactical fighter-bomber aircraft during the campaign on the
Continent.
Strategic bomber attacks on
rubber and
tire
factories produced virtually no strategic effect and had little
influence on ground operations.25
In view of these developments, which failed to dovetail
with what the adherents of strategic bombing expected of it,28
the Combined Chiefs of Staff decided to integrate air raids
from England with those from Italy, in the hope that simul-
taneous day raids over Germany from both north and south
would divide German fighter
defenses and make daylight
bombing on selected targets more successful. To this end,
there was formed in London, in January 1944, a new head-
quarters, headed by Lieutenant General Carl Spaatz. This
command, called the United States Strategic Air Forces in
Europe, combined the operations of the Eighth United States
Air Force in England and the Fifteenth United States Air
Force, established in Italy the previous autumn. Despite this
move, the strategic results obtained were no better, because
a coordinated air offensive proved impossible on account of
the different weather conditions that prevailed in western
Europe and in the Mediterranean. Daylight missions had to
be sent out from Italy without regard to weather conditions
in England, and vice versa, for it scarcely ever happened
that similar
weather conditions prevailed concurrently
in
both countries. Simultaneous attacks on German industry
scarcely existed, therefore.?7
28 Bradley and Air Effects Committee 12th Army Group, Effect of Air Power, 6-7.
26 Like Donhet. Willam
Seversese
Air
MacLean
128).
27 Craven andseate, Torch to Pointblank, 727.
