116
Operation Overlord: Part Ill
ally envisaged a deep beachhead, and Cherbourg was to have
fallen into Allied hands by D+8.57 These optimistic expec-
tations were soon revised, however, when in the weeks pre-
ceding D-day the Germans began to increase the number of
beach obstacles and mines all along the Channel coast. The
plan of operations was accordingly adjusted to a slower rate
of advance. Thus the line that was hoped to be reached
on D+8 was advanced to D+15. The objectives originally
intended to be taken about D+17 had now to be changed
for D+30, and the size of the beachhead envisaged for
D+20 could not be established until about D +45.
It was planned that at the earliest possible moment after
the landings fighter air strips would be constructed. Airborne
aviation engineer battalions were held in readiness to be
flown in to the beachhead on D-day.
"Neptune" planners
provided for the construction, at the end of D-day, of three
emergency landing strips. By D+4 they planned to have in
use four rearming and refuelling strips a more advanced
type of landing field-and 18 regular airfields by D+ 14.59
This was the design for crossing the narrow sea on the
now fateful day of June 6, 1944. That crossing was the be-
ginning of the last phase of the Second World War.
nai anticipated depth of advance see Map 2. (21 A. Gp 5516/5/0(Plans), AP-
1 (G-3)
Te Bu Prior
prioritist str
May 14es,
Joint. Plan-
11, 29 Decembe 13 M3a21 A.GD. NJC 1004, Neptune Taitial Joint Flaff Studyuary
Chapter 7
DESIGN FOR THE DRIVE INLAND
Allied Strategy
Once the beachhead was firmly established, the Allied
forces would be faced with the necessity of driving inland
so as to gain space in which to build up the ground and air
forces for a development of operations toward Germany.
Thus, at first, the ground forces were not to wheel eastward,
but drive southward until they reached the Loire. With the
river as their southern boundary, Allied forces would resume
offensive operations in an easterly direction toward the Ger-
man frontier.
This was the general plan of operations as
contained in the
"Neptune"
plan. And to achieve it,
the
ground force commander intended to create a threat in the
Caen sector, on the eastern flank of the beachhead, ma-
neuvering strong
infantry and armored forces in this,
the
most sensitive, area in the enemy's defense perimeter. Feint-
ing a drive to the Pas-de-Calais for a link-up with the forces
that were, presumably, to invade France across the Straits
of Dover, the Allied commander would draw the
enemy
reserves into that sector.
The main drive southward to ex-
pand the beachhead would then be aggressively developed
from the western sector of the front against a minimum of
enemy strength.
The entire front, according to this plan of
operations, was to be pivoted on Caen,
in a manner very
similar to von Schlieffen's "swinging door" strategy on the
western front in the First World War-except in reverse.
General Montgomery planned to employ both the Second
British Army and the First Canadian Army in the Caen area,
117
