138
Operation Overlord: Part IV
In the end, the strategic air forces made their truly great
contribution in western Europe in the attack on oil, which
was begun less than six months before the invasion of
France.? Their other great direct contribution to the success
of the invasion was in the attacks on tactical targets, such
as the bridges over the Loire and Seine, in the campaign of
interdiction bombing, or isolation of the battlefield, which
reduced the power of mobility and maneuver of German
reserves arriving from the east.+
The Submarine Menace
Pre-invasion sea operations centered on the defeat of the
enemy submarines, which had become the greatest menace
to the Allied war effort. By January 1942, that menace had
become so formidable that the Allies were losing no less
than a ship a day, and more in the months following." As a
countermeasure, the strength of Britain's Coastal Command
was increased and the Command transferred from the opera-
tional control of the Royal Air Force to the Royal Navy,
the better to coordinate antisubmarine sea and air opera-
tions. Improved methods of bombing were devised-British
fliers releasing their bombs on enemy vessels from low alti-
tudes, which proved
more successful than high altitude
bombing,® To cope with German land-based bombers, which
attacked Allied shipping approaching or leaving the British
Isles, the Admiralty introduced improvised aircraft carriers
to convoy merchant ships. These carriers operated a flying
deck from which fighter planes took to the air as soon as
enemy bombers threatened the convoys in coastal waters. In
western Atlantic waters the submarine menace was defeated
by a system of pens, with booms and antisubmarine nets, in
which merchant ships found safety at night.? When the effec-
tiveness of the submarines was reduced in both European and
Bradley and Air Efects Committee 12th Army Group, Effect of Air Power, 9-10.
Arnol The
Atlantic War. 91
Global Mission,
221
• Karig, The Atlantic War, 92-93.
Sea Power and Air Power
139
American waters, they began to operate in "wolf packs" in
mid-Atlantic, where neither antisubmarine nets nor improvised
carriers could interfere with them. This method of attack
virtually proved catastrophic to Allied shipping, making 1942
the worst year of the war.
Determined to win the battle of the Atlantic as an essen-
tial preliminary to military operations on the European con-
tinent, Allied strategists decided to attack enemy submarine
pens in French ports, thereby depriving the submarines of
refuelling and repair facilities. The task was assigned to
the Eighth United States Air Force, stationed in England,
which, because of its specialization in daylight precision
bombing, was thought particularly fitted for the mission. It
started a series of heavy raids on the submarine pens, lasting
from the autumn of 1942 to the end of the following spring.
The results were not rewarding, however. The number of
German submarines operating in the
central Atlantic had
actually increased, not declined. The difficulty encountered
was the virtual indestructibility of the pens,
which were
constructed of reinforced concrete many feet thick, and the
frequently poor weather conditions, which made it impos-
sible for the day bombers to keep up a sustained offensive.
It was therefore decided to attack the submarines directly—
at sea, and to attack them from the air. Since, by concentrat-
ing their attacks in the mid-Atlantic stretch of ocean the
submarines were safe from the reach of land-based planes
in Great Britain and the United States, it was decided to
provide convoys with aircraft carrier escort across the entire
Atlantic journey and not merely in the coastal areas,
before. The escorts consisted largely of improvised carriers
(known as "baby flattops"), which were converted merchant
ships and tankers surfaced for airplane landings and take-
offs. Put into operation in the spring of 1943, when losses
to shipping had reached a high peak, their naval aircraft
• Craven and Cate, Torch to Pointblank, 242, 251.
