128
Operation Overlord: Part III
former area and even reinforced it with two divisions from
the Russian front. Some 20 German divisions, composing
the Fifteenth Army, were contained in the Pas-de-Calais
area during the crucial first weeks of the invasion, when the
outcome of the entire
"Overlord"
plan depended on the
Germans not reinforcing the Normandy battle area with
strategic reserves. 10
The wireless stratagem was carried out by United States
Army signal service battalions and
detachments. Among the
fictitious commands which they
simulated was Headquarters First United States Army Group,
which nominally remained in the United Kingdom, while the
real army group headquarters, under its new name of 12th
Army Group, began to move to France in July. The wire-
less operations showed, in a number of ways, the forming,
during the operations in Normandy, of the
States Army Group in East Anglia, composed of real and
fictitious Allied forces, as a threat to the Pas-de-Calais.
The Army Group was represented as consisting of the fitti-
tious Fourteenth United States Army and the real Fourth
British Army in a fictitious location.
This untrue information
reached the Germans through
Allied wireless traffic.
their habit of monitoring
The deception was essential to victory The German High
Command was sure that in fighting the battle of Normandy
it was fighting only a diversionary battle.
looked
upon as only the prelude to the major invasion yet
to come across the Straits of Dover. When the Germans had
learned the error of their thinking it was already too late
for them to change the course of events.
FEEL
Deception, European Theater of Operations,
Chapter 9
THE PROBLEM OF CIVIL AND MILITARY
GOVERNMENT
General Policy
In the countries liberated from German occupation
policies applied by Allied military commanders to problems
of civil government was called civil affairs. In enemy terri-
tory it was called military government. On the highest levels,
governmental affairs policy was controlled by the Combined
Chiefs of Staff through their Combined Civil Affairs Com-
mittee. Broad directives from the Combined Chiefs of Staff
basis of civil affairs and military
planning at Supreme Headquarters, where procedures to be
applied in the field were formulated.
It was accepted as a basic concept in the highest military
quarters that the administration of civil affairs and military
government was as much a function of the military
com-
mander as was the conduct of military operations.
Although
this concept was at first not favored by civil authorities, who
held that political area directors should be placed in charge
of civil and military government,
government staffs were made responsible directly to the mili-
commanders.1 This practice, i.e., the practice of the
responsibility of the military
commander-on all levels of
command-
-for
all aspects of the military operation was
put into effect in western Europe.
Planning on the higher levels for civil and military govern-
ment went hand in hand with the planning of military opera-
1 COSSAC/1513/5/AQ, 21 July 1943.
129
