Operation Overlord: Part 1
30
Joint Planning Staff to commence planning for a return to
the mainland of Europe from Great Britain.
The studies of the Joint Planning Staff covered
possible
operations against France, Norway, Holland, Belgium, Spain,
and other areas. These studies were continued during 1941
and intensified after the Germans invaded Soviet Russia in
June, when ways were being sought to ease the pressure on
the Russian armies. A great amount of research was done
on enemy-held coasts, their systems of defense,
sea and
weather conditions, and related subjects. Dossiers were pre-
pared on a multitude of subjects that were essential to a suc-
cessful amphibious assault on well-defended coastlines.
Another first step in preparing for future invasion opera-
tions was the organization in Britain in June 1940 of the
Commandos (specially trained amphibious assault troops),
whose initial task was to raid the continental coastline in
order to gather information of the enemy and to test invasion
techniques. This was followed by the organization that au-
tumn of Combined
Operations Command, whose
express
mission was the development, on a large scale, of techniques
for an amphibious invasion across the English Channel and
the training of the
ground forces in amphibious landing
operations on hostile shores. Greater impetus was given to
this work in 1941 when Lord Louis Mountbatten replaced
the aging Admiral Sir Roger Keyes as Director of Combined
Operations Command and was placed on the all-important
Chiefs of Staff Committee, Britain's highest military body.
The responsibility for planning an invasion of western
Europe on the strategic level was delegated by the British
Government to a new body, established early in 1942, called
the Combined Commänders.® The Joint Planning Staff of the
Chiefs of Staff Committee was at the same time relieved of
5 War Office to the author, 4768/50 Records "D," 31 July 1950.
om the
and the
the
Oper Force;
July 1550 ted
Invasion: Strategy and Techniques
31
this responsibility, and it thereafter confined its planning to
all global areas save that of western Europe. The Combined
Commanders conducted intensive planning on the selection
of an assault area for a major invasion of the European
continent from England, and their work was not interrupted
by the preparations for the invasion of North Africa in Novem-
ber 1942.
To them was added the organization in Scotland
early the same year of a ground forces command charged with
preliminary planning for the ground forces that would take
part in an invasion of Europe and of making estimates and
appreciations of manpower and equipment requirements. This
command later became Headquarters 21 Army Group, the
headquarters that planned the military campaign in France
for all Allied ground forces taking part in "Overlord." For
logistical planning for an expeditionary force to France the
Combined Commanders formed a "Roundup" administrative
planning staff,® headed by Major General H. M. Gale. This
staff went into the many problems of assembling, marshalling,
and mounting a large-scale amphibious force in Great Britain
and of solving the supply problems on the beaches and in
the ports after a lodgment on the enemy-held coast had been
secured."
The Choice of Assault Areas
Among the several areas considered for an invasion of
western Europe was France, and of the hundreds of miles
of French coastline along the English Channel and Bay of
Biscay the stretch of coast in Normandy, roughly the area
between the Vire and Orne Rivers, was considered the most
suitable for a landing by a large force. After approximately
two years of research and study, involving the problem of
the strategically most desirable invasion route, that area was
? John Dalgleish, We Planned the Second Front
(London, 1945), 9.
code
"Roundup" was the wam chosen to early
cross-Channel planning,
before the
name
was chosei
"Auerlord"
Meeting of Heads
€ Branches,
Headquarters
Cost october 1540
Notes
Administrative
Huinctions or
