110
Operation Overlord: Part Ill
good part of this strength would be kept by the Germans
in or near the Pas-de-Calais with which to ward off the main
Allied assault, which their reasoning led them to believe
would fall there rather than in Normandy. Only after the
Germans became convinced that the
"Neptune" invasion
was no mere diversion but the main Allied effort, was the
whole weight of German naval strength expected to be felt
in the western portion of the English Channel.48
In air strength, the Germans were expected to have avail-
able a force of about 1,350 planes, which they could reinforce
on D+1 by an additional 300. The only limiting factor on
the full employment of this force in the Normandy area that
Allied planners could foresee was the need of defending
Germany proper against strategic bombing, 49
"Neptune" Changes in Overlord Outline Plan
The "Neptune" invasion plan, as we have seen, was based
on the strategic Overlord Outline
Plan,
prepared the year
before by Headquarters COSSAC, and on the many factors
just discussed. Fundamentally, however, it was no more than
the original plan, improved in several
respects. The most
important improvements were the widening of the front of
assault and the strengthening of the initial assault forces.
One of the weaknesses in the Overlord Outline Plan was
the narrowness of the beachhead, which the
"Neptune"
planners thought would limit maneuver unnecessarily. Since
no provision was made for a landing on the Cotentin Penin-
sula from which a drive could be developed on Cherbourg,
the operation for capturing that port involved a complicated
turning movement westward across the Vire River marshes
from the western extremity of the contemplated beachhead,
then northward
straight up the peninsula. Confining the
initial assault to a force of only three infantry divisions was
held to be another weakness. The "Neptune"
planning staffs
3511 Д.Ср,
13 MoXa.
NJC 1004, Neptune Initial Joint Plan, 1 February 1944, Amended
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
111
therefore decided that, in order to be effective against known
enemy defenses, the assault force had virtually to be doubled.
Thus it came about that the original beachhead was
widened on both flanks: From Courseulles it was extended
eastward to Ouistreham, near the Orne River; and an addi-
tional beach was added on the southeast coast of the Cotentin
Peninsula, from which the drive would be launched against
Cherbourg, thereby eliminating the precarious operation en-
visioned
earlier. The initial amphibious assault force was
then increased from three to five infantry divisions and sup-
porting units, the First United States Army to assault on a
two corps front with two divisions and the Second British
Army on a similar front with two British divisions and one
Canadian division.
The strength of the invasion force was
also increased over the "Overlord" plan from two-thirds of
an airborne division to three full airborne divisions.
The
United States 82d and 101st Airborne Divisions were
as-
signed the descent at the base of the Cotentin Peninsula,
with the primary mission of preventing German reinforce-
ments being sent into the peninsula to threaten the rear of
the units moving north on Cherbourg. The British 6th Air-
borne Division was assigned the descent on Caen, with the
prime mission of preventing German reserves from moving
into the Normandy beachhead from the east.
The entire Normandy invasion coast-some 50 miles long
—was divided into five separate beaches and named (from
west to east) Utah, Omaha,
Gold, Juno, and Sword. The
first two were to be assaulted by the First United States
Army and the last three by the Second British Army. The
beaches were in turn subdivided into beach sectors as divi-
sional and regimental objectives. 50
The changes in the "Overlord" plan resulted also in changes
in logistical requirements. An additional complement of 231
ships and landing craft was needed to carry the additional
divisions and their supplies. And these could not be supplied,
50 For map of invasion beaches see Map. 1.
