178
Operation Overlord: Part IV
forced with the 9th Infantry Division from the Cherbourg
area, the advance of VII Corps got only as far as St. Eny,
half way between Carentan and Perriers.
Operations against St. Lo itself were entrusted to the
American XIX Corps, in line east of the Vire River, with
the object of seizing that city as the eastern anchor of an
operation to break out of the beachhead between there and
Perriers in pursuance of the "Overlord" plan. On July 7, the
29th and 35th Infantry Divisions attacked in strength, ward-
ing off armored enemy counterattacks with the aid of close-
support dive bombers, the 29th Division entering the city
on the 18th. Armored cavalry units were promptly pushed
forward south of the city and considerable mopping up done
in rear areas where isolated pockets of resistance had been
by-passed. The city was held under enemy artillery fire and
air attack for a time, but no major action took place until
the breakthrough later in the month.
The V Corps sector was, on the whole, a quiet sector.
Only minor operations were conducted for tactical objec-
tives, such as high ground and other positions of advantage.
Holding the eastern flank of the First United States Army
front with the 5th Infantry and 2d Armored Divisions, the
Corps awaited the regrouping of the remainder of the Army
for the next phase of the campaign farther west. In prepara-
tion for this campaign the Corps was relieved of the 1st
Infantry Division, which it had had under its command
since before D-day.* Farther east, a seesaw battle was con-
stantly in progress on the approaches to Caen, culminating
in a full-scale offensive on July 8.
The Caen offensive began with a breakthrough on a nar-
row front. On the night of July 7, close to 500 heavy
bombers of the Royal Air Force raided enemy positions, and
at twenty past four the next morning, preceded by massed
artillery support and the guns of the fleet, the ground attack
Arter Action RepOrt is commer,
Report to the
Group,
Combined Cr
70-71
Chiefs it
The Beachhead Widened
179
was launched by I Corps with the 3d Canadian Division
and the 3d and 59th British Divisions, besides two armored
brigades. After some 24 hours of severe fighting, during
which the Germans committed the 12th and 21st SS Armored
Divisions and the 16th
Air Force Division, the city was
During the build-up phase of "Neptune," the American 35th Division
unloads equipment from LST's on the beach.
entered by the 3d British and 3d Canadian Divisions and
the 33d Armored Brigade. Then ensued a week-long battle
for the high ground south of Caen and the three highways
leading out of the city-to Flers and Avranches to the south
and southwest, and to Falaise to the southeast. (See Map 6.)
As it pivoted on Caen, the
operation intended to sweep
southeastward from Hottot and
Villers Bocage, cutting the
roads from the west below Caen.
The Second British Army
These operations were
grueling, but territorially accom-
plished little. As before, they had nonetheless served to pin
