203
Breakthrough, Encirclement, Pursuit
Operation Overlord: Part IV
202
following day, on D+90, Antwerp was occupied, the im-
portant dock area being taken virtually intact. 13
Invasion of Southern France
Just as the "Overlord" campaign neared its end, the south
coast of France was invaded by Allied forces from the Medi-
terranean theater of operations. On August 15, the Seventh
United States Army under Lieutenant General Alexander M.
Patch landed southwest of Cannes, beginning a rapid drive
up the Rhone Valley for a junction with the "Overlord"
forces near the borders of Switzerland. 14
In order to meet the requirements of this operation, the
chief purpose of which was the opening of the ports of Mar-
seilles and Toulon as additional supply ports for "Overlord,"
the American VI Corpst was withdrawn from the line in
Italy in mid-June. In addition to VI Corps, four French
Divisions— the Moroccan 1st Motorized, 2d Infantry, 4th
Mountain and Algerian 3d Infantry-were withdrawn from
the fighting in Italy in July, the Italian theater having become
in the strategy of the Combined Chiefs of Staff a secondary
theater of operations.
The invasion began in the small hours of the morning with
the landing of a combined British-American airborne task
force near the mouth of the Argens River, southwest of
Cannes. The mountain pass through which the ground forces
had to move was seized. Several hours later a naval and air
bombardment, in which carrier naval aircraft participated,
was opened on the beaches, and at eight o'clock the Seventh
Army's VI Corps landed southwest of Cannes. The landing
of VI Corps was followed by that of the French I and II
Corps of the First French Army, General Jean J. de Lattre
de Tassigny commanding. As the main body of troops drove
westward, quickly taking Toulon and Marseilles before turn-
ing north, a task force was dispatched to capture Gap and
ng of the War, 37-18; MAngimery, Normandy to Baltic, 127.
- 36th, and 45th Infantry Divisions.
Replacement troops come ashore at Omaha Beach in August.
Grenoble in the western Alps, afterward to descend into the
Rhone valley to cut off the German columns retreating north.
This operation to take the units of the Nineteenth German
Army in the rear greatly facilitated the progress of the main
Allied forces from the south. The Germans withdrew rapidly,
offering only light resistance. On September 3 they lost Lyons
and on the 5th Besançon. Two days later Allied troops cap-
tured Dijon, where contact was established with the Third
United States Army.16 Soon afterwards the
northern and
southern operations were joined into one under the command
of General Eisenhower.17
The
Winnir
lant Wier
are ison ned
warar,
35-57;
Montgomery,
222-24,
An No and dy, to
was
over-all
emailed me centre mina
a Commandera enhowver.
of shel
wly-al
commanding.
became
Sperational under
