122
Operation Overlord: Part III
Operation "Chastity"
Owing to the difficulties involved in a landing on the
rugged north Brittany coast and the uncertainty as to the
rapidity with which Brest could be taken before the Germans
destroyed the port, the project was, after a while, abandoned
in favor of a drive to the Quiberon Bay, a well-sheltered,
undeveloped harbor on the south Brittany coast. Since that
region was comparatively lightly defended, it was thought
that the Third United States Army could advance on it with-
out strong opposition. It was intended to develop the area
mainly as a port of entry for supplies and equipment, its
build-up capacity being greater than that of the Morlaix
area and less subject to unfavorable weather conditions.'
Aside from logistical considerations, the Quiberon Bay was
favored also from a purely tactical point of view.? If the
area could be captured without much difficulty, that would
do away with the need to establish a bridgehead across the
Loire, as there would be in the case of an attempt to seize,
or invest, Nantes and St. Nazaire. The operation gave promise
of easing both the supply and tactical tasks.
The capture of the Quiberon Bay was therefore made a
major objective in place of the two Loire River
cities.?
The First United States Army was accordingly instructed to
alter its intended axis of advance away from the mouth of
the Loire toward Quiberon Bay, but not to point too early
toward the latter, in order to lead the Germans to believe
that the objective of the Allied southward thrust was the
ports of Nantes and St. Nazaire and not the Quiberon. The
capture of the Quiberon Bay was expected about D+40,
employing for that purpose the XV Corps of three divisions.
This accomplished, supplies would be moved through the
port area for troop units which
Quiberon,
He. Forward Echelon
would simultaneously
be
A-S06
Cable $ 50/2063/52/Plans,
00/14/59/(Q(Plans), Quiberon Bay
Communications Zone, Development of the Bay
Project, 11 April 1944: SHAEF,
19441
Design for the Drive Inland
123
landed in France across the busy Normandy beaches.®
Later modifications and revisions in the basic operational
plan charged the Third United States Army with respon-
sibility for capturing the Quiberon area.10 Third Army in
turn assigned the mission to VIII Corps and held XV Corps
in readiness in case of necessity." The entire operation for
subduing the Brittany Peninsula, while the main American
forces swept southeastward and eastward toward the Seine,
was delegated to VIII Corps.
Operations for the drive inland and the subsequent pur-
suit and encirclement of the German armies in Normandy
were, on the whole, carried out later very much according
to the plans worked out, although the Quiberon Bay opera-
tion was abandoned. The rapid progress of the Third Army
after the breakout from the lodgment area, the distintegration
of resistance on its front, and the speedy advance to the
Seine led to a concentration on the capture of the eastern,
in the place of western, Channel ports, such as Le Havre
and Antwerp, and the ports of Marseilles and Toulon, after
the successful landings on the French Riveria in August.
G-3 to Assistant Chief of Staff G-4,
23 MAY USA: AG S702 GNMCC, Operation "Chastity," 25 June 1941.
