64
Operation Overlord: Part Il
linked to the tactical planning, and the responsibility for it
was made that of the highest ground force commander.
This arrangement of command was to hold true for the
entire "Overlord" campaign (to D+ 90). During the later-
post "Overlord" —period, however, when the supreme Allied
commander would take over direct charge of the ground
battle, relieving the Commander-in-Chief 21 Army Group
224117
In Berkshire in the spring of 1944. an artillery
unit of the 101ct Alr
borne Division trains for Operation "Neptune," the first part of "Overlord."
of that function, General Eisenhower decided that Head-
quarters Services of Supply should not be placed under the
direction of First United States Army Group
but
under
Headquarters ETOUSA, of which he was the commanding
general. Thus, in the later stages of the campaign on the
Continent, the principle of the unity of command functions
was not followed through, and, unlike its sister organization
21 Army Group, which directly controlled its logistical sup-
port organization-Headquarters Lines of Communication-
U. S. Army Organization in Europe
65
to the end of the war, the First United States Army Group
lacked the intrinsic unity which comes with command con-
trol. General Eisenhower was not favorably disposed'?
to
recommendations that the fundamental principle of command
responsibility within the
American
military organization
adopted for the first stages of "Overlord" be carried through
in the late stages.18 Instead, the First United States Army
Group, controlling in the more advanced stages of the cam-
paign on the Continent the First, Third, Ninth, and Fifteenth
United States Armies,
was served logistically by a new
command called Headquarters Advance Section Communica-
tions Zone, an offshoot of and appurtenance to Headquarters
Communications Zone,
the name given to Headquarters
Services of Supply when it moved to France. The Advance
Section Communications Zone was not under the command
control of the tactical headquarters it supported, but under
support.
The American Chain of Command
The United States Army organization in Europe
was
rather involved. A desirable chain of command needs to be
simple, direct, and needs to function with ease. The Ameri-
can system of organization transgressed at a number of points
established and tried
principles of command relations as
well as some fundamental maxims of war. Although all com-
mands labored unstintingly toward the common end, the pur-
suit of that end was not made less arduous by the cumbrous
command organization which was in force.
17 SHAEF/17100/6/Ops (A),
June 1944.
Organization and Command
of U.
s. Forces, 3
1821 A.Gp/20657/1/G (Plans), 30 May 1944.
