205
Breakthrough, Encirclement, Pursuit
204
Operation Overlord: Part IV
The Logistics of the Campaign
The Allied sweep across France from St. Lo to Paris and
beyond severely taxed the energies of the logistical organiza-
tions supporting the military operations. And this was espe-
cially true of the American organizations, which had to keep
up with the swift thrusts of the armies in the field in their
wide encirclement operations toward the Seine. As "Over-
lord" came to an end in Belgium and France, just short of the
German frontier, supply lines were strained to the limit, and
the advancing columns were maintained by uncommon
methods. Fast one-way routes, known as the Red Ball
Express, were used from the beaches to the Seine; air trans-
portation was utilized to the maximum; and some units had
temporarily to be stripped of their organic transport in order
to supply the forward units whose momentum of advance had
to be maintained. The consumption of motor fuel was enor-
mous and the greater part of transport was used to bring it
forward from rear installations. The import to France of sup-
plies from England, including
ordnance and ammunition,
were on occasion curtailed in order to release motor transport
from clearing ports and beaches to the task of moving essen-
tial supplies to the forward troops.
American and British
transportation columns sometimes travelled 200 miles a day
during the speedy advance toward the Seine and the ap-
proaches to Germany.
By D+90, however, logistical difficulties finally began to
affect military operations and the momentum of the advance
began to diminish. Losses in equipment and ordnance also
began to tell on the Allies. The heavy fighting during the
breakthrough, the not uncostly battles in the Caen-Falaise-
Argentan
area and the Falaise Pocket took their toll in
weapons and equipment. American forces alone consumed in
western Europe an average of eight million rounds of artillery
and mortar ammunition a month, and artillery ammunition
Wrecked armor and dead dotted the
hedgerows of Normandy as the
infantry fought to enlarge the bridgehead.
was at no time plentiful, but had to be "rationed." Monthly
replacements-
—the result of battle losses and attrition—re-
quired amounted to some 36,000 small arms,
500 tanks,
2,400 vehicles, and 100 artillery pieces, among other things.
Although by D+ 90—September
4 —roughly
two million
Allied troops and close to three and a half million tons of
supplies had been landed in France, 18 the lines of communi-
cation were stretched thin and shortages in basic equipment
persisted. During the next—post-"Overlord" - stage
of the
war it became essential to move rear supply areas and dumps
forward, nearer the combat zone than was the case until then.
The Beginning of the End
But the battle of Normandy and of France had been won.
The "Overlord" plan and its execution had brought victory.
For the Germans it marked the beginning of the end; for the
Allies, a hope and prestige that only comes with the destruc-
The Winning of the War, 37-38; Montgomery, Normandy
