58
Operation Overlord: Part Il
thereupon cabled General Devers, in London, for his views
and recommendations.4
As a result of the preliminary conversations in June be-
tween General Morgan and General Devers, the first prac-
tical steps toward the organization of a senior United States
tactical ground force command in Great Britain were taken
soon thereafter at ETOUSA. But the ETOUSA staff thought
not so much in terms of a tactical army group headquarters,
pure and simple, similar to 21 Army Group, as of a com-
bined administrative-tactical command, which would be re-
sponsible for both theater-wide administrative functions and
combat operations. They planned to activate a General Head-
quarters, or GHQ, as it is commonly called, to carry out this
dual function and they had a draft prepared of an order
establishing such a headquarters, upon authorization from
the War Department. The existing ETOUSA headquarters
was thought of as the GHQ, which would be reorganized so
as to provide for a forward element, responsible for field
combat operations under the personal control of its com-
manding general, and a rear element, under direct super-
vision of the commanding general's deputy, to carry out the
normal functions of a theater administrative command.
When General Marshall cabled General Devers for his
views and recommendations regarding the formation of an
army group headquarters, General Devers naturally recom-
mended the organizational form which had been worked out
by his staff-that of a GHQ, with dual functions and respon-
sibilities. He also virtually intimated, though not directly,
that the incumbent theater commander might be named com-
manding general of the proposed GHQ.®
These recommendations were not received with a con-
senting mind by the War Department. General Marshall
held that the conduct of military operations should be sepa-
5 ETOUSA,
* War Department, Cable R-2910, 10 September 1942.
• ETOUSA, Cable W-4421,
Draft for General Order, U.S.
13 September 1943
GHQ, 28 August 1943.
7 War Department, Cable R-3267, 18 September 1943
U. S. Army Organization in Europe
functions and that the commanding general charged
the one responsibility should not be burdened with the other.
He favored ETOUSA, i.e., the theater headquarters, remain-
ing as it was, without being transformed into a GHQ, and
retaining its over-all administrative functions unchanged. For
conducting military operations of American ground forces,
General Marshall desired the organization of an army group,
comparable to the British 21 Army Group, which, together
with the latter, would, for tactical purposes,
the United States army group would draw on ETOUSA, in
and its auxiliaries.
At the head of this important new military command
General Marshall had decided to appoint Lieutenant General
Omar N. Bradley, one-time commandant of the Infantry
Dempsey, was earmarked for spearheading the
tional American army and a British-Canadian army. This
dual command also was intended to ease the transition from
a narrower to a broader sphere of military operations and
command responsibilities. General Devers' objections to the
