100
Operation Overlord: Part III
the 29th Infantry Division. The exercise provided sorely-
needed training, for many of the troops showed timidity in
the assault, wave after wave of men piling up. Many men
lay in exposed positions, vulnerable to hostile "fire" directed
at them and failed to place all of their own firepower on
known "enemy" positions.1º
"Tiger" was a rehearsal by the 4th Infantry Division and
its naval component, both of which were intended for the
invasion of Utah beach, at the base of the Cotentin Pen-
insula. This force sailed from Dartmouth to simulate actual
D-day conditions. The exercise ended tragically, however.
for in the small hours of April 28, 1944 an attack by Ger-
man torpedo boats resulted in the sinking of two LST's and
in well over 400 casualties. 13
A series of combined maneuvers of British, Canadian, and
American forces- called "Fabius"
VI-were carried out shortly before D-day. "Fabius" I was
a full-scale rehearsal of the assault on Omaha Beach by the
American 1st Infantry Division
assault force. "Fabius" II through IV were rehearsals of the
assault on the eastern three beaches-Sword, Juno, and
Gold—by the British 3d and 50th and the Canadian
Infantry Divisions. The last two exercises in the series prac-
ticed the mounting of the "Neptune"
assembly areas and ports of embarkation. Other training
exercises tested the network of signal communications and
the speed of laying cross-Channel trunk circuits. 15
Exercises and rehearsals in higher staff control formed part
of the preparations for "Neptune." They included discussions
and clarifications of such matters as the over-all chain of
12 Hq. V Corps, Document No. 44, Critique-
Exercise "Tiger'
-Exercise "Duck," 1 February 1944.
Valey baxes Mi
19 Major
15 21 A.Gp/7528/16/2/X,
wxercise
20 April 1944.
Design for Crossing the Narrow Sea
101
command and the arrangements for calling up air support. 16
The entire operational and logistical concept of "Neptune"
was then discussed in an inclusive conference and exercise
attended by commanders down to division level and naval
officers of flag rank. Presided over by the Supreme Com-
mander,
the senior ground, air, and naval commanders of
the operation presented their particular aspects of the under-
taking and many of the fine points were hammered out in
debate and conference. 17
The Shipping Problem
From the very outset of tactical planning for the invasion
of France it was clear that an important element in the
success of the operation would be the
ability to utilize
properly the available ships and landing craft.
This utiliza-
tion and control of shipping included, among other things,
convoy sailings, the employment of tugs, the repair of dam-
aged vessels, and the embarkation of troops in accordance
with the priority build-up tables prepared by the ground
force commanders. 18
The better to control these aspects of the invasion, several
new organizations were formed: The Build-up Control Or-
ganization (BUCO), the Turn-round Control Organization
(TURCO), the Movement Control Organization (MOVCO),
the Control Tug Organization (COTUG), and the Control
Repair Organization (COERP). The parent body
of this
control system was the Build-up Control Organization, re-
named, shortly before D-day, BUCO (West). This change
in name was occasioned by the strategic deception plan and
was intended as one more piece of feigned evidence that an
additional landing was planned by the Allies to the east of
Normandy. 19
, Appl
OperationS /NJC/50/302,
