174
Operation Overlord: Part IV
Bricquebec was quickly occupied, and soon the stubbornly-
defended cities of Montebourg and Valognes fell. Along the
main north-south Valognes-Cherbourg road operated one
Prime Minister Churchill with General Brooke, Chief
of the Imperial General Staff en route to France to
the headquarters of General Montgomery.
12. 1944
division; the other two developing an envelopment of the
city as they neared it from east and west.
On June 22 the first assault on the city began with a
heavy aerial bombardment across the entire front. An artil-
lery barrage laid down white smoke to mark the southern
limit of the aerial target area.
Then 10 squadrons of Royal
Air Force fighter bombers and 12 groups of American Ninth
The Beachhead Widened
175
Air Force planes swooped down over the area on a mission
of strafing and bombing, followed by an additional 11 groups
of medium and fighter bombers
attacking
selected targets.
Numerous gun positions, fuel dumps, and buildings were hit,
and large bodies of troops demoralized. But
as the ground
attack went in, strong resistance was encountered from many
strong points that survived the air attacks. Offering intense
resistance, Cherbourg was
finally
ringed on the 24th, when
the 4th and 9th Divisions, constantly
supported by artillery
and tactical planes, reached the north coast of the Cotentin
Peninsula from the east and west.
The following day the city
was assaulted from
three sides, and from the sea naval guns
laid down a heavy barrage on
the port's defenses.
The city
was entered, and on June 26
the
Cherbourg
garrison sur-
rendered, ending all organized resistance.
Three
days later,
the last remaining groups of German troops holding out in
the arsenal, in the outlying harbor, surrendered when their
position became untenable.]
The Attack on Caen
While the battle for Cherbourg held the stage on the west-
ern half of the Allied front, V Corps kept up heavy pressure
toward the town
of Caumont, capturing
it on
June 13.
Farther east, I and XXX Corps launched coordinated holding
attacks in the Caen area, in order to contain the German
forces there and prevent their reinforcing the Cotentin front.
Additional troops were brought into the line in preparation
for a drive southward toward the Loire, the United States
XIX Corps taking up a position between V and VII corps
on June 14. In the Caen sector, the British VIII Corps joined
the Second Army on the 15th and was directed to occupy the
sector between I and XXX Corps in preparation for a pincer
operation against Caen.
A series of local, but bitter, engagements ensued. While
1 FUSA
After
ment.
Utah to
cherbour
Reportshington,
t, 6 June 19Augu8t 1997
1 (no date); War Depart-
