Operation Overlord: Part 1
1942, as well as the invasions of Sicily and Italy the following
year, were an extension of traditional British strategy of
subjecting the adversary to a strategic encirclement, of driv-
ing him in, and of holding him as in a vise. So was the idea
of invading France from England, once the resources had
been accumulated. It was in line with well-established stra-
tegical thinking in Great Britain.
In the United States, owing to the absence of a global
attitude and of direct strategic interest outside of the Pacific
area, no general theory of world strategy had, it would
appear, been evolved. Military and naval thinking, in its
broadest sense, preoccupied
itself mainly
with
Western
Hemisphere defense. With few exceptions, military authorities
in positions of responsibility did not appreciate the strategic
trends of thought of their British colleagues, and military
operations at distant peripheries seemed less justifiable to
them than across 18 to 20 miles of sea.
At the outset of the war, Britain's paramount strategic
task was to safeguard the British Isles against invasion. The
Royal Navy prevented Hitler from invading England in 1940
under the plan named "Sea Lion." When, by late 1940, the
danger of invasion had abated and the British Government
felt that the homeland was reasonably secure, the possession
of sea power enabled the British to reinforce their strategic
areas. During the third year of the war they sent abroad
five planes and 15 tanks for every one they received from
the United States.® The Middle East offensive that followed
toward the end of 1941 had as its strategic objective the
denial of the Middle East oil resources to the Germans and
Italians and of clearing Axis troops from the entire coast
of North Africa. A proposed occupation of the northwestern
coast of Africa, extending from Casablanca on the Atlantic
to Algiers and Tunis in the Mediterranean was mooted as
an auxiliary operation. Great Britain then intended to invade
Sicily and Italy as part of her encircling movement of her
3 Bernard Brodie, A Guide to Naval Strategy (Princeton, 1944), 5.
English Channel-Mediterranean Controversy
7
adversaries. She planned these operations,
and
made ex-
tensive preparations, before the United States
became a
belligerent.
As a counterpoise to this strategy, the United States War
Department chiefs proposed an assault on France from
England in the summer of 1942, as a means of engaging
the main body of the German Army in the West and of
relieving the pressure on the Russian Army. Although both
the United States and Great Britain had only one end in
view, namely, the defeat of Germany, they proposed differ-
ent methods of attaining it. The United States, it would ap-
pear, proposed the straight and direct-the easy-road; Great
Britain, the circuitous, round-about-the more difficult—
road
How to reconcile the two methods without compromising
the goal became the most important strategic problem the
Western Allies had to solve when the United States entered
the war in December 1941. It is worth noting at this point
that when all the facts bearing on the determination of
strategy were closely examined, and the feasibilities of each
investigated, the strategy of cross-Channel operations in
1942 as against operations in the Mediterranean had little
to be said in its favor. It was found that Allied capabilities
were unequal to the requirements of a cross-Channel in-
vasion after only some six or seven months of active United
States participation in the war. To the responsible military
authorities in the United States, it was, as General Mark W
Clark, wartime commander of the Allied 15th Army Group
in Italy, states, a case of "being
new on the job"
and of
being
"ready to tackle anything." 4 To the responsible mili-
tary authorities in Great Britain it was a case of long ex-
perience and preoccupation with strategy based on all the
seas and continents. Moreover, the manpower and material
resources were not available in 1942 for the launching of
an invasion of France. The United States was first able to
4 Clark, Calculated Risk, 34.
