pg_0020.pdf:
V07793 (19) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Sec. 3.1
7
aim or objective. This implies also the co-operation of all
parts of the nation or of a force: the co-operation of the
civil and military leaders; of the navy, the army and the
air force; and of the various parts of any army.
A corollary of the principle of concentration is that of
economy of force at less vital points: some detachments
from the main theatre or the main force will always be
required for purposes of security, or to divert some part of
the enemy's forces, or for other purposes they must be
large enough to fulfil their object, but not so large as to
weaken unduly the force engaged on the main aim.
iii. A reasonable security is the basis of any plan of cam-
paign and consists in providing adequate defence for vital
and vulnerable points of the nation, or of the force so
as to obtain freedom of action to pursue the selected aim
with all remaining resources. Thus in a national war it
may include provision for the defence of the homeland
against invasion or air attack, in an overseas expedition
arrangements for the safety of the base and lines of com-
munication.
The principle must not be read to justify
undue caution and avoidance of all risks: bold action is
essential for success in war, and security can often best be
obtained by offensive operations which, by threatening the
enemy's security, deprive him of his freedom of action.
iv. Since victory cannot be won by passive defence, it is
a principle of war that offensive action should be undertaken
whenever the circumstances are favourable.
This does not
mean that attacks should be rashly undertaken with in-
adequate means; but that the great advantages that the
offensive confers-liberty of action, heightened morale,
power to force the enemy to conform-should be realized
and should be sought whenever possible.
v. Surprise is a most powerful weapon and has a great
moral affect; by creating a situation for which the enemy
is unprepared it upsets his plans and forces him to hurried
and unconsidered action. The value of surprise is usually
proportional to the length of time that it will take the enemy
to provide effective counter-measures. Surprise may be
obtained by the development in peace of new resources for
war or of a new weapon; by the intensive preparation of
national industry for the production of war material or by
unexpected speed of mobilization: in the field it may be
gained by secrecy, by calculated stratagem devised to mislead
V07793 (19) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

