pg_0019.pdf:
V07793 (18) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
[Chap. 1. Sec. 3.
But it must be clearly understood that the principles that
guide action in war, whether strategical or tactical, are not
laws, such as the laws of natural science, where the observance
of certain conditions produces an inevitable result, nor
rules, such as the rules of a game, the breach of which entails
a definite fixed penalty: they simply indicate a course of
action that has been successful in the past and serve as a
warning that disregard of them involves risk and has often
brought failure. Many plans have, however, succeeded in
war, although not made in accordance with text-book
principles.
3. Some of the most important and useful guides to
strategical planning and action may be briefly stated as
follows :—
i. In the conduct of war as a whole and in every operation
of war, it is essential to decide on and clearly to define the
aim that the use of force is intended to attain.
The
ultimate national aim of war has already been defined
(Sec. 1, 3): the immediate political aim of a campaign
will be a more definite one, such as to drive the enemy out
of certain territory; or to occupy or menace his capital
city; or to blockade him and cut off all resources by
sea and land; or to attack centres of his national effort;
or to further and aid the operations of our allies; or to
protect vital national interests in some part of the world;
or some combination of the above or similar aims.
may sometimes lead to the despatch of one or more mili-
tary expeditions, the aim of which is to defeat enemy forces or
to occupy places of strategical importance; to effect this,
it may be necessary to give different objectives to different
parts of an expedition. In every instance, the selection of
a correct objective demands knowledge and judgment:
the objective must be within the means of the force that
can be made available to secure it, and must be that best
calculated to further the favourable conclusion of the opera-
tion or of the campaign or of the war.
When once the aim
or objective has been decided on, all effort must be continually
directed towards its attainment, so long as this is possible,
and every plan or action must be tested by its bearing upon
this end.
ii. This introduces a second main strategical principle, the
concentration of effort, which means that the greatest possible
force moral, physical and material-should be employed
at the decisive time and place in attaining the selected
V07793 (18) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

