pg_0059.pdf:
V07793 (58) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
46
[Chap. V. Secs. 20 and 21.
act of the battle in which all arms and all parts of the force
should co-operate, by their fire and by advancing whenever
the situation permits.
21. Mobile and armoured formations in the attack
1. The employment of mobile and armoured forces in the
battle will usually mark a decisive phase; the tasks allotted
to them should therefore be designed to ensure, or confirm,
the success of the main attack.
Tank brigades or other mechanized forces
are not
suitable for attacking strongly defended localities, and
should generally be used to attack the enemy's weaknesses
rather than his strength. Suitable tasks may be to strike
the enemy on the flank; to attack enemy reserves in move-
ment, in order to prevent their intervention in the battle;
or to attack gun positions, headquarters or other vulnerable
points in rear, when the results to be gained are calculated
to have decisive influence on the main attack.
2. The existence of an open flank is likely to offer the most
favourable opportunities for the employment of mobile and
armoured forces.
Their action will then be directed to
prevent the enemy from extending
or strengthening
his
flank to meet the attack; or to assist the other attacking
forces to overcome the defences.
When the plan of attack aims at penetrating the enemy's
front, it will not usually be possible to employ mobile and
armoured forces until
the main attack has succeeded in
breaking down organized resistance and has created
a
situation favourable to their action.
A mobile and armoured force may occasionally be reserved
for the pursuit, after the enemy has been driven from the
battlefield by the action of the other troops.
3. The timing of the intervention of a mobile and armoured
force will require careful consideration, especially when the
attack aims at penetration. Opportunities favourable to
its action will be fleeting. It will therefore usually be
necessary for the commander to issue beforehand orders or
instructions as to the objective or role of the mobile and
armoured force in the battle, delegating to its commander
the responsibility for deciding when the time for its inter-
vention has arrived. The commander of the mobile and
armoured force should then place himself where he will be
in close touch with the commander of the troops on whose
VICKERSM
V07793 (58) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

