pg_0045.pdf:
V07793 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
32
[Chap. IV. Sec. 16.
16. The location and movement of headquarters
1. A commander must select the site of his headquarters
as early as possible, since on it will depend the lay-out of
the signal communications. The site selected should be
where he is best placed to receive information from the
front and from the rear; whence he can easily reach and
control his supporting arms and his immediate subordinates,
especially the commander of his reserve; and whence he
can exercise a personal influence on the course of events.
It must be as central to his command as possible, so that
he obtains a balanced view of the situation and is not liable
to be distracted by local incidents that affect only a part of
his command. Other important factors are the existence of
sufficient accommodation, concealment from air observation
and security against interference by hostile mobile troops.
The comparative importance of these factors will vary
according to the size of the formation. However carefully
the site has been selected, the location of headquarters will
be disclosed to hostile aircraft unless traffic in its vicinity
is properly controlled.
Facilities for close liaison with air force formations or
units are an important factor in the siting of higher head-
quarters.
The headquarters of the air force contingent
should be located where it will be in close touch with G.H.Q.
Similarly, the headquarters of air formations or units
operating under a subordinate commander should be located
as near as possible to his headquarters.
The proximity of
suitable aerodromes or landing grounds will therefore have
to be considered when the site for the military headquarters
concerned is selected.
2. The work carried out at the headquarters of higher
formations, by the staff and representatives of services,
consists, firstly, of the collection and sifting of information
from all sources, and the preparation of plans and the issue
of orders for the conduct of operations; and, secondly, of
measures necessary for the maintenance and administration
of the formation.
The total volume of this work is so great
that the headquarters of the larger formations cannot be
moved without considerable interference with efficiency.
In
principle, therefore, the movements of headquarters shoul
be as infrequent as possible; and, when it is necessary t
move, the interruption of work should be reduced to a
minimum by the timing and arrangement of the move,
V07793 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

