pg_0049.pdf:
V07793 (48) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
36
[Chap. V. Sec. 17.
morale and will to resist. The advantages of envelopment
of the flanks should be sought whenever possible, but it
must be borne in mind that the enemy will be fully aware
that his flanks are his sensitive points and will take steps to
protect them by reconnaissance, by the use of natural
features and by the positioning of his reserves.
An obvious,
unskilful attempt to outflank a position is therefore likely
to find itself met by a strongly organized defence and may be
exposed to a pre-arranged counter-stroke. The opportunity
to assault the enemy on the flank must be made by previous
manœuvre, by superior mobility, by use of the cover of
darkness or by ingenious deception of the enemy. It will
usually be necessary to engage the enemy on bis front in
order to distract his attention and resources from the flank
attack. Unless it has been possible during the preliminary
manœuvring to place a sufficient part of the force in a position
to outflank the enemy, envelopment will require more time
and movement of troops than will a direct attack, and sur-
prise may thus be harder to obtain; it may also involve
a separation of force, during which the enemy may find
opportunity for a counter-stroke.
If mobile troops are
available for the outflanking movement, the difficulty of
surprise and the danger of separation can more easily be
overcome.
3. If the enemy's flanks are unassailable by reason of
natural obstacles, such as marshes or thick bush, absence
of roads or lack of water, or are too strongly posted and
closely watched; if the time factor makes an outflanking
movement inadvisable; if the ground occupied by the
enemy offers better facilities for the co-operation of all
assault with a view to penetration may be the best, or
indeed the only practicable solution. Such an attack can
often be organized more simply and rapidly than a flank
attack, and an initial surprise and success may therefore
be easier to procure. Penetration of the enemy front is
less likely to lead to decisive results, since the enemy is
usually driven back on his line of communications: but
penetration at two or more places may be developed so as
to lead to the envelopment and destruction of the hostile
troops between them. The main difficulty of the direct
form of attack is to obtain fire superiority on a sufficient
V07793 (48) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

