pg_0039.pdf:
V07793 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
26
[Chap. III. Sec. 12.
that it will be to his advantage to await the attack. No
fixed rules can be laid down: nor does one force invariably
attack and the other continually defend during the course
of a battle; there are usually alternations of attack and
defence; often part of a force will defend and part attack.
3. Though the respective advantages and disadvantages
of attack and defence change to a certain extent with the
development of weapons and organization, the pyschological
factors remain constant. Thus the moral advantage of the
attack is a feeling of superiority, which will be increased if
the material advantages the power to select the point of
attack and to concentrate superior force at it are used to
givings of one who has-with insufficient information-to
wait on events and on his opponents' will: but he may gain
a compensating feeling of confidence from the strength that
the fire power of modern weapons gives to the defence;
while a repulse with heavy losses will cause a depressing
reaction on the morale of the attackers.
But defence, how-
ever successful, can seldom bring anything but a negative
result; for positive results a change to the offensive is
almost always necessary. This change is a difficult matter,
and demands high qualities of skill and resolution from the
commander, if he is to remain undisturbed by the enemy's
attacks; to judge correctly the time to make his own ;
keep intact a general reserve suffcient at least to initiate
the counter-offensive; and to inspire the mental change
that will be necessary to turn a defending force into an
assaulting one (see also Sec. 26).
4. When a commander's intention is to gain time, he must
decide whether he is more likely to achieve his object by
occupying a position on which he is prepared to withstand
assault or by acting with the same general methods as a
rearguard (Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 48),
i.e. taking up a series of positions in front of which the enemy
must deploy for attack, and then withdrawing before the
enemy can come to close quarters. The decision must
depend on the extent to which ground can be given up;
the time for which the enemy is to be delayed; and the
possibility of securing the flanks against an enveloping
movement if a position is taken up to await attack.
5. Armoured units, of which only a small number are
V07793 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

