pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iji) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D..3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
It will be
entered up daily,
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
A.F. C.2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTI.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and descripfion of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Metrorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above hut at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infantry brigade or higher
formation will be forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicate copies
of the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the off
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.-The time entered should be the time the information or order
aches
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known.
Instructions regarding
War naries
and Intellig
ontained in
F.S. Regs.,
Mouthy War
MORELY
Diaries wil eateose ind
avariable,
Intelligence
Summaries,
the
prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year. August 1944•
ORIGINAL
WAR DIARY
INTELE ENGRESUNWARE
(Delete heading not required).
pace
Date
nour
Summary of Events and Information
Gazelle
2 AUg
0800
Granville
14,00
Bn moved from rest area to assembly area five miles NORTH of CAMONT.
In recce party noved to 309 to arrange relief with 4th SEAPORIHS. Relief
Granville 3 Aug
0800
cancelled late in evening.
Bn moved off to temporary assembly area at the FORET LEVEUE four niles
NORTH of Le BENY BOCAGE. C.O. went straight on to GARVILLE one mile SOUTH
of Le BINY BOCAGE to ale "O" Gp. A D.Ro was sent back to the FORET LEVELUS
1400
to bring up Bn recce party. Meanwhile the C.O. moved up southwards toja59
Bde I• (11 Armd Div) at FORGUES four miles NORIHI - LIST of VIRE. The recce
WAR DIARIES
No.
party arrived at 14,00 hrs. and a reconnaisance was made during the
afternoon of a posn overlooking BURCY and facing the enemy on the oposite
22 SEP 1944
G.H.Q. 2nd EOHELON
ridge. The Bn came under comnando 159 Bde and were ordered up into posn.
1530
at 1530 hrs. Owing to our rapid advance however, small mobile enemy parties
were still making themselves a misance sone miles behind. These parties.
often consisted of three or foux PANIIIR or CIGER tangs and about a coy of Inf
The Bn riding on T.C.V's was ordered to deal with this misance in the area
W1,84820, 1676 800,000 11/43 W. H, & 5. 51-7016
Wt. 13474/1805
1,200,000 7/40 BPL
51-7171 Forms C2118/22
RHU,
EG RIFLES.
10le
into
party
im that
ich fact
gouts as
they were
with
ate. that
The chief
e good,
and night!
mpanied
ISE
is
guard
near Le
ission,
nent that
Is attitude
found that
Army Form C. 2118.
Unit... 2nd Bn KeS. LoIa
Commanding Officer It-Col. C.G NILLETT (ORE)..
References to APíndices
Ptes DYKES
en
upany on
50
DIARY
1944.

