pg_0090.pdf:
V10326 (89) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
83
torches, etc., as are necessary for controlling traffic both by
day and night.
During large moves it may be necessary to locate at selected
control posts reserves of engineer troops for decontamination,
road clearing and repair; medical and vehicle light aid
detachments, and stocks of petrol and oil.
6. If enemy interference is probable it will be advisable to
reconnoitre deviations along the route. Deviations should over-
lap, and thus keep as short as possible the distance between
the site of a possible obstruction and the entrance to a deviation.
When using a single route, this can be done by choosing
deviations on both sides of the road, but when two or more
routes are used, care must be taken to prevent deviations from
different routes from running into each other.
Deviations should be numbered consecutively along the
route.
When two or more routes are in use the distinguishing
route letter should be used also.
The lay-out of deviations can be conveniently issued in the
form of a tracing as an appendix to orders.
7. Deviations should be marked with arrows at all doubtful
points. It is advisable for these arrows to be different in
colour from those on the main route.
A short distance before
the entrance to the deviation, a normal arrow should be placed
pointing up the main route.
This sign can then be adjusted
when it is necessary to bring the deviation into use.
At the entrance to the deviation a board, protected from
the weather, should be placed giving information where the
deviation rejoins the main route.
If time is not available to mark deviations, nor to place
descriptive boards in position, deviations should be published
in a list or marked on a map. The list or map should be in
possession of all officers empowered to order a deviation. This
power should normally be decentralized to commanders of
sub-units.
8. In addition to the control organized by the higher
command, every unit commander is responsible for :-
i. Guiding his unit.
ii. Ordering deviations (normally delegated to officers
commanding companies, etc.).
ii. Regulating cruising speed to maintain the speed
(m.i.h.) ordered.
iv. Dealing with break-downs.
= 2
V10326 (89) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

