pg_0077.pdf:
V10326 (76) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
70
4. In order to reduce the possibility and extent of a compro-
mise of the order of battle, which would result from the
loss or capture of such lists, divisional headquarters and forma-
tions forward of these headquarters will not be issued with
the complete lists of the whole force.
They will receive
lists containing only those code names of their own formation
and units and the necessary names of flanking and co operating
formations and units.
5. Principles of allotment
Block lists of code names will be issued in two lists, one
prepared in haphazard order and the other in alphabetical
order. Each block list will contain 100 code names. which
should be sufficient to meet the requirements of a division
including the necessary spares.
As one of the main reasons for the use of code names is
to conceal the identity and composition of formations and
units, it is essential that code names should not be allotted
on any methodical system. For this reason and to assist
encoding, code names will therefore invariably be allotted
using the haphazard order list and the formation's order
of battle. The last 10 spare names on the list in haphazard
order for each division will be reserved for use by that division.
Any allotments from these spares which may be made by
division will be notified to all concerned. To assist in decoding
a corresponding list showing code names in alphabetical
order will also be prepared.
6. Relief of formations and units
In order to assist in concealing reliefs, the relieving formation
or unit will normally be ordered to take over the existing
code name of the outgoing troops.
7. Changes of code names
Changes of code names will be ordered by the general
staff, as frequently as is found necessary and will be made
at irregular intervals. As changes of code names must be
accompanied by a change of wireless frequencies and wireless
call signs, the general staff
will co-ordinate these changes
in consultation with the signal officer in chief or the senior
signal officer of the formation concerned.
8. To enable changes to be made with the minimum delay,
and to allow a change to be effected within formations where
necessary, an alternative allotment of code names will be
prepared in advance. At least one such alternative will be
issued down to divisional headquarters where the lists will
V10326 (76) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

