pg_0032.pdf:
V10326 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
25
iv. Responsibility for lateral communication by other
means is from right to left, i.e. each commander
is responsible for arranging communication with
his left-hand neighbour.
v. A formation or unit is responsible for the provision
and maintenance of communication with its
supporting artillery. The artillery commander,
however, must do what he can to assist in the
matter and should occupy adjacent headquarters
whenever possible.
vi. When army tank battalions are co-operating with
infantry, the responsibility for intercommunication
rests primarily with the tank commander, who is
provided with a wireless set for attachment to
infantry headquarters.
vii. Higher formations must do all in their power to help
lower formations and so release their signal units
for forward work. A higher formation will
frequently extend its lines forward beyond the
limits of its responsibilities in preparation for an
advance. It may then authorize the
lower
formations to make use of these lines until they
are required.
viii. A higher formation is responsible for the general
supervision, and co-ordination where necessary,
of signal communication within lower formations.
1. The above principles do not absolve any commande
from the duty of taking all steps in his power to provide the
communications required by the tactical situation, when for
any reason it has not been possible to provide them in
accordance with these principles.
5. Communication with aircraft
The army is responsible for the provision and maintenance
of ground communication (by line, wireless, or D.R.) between
the headquarters of army formations and the headquarters of
air force formations or units; and of ground communication,
other than by wireless, between air force formations and their
air units.
All ground communication is in fact an army
responsibility, except that :—
i. Air Force units in possession of motor cyclists will be
prepared where necessary, to carry messages to
the Army or Air Force formation with whom they
are co-operating.
V10326 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

