pg_0035.pdf:
V10326 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
28
signal traffic. As the tactical situation develops, these units
strengthen and elaborate the communication established by
those in front of them, thereby relieving the latter and freeing
them for work further forward.
2. Signal offices. -- In order to co-ordinate the various
means of communication, other than the army postal service,
and to ensure that messages are dealt with systematically, a
signal office is established at the headquarters of every
formation and at the headquarters of such units as carry
signallers on their establishment or are provided with a signal
section. The duties of the personnel of the signal offices are
to receive, record, despatch and deliver messages. It is the
duty of the originator, not of the signal personnel, to keep any
copies required of messages sent.
3. Signal centres.—It is sometimes convenient temporarily
to establish a special signal office at a point which is not a
headquarters, but at which means of communication with two
or more headquarters may be concentrated. Such an office,
which may be established by a higher formation in the vicinity
of the headquarters of lower formations or units, is called a
signal centre. After deployment, communication with the
headquarters of subordinate formations and units can often
most conveniently be arranged by means of signal centres.
When a headquarters halts beside a signal centre, the signal
office of the headquarters will continue to act as such but will,
if it is convenient and economical, use the means provided by
the signal centre to dispose of its messages. Signal centres,
if properly used, should effect economy in signal personnel
and material. A formation may establish a signal centre at a
site to which its headquarters will move later. When the
move takes place, the signal centre becomes the signal office
of that headquarters.
4. Marn arteries.- Within a formation the communications
from rear to front are normally centred in one, or possibly more,
main arteries on which are established the signal offices or
signal centres.
The system is further developed and strengthened by lateral
connections between signal offices and centres. The means
of communication available are allotted to the main arteries
and laterals in the way best calculated to meet requirements.
5. By the general method described above the varying
requirements are satisfied. The theatre of war becomes
covered with a network, which puts all parts of a force in
ultimate touch with one another, while it gives the most
V10326 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

