pg_0042.pdf:
V10326 (41) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
35
CHAPTER VI
MOVEMENTS
23. Movement by road- General
1. The strategical or tactical considerations which govern
the movement of armies in a theatre of war, e.g. the front on
which a force may move, the order of march and the extent to
which use can be made of mechanization, are discussed in
Field Service Regulations, Volume III.
volche zation,are
The protection of
columns on the march will be dealt with in pamphlets on
" Approach" and " Withdrawal."
2. The length of moves will be governed mainly by the
strategical and tactical situation, but the daily distance that
can be covered will depend upon the physical and moral state
of the troops, the condition of vehicles, the standard of march
discipline, the state of the weather and of the roads, and the
efficiency of the arrangements made by commanders and
staffs for traffic control and for the comfort of the troops.
Account must be taken of the demands which have been made
on troops and vehicles immediately before a move. Tired
drivers, particularly if subjected to the strain of night move-
ment with reduced lighting, will inevitably cause accidents.
Forced marches by infantry, owing to the risk of casualties
and loss of efficiency involved, should be undertaken only in
he ca to of extra tactic see sit the easil espe
made known to them. Infantry should rarely be called upon
to exceed the regulation rate of marching; a forced march is
made by increasing the number of hours the troops are on the
road rather than by increasing the rate of marching.
Sufficient time must be allowed at the end of a march for
the maintenance of vehicles, otherwise their condition will
rapidly deteriorate. Whenever possible the heavier categories
of tracked vehicles should be moved by rail.
3. As a general guide, the daily range of mechanical vehicles,
in miles, can be taken to be :-
Normal
Emergency
Wheeled vehicles
150
300
Light tracked vehicles
-..
100
150
Medium and heavy tracked vehicles
50
75
4. The average daily march of infantry columns is 15 miles
with one day's rest at least once a week. Small columns of
seasoned troops can maintain a higher average; and any body
V10326 (41) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

