pg_0022.pdf:
V10326 (21) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
15
to take starting point, so as to coales borate without
unnecessary fatigue to the troops and without crossing the
line of approach of other commands. Each subordinate
commander must fix his own local starting point and the time
the head of his command must pass it so as to be able to pass
the higher formation starting point at the hour specified.
When commands are broken up for administration and
discipline in quarters, the responsibility for the arrangements
for the resumption of the march by the troops quartered in an
area rests with the area commander as far as the starting
point fixed by the superior command.
In fixing a starting point for marching troops, care must be
taken that each unit reaches it by moving forward in the
direction of the march.
Should the move begin in the dark, special arrangements for
marking the starting point must be made and notified in the
operation order.
5. A dispersal point is necessary on each route used.
At
this point the column is split up into subordinate formations
and units, and the responsibility of the higher formation for
movement ends. To avoid congestion at the dispersal point
it is essential that arrangements for dispersal should be made
beforehand, and for mechanized columns these will include the
organization by subordinate formations and units of a complete
system of traffic control from dispersal point to destinations.
6. Staff officers must have, ready for reference, the strengths
of units, showing the road space occupied by them in column
of route, including the recognized distances between sub-units,
and the time taken to pass a given point. They must know
the number of vehicles in mechanized columns and the speed
and density ordered for the move.
They must also know the billeting accommodation and
parking space required, and must be able to estimate the
amount of cover required for the concealment of bivouacs
and vehicles.
V10326 (21) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

