pg_0094.pdf:
V10326 (93) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
87
iv. Lights at halts.—If lights are permitted they will all
be switched off at halts except that shaded side lights
of leading vehicles and tail lights of rear vehicles will
be left on, if other traffic is using the road.
Il. Marching infantry and mounted troops
4. The average rate of march of a large body of troops
moving at foot pace should be maintained at two and a half
miles an hour, and of a mounted column at five miles an hour.
5. In marching columns,
halts will be from ten minutes
before each clock hour until the clock hour, unless otherwise
ordered. During long marches, of 15 miles or over, a halt
of one hour or more is advisable if the situation permits.
6. Time must be allowed for animals to be watered and
fed before starting a march. If an early start is necessary,
it is also advisable to arrange for watering after one or two
hours' marching, since animals will not usually drink in the
early morning.
Watering on the march may be from troughs,
or if they are not available, by buckets or direct from a stream
or pool. Arrangements for traffic control at a watering place
are essential, and time tables prepared by the staff may be
necessary.
If animals are watered direct from a stream, steps
must be taken to prevent general pollution of the supply.
Long halts should last at least an hour if animals are to be
off-saddled, watered and fed.
)
7. No trumpet or bugle calls are allowed on the line of
march. Intercommunication throughout a column will
normally be by D.R.
8. An officer, or non-commissioned officer, will march in
rear of each troop or platoon to see that no man leaves the
ranks without permission, and that the sections, vehicles and
animals keep properly closed up.
9. Strict attention must be paid to water discipline; the
less men drink during the actual march, the better; men
should not be allowed to drink from their water bottles
without permission. They must not be permitted to fall out
for water; when necessary, halts will be made to enable men
to fill their water bottles. Every opportunity will be taken
to water animals on the march.
V10326 (93) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

