pg_0024.pdf:
V10326 (23) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
17
9. Time
1. Time will be described by reference to the 24-hour clock.
Groups of four figures followed by " hrs" will be used. The
first two figures represent the hour and the last two the minutes
past the hour.
Examples (Date—3 Sep) :
" 0001 hrs" : one minute past midnight, night 2/3 Sep.
" 0900 hrs" : nine o'clock in the morning.
" 1200 hrs" : noon.
" 1635 hrs" : twenty-five minutes to five in the afternoon.
" 2400 hrs" : midnight 3/4 Sep.
2. When plans are being drawn up which are to be carried
out in accordance with a time-table, it will be usual to base
the timings on a time known as " zero hour"; this enables
arrangements to be made in detail without the necessity of
fixing or disclosing, until it is convenient to do so, the actual
moment when the operation will begin. It will be the
responsibility of the commander who issues the orders for an
operation to define what constitutes zero hour for that
particular operation: in attack, it will normally be the hour
at which the leading troops of the attack cross their starting
line.
Action to be taken before or after zero hour will normally
be timed from zero in minutes, and all figures will be read as
minutes unless otherwise stated, e.g. Z—10, or Z + 4 hrs.
3. i. In communication between units (including inter-
service communication) in the same time-keeping area, the
local time of the area will be used both for " times of origin"
and times occurring in the subject-matter of a message.
Times will not be followed by the group LT.
ii. In communicating with any authority that is in a
different time-keeping area, or whose whereabouts are not
known, G.M.T. will be used for all purposes, and all times in
the subject-matter and " time of origin" will be followed by
the group GMT. This method will be used in all cases when
any possible doubt may arise as to the recipient understanding
references to local time, and is applicable in peace and war
except for a specially planned combined operation for which
special instructions are issued.
iii. In any case the same standard time must be used both
in the body of the message and for " time of origin."
V10326 (23) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

