pg_0044.pdf:
V10326 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
37
The normal distances between units and formations will be
50 yards. Whenever troops are moving in areas in which they
are liable to air attack without warning every endeavour
should be made to move them on a broad front across country.
It is not, however, worth while to change one march formation
for another, unless the latter can be maintained for a
considerable distance.
Owing to the discomfort caused by dust and petrol fumes,
mechanized vehicles should as far as possible pass marching
columns while the latter are halted.
4. Arrangements must be made for the regulation of civilian
traffic. Usually if heavy troop movement is in progress all
civilian traffic will need to be diverted to side roads. If no
side roads are available, civilian trathc must be parked well
clear of the road until the weight of military traffic is
arned to disperse in their parts proced ig suit trenches bo
their protection while waiting.
5. Traffic control is dealt with in Appendix VIII.
25. March discipline
1. A unit will retain its mobility under the exacting
conditions of field service only if a high standard of march
discipline is maintained. A great deal therefore depends on
the efforts of regimental officers. March discipline includes
everything that affects the efficiency of the man, vehicle or
horse during the move, e.g. the arrangements for food, the
ning of water bottles, the maintenance of mechanized vehicles,
the strict observauce of the correct formations, distances and
densities and many similar details.
2. Slackness in march discipline not only causes discomfort
in the unit itself, but may expose it to heavy casualties from
air attack and may lead to disaster through troops arriving
late or too exhausted to take an effective part in battle. The
importance of march discipline and the necessity of main-
taining a high standard in all conditions must be realized by
all ranks.
March discipline which breaks down at a time of
crisis is of little value; the longer and more trying the march
and the worse the conditions, the more strictly must it be
enforced.
3. Details are given in Appendix IX.
V10326 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

