pg_0030.pdf:
V10326 (29) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
23
19. " Emergency operations." —This indication will be used
only for messages of the utmost importance having a direct
bearing on operations.
"Immediate." -The use of this indication will be limited
to messages the speed of which is of special importance, as
otherwise its purpose will be defeated. In urgent cases any
officer may frank a message as " immediate,
," but, if un-
authorized to do so, he will be held responsible that the urgency
is sufficient to justify his action.
21. " Important." —This indication will be used for those
messages which require priority above ordinary official
messages, such as signal messages dealing with the working
of the signal system. Signal officers are authorized to frank
messages in this way.
22. " Priority lists."—Lists of officers authorized to frank
emergency operations," " immediate"
and " important"
messages will be prepared by the general staff and published
in routine orders.
Officers on these lists entitled to send " immediate " messages
may demand a special despatch rider and may also make
priority telephone calls. Such calls take precedence over all
other waiting calls, but a conversation in progress will not be
interrupted for them.
For authority, in connection with priority lists, to use R/T
behind divisional headquarters, see Sec. 19, 4, ii, (a).
23. Private messages.—When private messages are to be
accepted, special instructions for their disposal will be issued
in routine orders. Such messages will always take precedence
after ordinary official traffic.
24. Acknowledgment.—The staff at a headquarters will make
their own arrangements for checking the acknowledgment of
any message which the addressees have been ordered to
acknowledge.
25. Time of origin.—This is the time at which the originator
signs the message and is filled in by him. The 24-hour clock
will be used. The abbreviation " hrs" will not be used.
26. The remainder of the message form is for the use of
signals.
27. Examples of messages are given at Appendix V.
V10326 (29) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

