pg_0026.pdf:
V10326 (25) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
19
7. An area will be described by taking the northernmost
point first, and giving the remaining points in clockwise order.
Positions will be described from right to left looking towards
the enemy.
8. Boundaries, if generally parallel to the line of advance
or withdrawal, will be described from rear to front in advance,
or attack, and from front to rear in defence and withdrawal.
If generally parallel to the front line, they will be described
from right to left.
In detailing boundaries between units and formations, the
words " inclusive" or " exclusive," abbreviated to " incl"
or " excl," will be used. These words should be written before
the place to which they refer. A locality will be described as
inclusive or exclusive to the unit or formation to which the
writer belongs, rather than as exclusive or inclusive to another.
In an operation order, it is usually convenient to place all
details of boundaries, including-so far as necessary-those
laid down by a higher formation, in the " Method " paragraphs
(see Sec. 5, 4).
9. River banks may be described as " right" or " left," it
being assumed that the writer is facing downstream.
10. The terms " right" and " left" applied to our own
forces in retirement will be taken to refer to the original right
and left flanks, as they were when facing the enemy.
11. Generally, such terms as " right," " left," " before,"
" behind,
," " beyond," " front," " rear," " on the side of"
should not be used to define a locality, unless it is clear to
what they refer.
12. Bearings will be given as true bearings, except when a
gridded map is used, when grid bearings will be used.
11. Rules for drafting messages on Army Form C.2128
1. Owing to the large volume of signal traffic in modern
armies, and to the necessity of enciphering W/T messages,
brevity, clearness and the strict observance of rules are
essential in writing messages.
Any officer may originate a message for transmission by
signals. It will be accepted by a signal office provided that
it is legible and signed by the originator, who is responsible
that it is sufficiently urgent to justify its despatch by signals
and not by post.
2. Copies of all messages will be kept by the originator.
V10326 (25) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

