pg_0037.pdf:
V10326 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
30
In protracted operations, where buried cables are installec
within divisional areas, this general co-ordination may extenc
to the front line.
17. Organization of wireless communication
1. Allotment of wave frequencies.—Subject to any genera
directions as to policy or any special requirements laid dowi
by the general staff, the allotment of frequencies for use by
the Army and by the R.A.F. component is controlled by the
signal officer-in-chief. He will allot blocks of frequencies to
all formations which come directly under G.H.Q., to line ot
communication and G.H.Q. signals, as well as those required
by the air officer commanding for communication with army
co-operation wings and air formations directly under air force
headquarters.
Similarly signal officers of lower formations, on receipt of a
block of frequencies, will make their own
sub-allotments
Detailed instructions are given in Signal Training, Vol. I, 1937,
Chapter XX
2. Allotment of call signs.—The allotment of call signs
requires the same co-ordination as frequencies and is therefore
made under the instructions of the signal officer-in-chief. As
it is bound up, however, with other security questions, it is
subject to the control of the general staff.
Call signs for use by the R.A.F. component of an army in the
field are allotted by the army. For wireless call signs to be
used in communication with army co-operation aircraft see
The Employment of Air Forces with the Army in the Field,
1938, Sec. 17, 10.
3. Grouping of wireless stations.—A number of wireless
stations working together on one frequency is called a group.
A group of two stations resembles, in traffic capacity, two
L/T terminals at the end of a line, subject to the delay imposed
by cipher.
If there are more than two stations in a group, only one can
transmit at a time, and messages from any one of the group
are received simultaneously by all the others. Such an
arrangement is often useful for transmitting multiple addressed
messages. The traffic capacity, however, diminishes as the
Such a group should have a fair traffic capacity, and at the
same time
provides lateral communication
subordinate formations.
between the
V10326 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

