pg_0009.pdf:
V10326 (8) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
2
writing, whe be in the he pies tation, if it is committed to
Appreciation of the Situation
by
(Name or designation of officer from whose point of view the
appreciation is written)
at....
.. (place) at....
..hrs. (time) on.
• (date).
6. The object
The bed rock of an appreciation is a correct definition of
the "object" to be attained. This must be clearly and
accurately stated since if this definition is inaccurate or
ambiguous the whole appreciation will be founded on a wrong
basis and will almost inevitably lead to a faulty plan.
The "objective"
', e.g. a locality the capture of which will
most rapidly and economically result in the attainment of the
object, will emerge as a result of the appreciation. It is
important that there should be no premature confusion of the
two terms "object" and " objective.
The object of a junior commander will often be defined for
him in the orders of his superior. He must take full account
of any qualifying instructions such as a limit of time by which
the object must be attained.
7. Factors
An appreciation will not be complete unless full weight
is given to every factor which may have an influence on the
attainment of the object.
It
is important
to treat each one on its own
merits.
The influence which it is likely to exert on the
attainment of the object must be recorded in the form of a
definite deduction. If no deduction can be made, it is probable
that the influence of that particular factor is negligible and it
should be omitted from the (written) appreciation. The
review will begin naturally with those factors which appear
likely to have the greatest influence on the situation.
If no one factor appears to be of outstanding importance it
will generally be found advisable to consider initially the
position, strength (including probable reinforcements), arma-
ments and moral of the enemy in relation to one's own
forces. Subsequently each factor should be taken in logical
sequence.
In a well arranged appreciation each deduction
leads naturally to the next, so that the whole becomes a
logical and reasoned argument leading up to the plan.
It is important not to give undue weight to the effect of any
V10326 (8) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

