pg_0041.pdf:
V10326 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
34
orders and instructions give nothing away and
should be used where possible. Pre-arranged code
words and phrases may be employed to describe
positions and actions.
Conversations should be
kept as short as possible.
5. Wireless frequencies and call signs
Frequencies and call signs must be changed periodically and
always when code names are changed.
20. Security of line telegraphy and telephony
1. In certain circumstances, mainly in those of position
warfare, it may be assumed that the enemy will be equipped
with means for overhearing telegraph and telephone traffic on
lines in front of divisional headquarters. The general staff
one tral start
will then notify that a danger zone exists in a divisional area.
In a danger zone line communications will be limited to
those which can by technical means be rendered immune from
overhearing, and instructions will be issued limiting the use
of the telephone.
21. Security of despatch riders
If messages by despatch rider are liable to fall into the
enemy's hand, the general staff will give the necessary warning
to signals. Escorts may have to be arranged.
22. Code names
Formations and units are allotted code names by the general
staff, in accordance with the instructions contained in Appendix
VI.
Within divisions, armoured divisions and corps medium
artillery, code names will be used in the addresses and texts of
written messages for despatch by telegraph or despatch rider,
except in the following cases :—
i. Messages originated at headquarters of divisions and
armoured divisions, and corps medium artillery,
and addressed only to units and formations in rear,
or to the headquarters of other divisions or corps
medium artillery.
ii. Operations orders and instructions marked for
despatch by D.R. only.
In these cases, and at the headquarters of corps and higher
formations the authorized abbreviations will be used.
In radio telephony, code names will always be used.
In line telephony, when a danger zone has been notified,
code names will be used when either speaker is in front of
divisional headquarters.
V10326 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

