pg_0036.pdf:
V10326 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
29
direct communication where it is most needed. Dissipation
of effort, by providing special direct links of communication
outside this general framework, must be avoided unless
justified by the importance of the link required.
6. During an advance the higher formations push forward
their main arteries into the area of their subordinate formations,
set up their new signal offces or signal centres ready for work,
establish their new laterals and, in short, do everything
- to
ensure that their headquarters find communications ready
when they move forward. To this end it is essential that
signal officers obtain from the general staff the earliest possible
information of any move that is contemplated.
In the withdrawal, headquarters of lower formations should
fall back along existing arteries and establish themselves near
existing signal centres: two or more headquarters may be
grouped on the same artery.
7. The main artery system is unsuitable in any formation
covering a very wide front with its headquarters well forward :
nor is any advantage secured by concentrating wireless and
direct visual communication on a main artery. The system
is therefore not generally applicable to mobile forces, which
depend on wireless as their principal means of communication.
A formation making use of direct wireless and visual com-
munication may yet follow the main artery system in the
employment of lines.
16. Control by formation commanders
1. The line of advance of a formation headquarters using
a main artery will normally be along that artery to ensure
intercommunication at the end of a bound. The routes
closen for main arteries are not therefore a purely technical
question but must he settled by commanders in conjunction
with their signal advisers.
2. In the intercommunication paragraph of operation
orders the routes, which subordinate headquarters will follow,
are laid down.
In this way arrangements for intercom-
munication can be planned in advance.
3. In rear of divisional headquarters main arteries and
laterals may include semi-permanent and permanent line
routes.
Once constructed, these cannot be readily altered.
For that reason, and to ensure economy and concentration of
effort, the system will as a rule be co-ordinated by G.H.Q.,
who may lay down the routes which main arteries and laterals
of the larger formations are to follow.
в 2
V10326 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

