pg_0025.pdf:
V10326 (24) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
18
10. Place
1. The name of a place at which a headquarters is situated
or from or to which a message is despatched will never be given
unless it is essential to ensure correct transmission or delivery,
or to make the sense plain.
2. Names of places will be written in block capitals, thus—
LONDON, exactly as spelt on the maps in use.
If more than
one place of the same name exists, misunderstanding must
be avoided by the use of a map reference.
3. If a map is referred to, the one used must be specified
unless, in the knowledge of the sender, no confusion can arise
by the omission of the information. When a map is specified,
its description will be given under the heading of an order,
instruction or report, and at the beginning of a message, e.g.
" Ref. Map 1 inch to 1 mile Sheet 114 WINDSOR."
4. Points will be described either by co-ordinates (if a
squared or gridded map is available); or by giving the
distance and direction from some easily found reference point,
e.g. i-
" X rds. ½ mile SW of HASELEY."
"X rds. 225° from HASELEY CHURCH."
"X rds. $ mile SIV of second E in (NOT 'of')
HASELEY" (the letter referred to being underlined
except in messages to be transmitted by signal in which
the underlining of individual letters of a word cannot be
transmitted).
5. The four cardinal points of the compass will be written
in full, abbreviations with the letters " N," "S," " E" and
"W"
being used to denote intermediate points, e.g. :—
" South of HASELEY " not "S of HASELEY."
" SW of HASELEY" not " South-West of HASELEY."
6. Roads will be indicated by place names on them, care
being taken to name sufficient places to ensure that the road
intended is followed. The word " road" will precede, not
follow, the place names, e.g. " rd BAGSHOT-CAMBERLEY "
not
" BAGSHOT-CAMBERLEY rd". Railways may be
similarly described.
V10326 (24) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

