pg_0086.pdf:
V10326 (85) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
.79
(111) Density.—The general spacing of vehicles on a route
is known as " density" and is expressed in terms " vehicles"
to the mile " (v.t.m.).
(iv) Group.—A group is a small number of vehicles moving
as a formed group.
(v) Sector.—For purposes of road movement control a
route may be divided up into " sectors," each sector being
about 10 miles to 15 miles long.
2. Density and speed are inter-related since the higher the
said the bever
speed the lower must be the density, to allow the individual
vehicle to be driven without interference or danger from those
in front. The maximum safe density for a given cruising
speed can be found from the graph facing this page.
3. As vehicles enter a restricted section of road there is a
general reduction in speed through the column and there will
be a corresponding increase in density. As vehicles accelerate
on clearing the restriction this increase serves to prevent an
undue opening out of the column. Unless, therefore, the
increase in density is proportionate to the decrease in speed,
restricted sections will reduce the volume of traffic using the
road over and above the delay imposed on individual vehicles.
The increase in density must be considered also from the
tactical aspect discussed in Part IV-Protection.
4. To ascertain whether a given volume of traffic can pass
over a road or roads in the time available the graph on
page 81 shows the number of vehicles that will pass a point
with columns moving at various densities and speeds.
In employing the higher densities, in order to make the
maximum use of the roads available, it will be necessary to
exert an increasing degree of control over traffic. Detailed
time tables must be issued by the highest formation controlling
the roads and measures taken to ensure that timings are
adhered to, or that at any rate any disorganization is at once
reported to the controlling authorities so that suitable adjust-
ments can be made.
5. The cruising speeds of the various vehicles in a formation
(see para. I, above) may vary to such an extent that, subject
to tactical considerations, it may be advisable, both for the
comfort of the troops, the efficient running of transport and in
order to make the fullest use of the roads, to group vehicles by
V10326 (85) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

