pg_0078.pdf:
V10326 (77) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
71
be retained ready for issue. To effect a complete change
of code names within a corps a period of 15 hours should
be allowed.
9. Distribution of lists
At the headquarters of corps and higher formations, where
the use of code names is restricted, the issue of code name
lists will be confined to the intelligence branch of the general
staff, to officers authorized to frank "emergency operation"
messages and to the signal and cipher offices.
10. In calculating the distribution care must be taken to
include the requirements of staffs, signal offices, and cipher
personnel. A sufficient supply of spare copies should also
be issued.
11. A guide as to the scale of issue to signal offices is given
as under :—
i. Each signal office down to (inclusive) corps head-
quarters, should receive from its formation head-
quarters three complete lists of the force.
ii. Each headquarters of divisional signals should receive
from its formation headquarters sixteen copies
of its own corps and divisional lists.
ili. Each brigade signal office should receive from its
formation headquarters two divisional lists and
extracts from the corps list to include all Royal
Artillery (including Survey) and machine gun units
in the divisional area, whether under command
or in support of the division.
iv. Each unit strom fict or subunit with e divisiona
v. Each R/T. terminal should receive from its signal
office the code names of certain other R/T.
terminals. The number necessary for each
terminal varies.
In Royal Artillery it will
necessarily be generous and must include the code
names of the infantry brigade (and battalions)
with which the regiment is working, together
with the code names of other Royal Artillery
units in or working with, the divisional artillery.
12. Method of allotment and issue.
Code names will be allotted and issued as in the following
Table A.
V10326 (77) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

