pg_0046.pdf:
V10326 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
39
roads, and provides less comfort. It has, however, the great
advantage of flexibility, as it can go wherever a suitable road
exists. The advantages and disadvantages are in fact similar
to those of. the railway and motor transport in civil life.
2. Owing to danger from air attack it is essential to reduce
to a minimum the time spent in embussing and debussing.
Thus when sufficient transport to carry all personnel of a
division cannot be made available it will be better to lift
portions of the division forward on successive days to the
maximum daily distance rather than lift the whole division
forward a lesser distance by a series of short moves on each
successive day. Besides entailing much embussing and
debussing this latter method will also be more difficult to
conceal, owing. to the increased activity over comparatively
short stretches of road; there may, however, be occasions when
the strategical or tactical situation will force the commander
to adopt it.
To achieve the greatest possible daily distance, a com-
bination of marching and carriage by mechanized transport
may be arranged.
This will be carried out, however, at a
further sacrifice of freedom from air observation and attack.
3. It is essential that points for embussing and debussing
should be carefully reconnoitred. Such points should be
protected from the air and concealed wherever possible.
Debussing points must be near a turning circuit. Arrangements
must be made for embussing and debussing to be carried out
expeditiously.
The operation when effected in daylight
should never be allowed to exceed one minute.
Every man
should jump clear holding the stores for which he is responsible;
in daylight there should be no further unloading of stores.
Immediately the troops are clear the vehicles move on to a
locality which must be clearly stated in orders. Vehicles
must never be allowed to close up during embussing or
debussing.
When embussing the exact halting places for vehicles must
be clearly marked, and troops should be detailed and waiting
ready to jump into their vehicles as soon as they arrive. A
suitable table for use is given at Appendix I1l.
4. The command of a mechanized column of personnel
travelling in reserve transport will rest with the commander of
the unit or formation being transported.
• He will consult the R.A.S.C. officer commanding the vehicles
on all matters affecting the proper working of the transport.
He should avoid interference in technical matters which must
V10326 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

