pg_0031.pdf:
V10326 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
24
CHAPTER IV
SIGNALS.
RESPONSIBILITY, CHARACTERISTICS AND
CONTROL
12. Responsibility
1. Signal communications are the medium through which
command is exercised and intelligence is transmitted, and the
supervision and direction of the means of communication
provided by signals is the duty of the general staff. The
closest touch is necessary between officers of the general staff
and signal officers, as effective signal arrangements can be
made only when the signal officer at a headquarters is given
the earliest possible information of projected operations and
movements.
This does not, however, absolve the signal officer from
responsibility for using his initiative to suggest and organize
communications which are likely to be required.
2. The route to be followed by a headquarters during
mobile operations must be decided with due consideration to
the facilities for signal communication likely to be available,
taking the signal plan as a whole. And, with the increasing
use of wireless, signal considerations will weigh very heavily
when the lay-out of a headquarters in its new location is being
decided upon.
3. The following principles define the chain of responsibility
for signal communications :—
i. The higher formation is responsible for the provision
and maintenance of communication to the head-
quarters of the next lower formation or unit.
ii. When the lower formation has established both an
advanced and a rear headquarters, the higher
formation's responsibility extends to the former.
The lower formation is responsible for communica-
tion between its two headquarters.
iii. Lateral communication by wireless between two
subordinate headquarters is normally provided by
the next higher formation. But when advanced
headquarters are established lateral wireless com-
munication must be established from the head-
quarter's own resources.
V10326 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

