pg_0089.pdf:
V10326 (88) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
82
APPENDIX VIII
TRAFFIC CONTROL
1. Control of a road move is effected in its simplest form by
the selection of starting and dispersal points. In more
complicated moves it is exercised through control posts whose
function is to report the progress of the move to the controlling
formation and to transmit to units, en route, any modifications
which may become necessary to the programme. The officer
in charge of a control post must be prepared in an emergency
to make minor alterations on his own responsibility, and in
sectors where interference by enemy action is probable it will
be advisable to give to officers controlling those sectors general
instructions only, leaving the details to be settled on the spot.
2. Control posts should be about ten miles apart and should
be located on the " rule of the road"
side of the road.
Adequate cover should be available for them and, if necessary,
camouflage should be provided.
Communications between control posts, preferably by
cable, will normally run from post to post along the route to
headquarters of the formation controlling the move. Thus
when a control post commander reports to headquarters the
progress of movement past his post, all other control posts
will also receive the report. Where two or more routes are
being used for movement they should be connected, preferably
by cable, between one pair of control posts.
When time does not admit of the establishment of com-
munication by cable, and recourse has to be had to wireless,
a prearranged code should be used for security reasons.
3. The status and responsibility of a post commander will
be those of a staff officer to the commander... In the event of
disagreement between. the post commander and officers
sub-i post
commanding units or sub-units moving over his sector, the
deciding authority must be the post commander who alone
knows the formation commander's intentions, and is in the
best position to judge the general needs of his sector as a whole.
4. The control post commander should be provided with
transport and assisted, if possible, by traffic personnel of the
provost service, who will patrol the sector, check the traffic
sign posts and carry out general traffic control duties.
5. The standard equipment required by posts should be
laid down in standing orders and will include such signs,
V10326 (88) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

