pg_0034.pdf:
V10326 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
27
5. The army postal service.—Less urgent messages should
be sent by this means and full use made of it to relieve
the D.R.L.S., which is apt to become overloaded. Details of its
working will be found in Field Service Regulations, Volume I.
14. Organization of R. Signals
1. R. Signals provide means of intercommunication, other
than postal, for an army in the field down to the headquarters
of cavalry regiments, batteries and battalions. Within these
units intercommunication is carried out by unit signallers
and orderlies; but where wireless communication is employed
by the unit, the sets are maintained, and in some units operated,
by R. Signals personnel.
2. Signal personnel should be given priority on the roads by
other arms, since their work is usually urgent. They should
not be employed on other duties, except in an emergency or
after reference to a responsible signal officer.
3. Signals are responsible for the correct official time;
watches will be synchronized through signals before all
operations.
4. Signal units.-The establishment of each formation
includes a unit of R. Signals to provide the intercommunication
required by the formation commander.
Army field, medium and heavy regiments, Royal Artillery,
have signal sections which, though generally attached to a
corps or divisional signals, are independent units.
The general organization of units of R. Signals and their
employment are discussed in Signal Training, Vol. I.
5. In addition to the above R. Signals organization, cavalry
regiments, batteries, battalions of infantry and units of the
Royal Tank Regiment have signallers or driver operators on
their establishment. The detail of these and their tactical
employment are described in Signal Training (All Arms), 1938,
Chapter XXIV.
15. Organization of intercommunication
1. The essence of signal organization is co-operation and
progressive development.
In forward areas, highly mobile
signal units are capable of providing communication rapidly
to meet the changing tactical requirements; but the system
is necessarily fragile and limited in its traffic capacity.
Behind these forward signal units are others less mobile but
capable of providing the more solid communication required
by the higher command and of dealing with the amount of
B
V10326 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

