kept from the hrst day or embouncem.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (GOMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
matt hourt important occut post, fast of fopting
rdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
ers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
Occur, on Fe to to gie entered up, act in the vedes a nan hy night be the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
is representatives.
war diaries will be
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or other pen it shoul he made diet, hit the fice beho is to thie he tin at the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
(*) Indoint osters, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
(1) Daly otis in cement de the ot torenty fos hours and present dispositions.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(See F.SR., Vol diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows:—
the un one No. The time on entre should be the tim he niven it the test, it mor
DENN
Month and Year.....
MAX 1944.
Date
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Place
Bersted
Bi1lingshura$.22
Unit complote to War Establishment. Dys.
Inspoction by Col. Arold Favard ( Inspector 2-40C•Fiold force Unita
G 1098 Steros despatched to Silvertow. yb.
Unit divided among Port Operating Companies R.E. ( 1 Officer, 4 0.R'a
to 1025 Port Op. Coy RoDe 1 W.O. and 3 O.R'a to 1035 Port Op. Coy P.E.,
6 0.R(a to 1048 Fort Op. Co y R.B.) • 9gb
Attachments to 1025 Port Op. Coy R.E. moved to Billingshurst. Дзв
Further G 1098 Stores recoived and sent to Southampton. Дув.:
0.C. attended briofing conference at He?. No 8 Port Ope Group R.E. Ough
Unit complete to War Establishment.
Minor doficiencies in G 1098
Stores still exist. gh
Army Form C. 2118.
Uni 44 Port Amunition Dotachment R. 4.0.
Commanding Oficer If.D.G-BRAY.
References to Appendices
SUUNT 197T
cuments in your Bulk O
le you have requested,
nore of your doc
lents - Enquire al
ore documents are in use
a Desk for full details
oniro,
