TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
f mobilisation or
(in) Detailed a Cops heatin at eat intention pes, fast of afting
important phases.
rdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in the inner of otter rank of telade ana is the nashs an ends of
in adition in the cabe it on the . of changes in stores, transport, be nored.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice. At the
NOTE.— Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
his representatives.
close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009)
routine order or instruction
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
the war diary.
issed during the period .sored by of care op votine of
NoTE C.-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
vill be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
War Office, London, S.W.1.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
future
improvements in army training, equipment,
FIt will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, o
is to be noted that the
retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
VoTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commande
or other person mentioned in para. I, not the
officer he details to do the clerical work.
See F.S
S.R., Volume II).
All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows:—
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARS diaTy so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
mportant osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
decisions taken.
of the diaries
Mary ais in More on age unit at trenty outhout and present dispositions.
Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the unit concerned.
SE OnCE NOT The the time entered should este time the information or order
should also be given in the text, if l
Place
Month and Year. APRT. 194.
Hour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form C.
Unit. l4 Port Ammunition Detachment
.o.C.
Commanding Officer..
LT. D.G. BRAY
References to Appendices
Nessoliff 1.4,44
3.4044
504044 -
6.4044 -
7.4.44 -
10.4.44 -
Unit complete to M.E. Last Part II Order published.
Unit adopts.
Overseas Procedure for Documentation. Dogb
Personal Documents of Officer and O.R's sent to G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon.
All personnel employed in Repair Factory but spent one hour during
the morning on swimming instruction at Shrewsbury Baths. ugh.
Preparatory Administrative Order Part I received from 21 Army Group
via H.Q. Mid West District.
This order contained instructions
regarding:- (1) Preparations to be carried out by the Unit before
leaving normal location.
(2) Moves to and certain action to be
taken on arrival in Concentration Area. Digh
Medical documents of all personnel forwarded to G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon. Tgß.
One hours swinning instruction at Baths followed by Route March back
to Camp...
This is to be repeated every Monday and Friday morning. Tgh.
Personnel divided between Traffic and Control in C.A.D. Nesscliff for
Technical Training. DIs
(Vt,34859/1676 800,000 11/43 W. H, & S.
51-7678
WAR DIARIES SECTI
3 - INA/ 194
G. H.Q. 2nd Ec
cuments in your Bulk
more of you
nents - Enquire a
pre documents are in
