pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
2, F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. -1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or! C4
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
If (i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iji) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.-In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NOTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
or sub unit be guest, thro a he what eh or no, 2 the diary sected to rept be ait,
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration,
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
in regard to weapons, equipment, tactics, organisation and inter-service co-operation which
may be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
•A war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it
on A.F. C. 2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4. - In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
nug i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
nugg
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
СОЛЕКІЙС ГЕДЕК
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volame of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above)
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer consider:
they should be included).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, ete.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H Q.
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached.
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation wil
forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelor
transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicate cop
the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the officer i/e G
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to records offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.—The time entered should be the time the information or order re ra
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known
Instructions regarding War Diaries and Intelligence
burnsuare,
contained in F.S. Regs.,
Monthly
yar
Diaries
will be enclosed in A.F
C.2119.
If
this
not
avarlable.
the
and
for
me nrence
Summaries,
cover
prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year JULY
1944
Date
Hour
ORIGINAL
WAR DIARY
or
INTELUIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Place
Trance
Army Form C. 2118
Unit 3 (BR) dif Die Povertion Ent
Commanding Officer Cahit a D. Shilling law
References to Appendices
/
2
WAR DIARIES SECTION
NO....
*****..
..- 9 AUG 1944
G. H.Q 2nd Echeton
3
Summary of Events and Intormation
Goy A * Bde Gettin docations unchanged. One 2lc Mi.
involved in a Battle Accident" and admitted is Horhitat
beaster - dull y ohowen.
Boy to x Bee Sectin docatino unchanged. One
Office - Ar. Read-Jones (Pionce) Carr) ta teen on streng it
thu bay, ao kft, abo 1 2/c. Deathe Ary
Case of Cafe Proprior Georges Emile Gasser) Mraseed wink
and closed as regards sivestigatin by thn.
tomatin. Georges Crite Gasse deteried in Prian.
Coy ta yBde Section
the boy assisted in the
Location unchanged Permed of We
evacuation of civilians from
the vilage of CAZELLE. Three hundres and seventy one
residonti
ver excuated, end no "incidents" were rehorted
catha - dull x okay, charm 1s fine of end of day.
*5973. Wt.22661/1499. 3003, 8/42.

