ION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
mobilisation or
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
dinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
s representatives.
ar diaries will be
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issue
ed during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
!
It will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
A.F. C.2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
VoTe.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.—Omitted.
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
("*) Importist orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
!
arch tables in the case of larre units or of formations are of assistance
üi) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(See F.S.. You eiries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows:—
(1) Unlessarherone refred, at of the saley of month dirt to the preceding mich vi
for transles on to the ar ofte, sue eling hen hit at to tappeder are at achel,
of the diaries of units will be sent within a
2nd Echelore to tits smit be sent within a at me for same custs to.
the unit concerned.
SPECT NOT The the in entered stold be the tim the infven in the test, if teaches
968/LLLOM
• ... •.....2.
(e)
(a)
0730-1800 hrs
Gd nounting 1800
Cpl
(or
hrs.
act as sticke
Tho
by tho ordorly
4 mon (tron night ed - ronaindor disnount)
ordorly for Sqn Làn
Ordors for ga
offr.
snartost for will be croused ga and will
noat day.
Soo Apps: B.
Tho ed will be mounted
Army Form C. 211
WAR DIARY
prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year..
FEB 44.
Place
INTELIGENCE: SUMMARY
266 FUD DELIVERY SQN, RAC.
!
Commanding Officer. Capt. J.H.G. MITCHELL.
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appendices
DUMERIES.
LANG HOLM
DUMFRIES
14
17
19
1630
1930
0800
0800
2500
1200
1900
Son all reals danco, selance Rogt Bend.
Sqn attends inspection and parade by C in C, 21 ArTy GP•
Sqn offrs fly over billets and tre areas fron DUMPRIES aerodrone.
Son drana league aote a serios of security plays to 100al Hono Guard.
Sqn noves to TROQUEIR MILIS, DUIRIES in order to accommodate larger
aubers of reinforcements than was originally antibipated.
NITISDALE MILIS handed over to SAQG, DUIFRIES.
let Roinforconents 27 Ard Bde HQ Sgn ettabhed.
140 and surplus ORs, lot reinforcements, Hone dotails 13/28 ussars atte ched.
Son all ranks dance, RAT Band.
During this month Sqn Mines and Deiving Courses vere run.
(including dryshod troining). At the end of the month
the Sgn was practiced in the reception, seloction and
administration of reinforcements.
om mitche ca,to
Cond, 266 Fwd Dolivery San. RACe
Adm Order Nool att.
Wr.47724 903 2,000,000 8,43 W. H. & S. 61/0J75
ily.
ar
