WO171/895
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NotE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office. London. S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide
data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
i will be entered up daily. each entry initialled by the other detailed to keep it, or
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTt.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.—Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units of of formations are of assistance.
111) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
ION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
iv Detailed account of operations.
f mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
important phases.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affeeting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
rdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
is representatives.
ar diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F.
the war diary.
W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive
4, iv above).
Appendices will be
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
leading naming the author. References
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
day of the succeeding month dire
et to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
bor tramanded on to thirstar of the sure being taken that at to the fire/createchelo
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for safe custody
he unit concerned.
SPECT NOT The the time en
—The time entered should be the time the information or order reaches
event recorded should also be given in the text, if knowi
WAR DIARY
wid toe
Army Form C. 2 10.
Unit. 266 UND DELIVERY SON, RAC.
Commanding Officer
Capt. J.H.G. MITCHEL
L lace
Menin and eat..
JAN 44
Vate
Hour
INDELKIOENCEKSUMMARH
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appendices
DUMFRIES
1200
HAWICK
DUMF RIES
18
20
25/26
1115
1730
1730
1430
404562 SSM. MACKEY A.R. posted in from 13/18 Hussars to fill
vacancy of
SSM on W. E.
Squ
romd
lectures on "Tk Delivery" to 148 RAC.
" 13/18 Hussars.
" 13/18 "
2o4Le.
Coma, 27 Armd
Bde inspected Sgn.
San exercise "ALERT" - day and night rd moves; day &
night small arms firings harbouring & defence in
harbour.
DUMFRIES
29
29/30
0001
Sqn re-designated "266 Forward Delivery Sga RAC".
Cond 137 TDU visited Sgn and stayed night in
Sga
Offrs' Mess.
Ла Кему:
Cond, 266 Fwd Delivery Sqn,
* Je copen
Wt.17724,993 2,000,000 3/48 W. H. & S. 61/6575
