TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
f mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
rdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
on cers to the number othen the olors and of arints sport, be
and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
is representatives.
war diaries will be
PARa. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
NoTE B. —See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
The War Office, London, S.W.1."
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
NoTI.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
nd decisions taken.
) at raisin cements during the pot rent fo hour and present dispositions.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
PARA. 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
the unit concerned.
unFort No. The the in entered soul be the time tie niem in ered motes
Month and Year MAR 44
Fugary Barack
um.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Erase heading not required.
Commanding Officer.
Summary of Events and Information
all but 8 che panel thengh gas chambe in lupuates A/G lighe - nalailare
all atlemen and "Q" stall
attends lecture is "Packing o 6. 1098 store
118.
References to Appendices
1030 / Officel AT Lore) + 30 NC01 men abanded molt o Cin C-lea
10
Les No 15- total of o/ unchanged ..
Behin 12.2 astrain a sins 822] • 3/22 It ou
10544308 L/ Cal GIAMORE S. C ana 14 21y 060 9t WILKEr JR
20
2 OPe. aH b 801 Dra Cn d U.S. Aubra Due 2 0f, fem 801
Ra Ca alcie change one end 14 days a mell run exchanged
re of your doc
documents are in us
Jesk for full details
ents in your Bulk O
u have requested,
