TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecti
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops a
important phases.
ordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers
s and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Metcorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.— Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
36), and personal
his representatives.
war diaries will be
кери пот сие
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
VoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a
The War mil Lorene, Tu5
unit
hrough the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3)
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
nd to provide ,
rganisation and administration
data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
AT Call be tensed ye dily, hach entry actin any tetifice detailed to keep it, on.
extraction and
retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary,:—
i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
nd decisions taken
(* Rat ties i te can i grin tie of treaty ou hour and precent dispositions.
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(Se PA. in einies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
SPECIAL NOTE. -The time
e entered should be the time the information or order reaches
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if know
TERE
Month and Year Feb. 1944
FIGSBURYCAMP
Hour
WINTERBOURNE 7ab
2.
3
14.
22
WAR DIARY
ORIC
SH:
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Unit 6 Aubarmerliv Ond 7d 0
Commanding Officer elonapl
W.D. MORRIs.
References to Appendices
hit Mobilised as al this date. Ready for bar, but the
of RADC Stores unt
talin of A Store no pet complete it altar mous
Unit on Percise SOJA to practice Fielderaft, RIT and
Field cookery No trausport taken.
11 Lame ali Chiluell COD regarding Tank Spares
hil on Exercise CORA. to prectice Vehicle Camay les dar
• night, harhoming, fild cooking ete.
hiet Inapection by I.0.0. thil sent on a 20 mile route
march and ouh, e man fellaul
клям
luit on Erecise OBAN, 2 gliders loaded with stares +
I with persomel. Flew out over the ren with frahter escat moe
B.H.D
OC. an Exercise QUACK Canference falland luyTEWT to
slides enfantre role for an airborne Die.
tank larries to CO) Feltham to collect
/ 12031 10/41 HF.JL. & CoLtA. 52-1041)
M8521/1218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Uo.i
re of your doc
its - Enquire ai
e documents are in use
Desk for full details
ents in your Bulk Oi
u have requested
