TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
ordinate command
operations, topographical and climatic.
important phases.
it eat kept thou pos factor feting
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals
should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viji) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
i conto a entered up not in order as anen th vi hit it the time they
his representatives.
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
4) A cope of each finit retin (sue d30 te perio overed)
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
and to
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
organisation and administration.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
It will be €
A.F. C.2118.
tro. ward a is to tene ten that he citration and s.
be day, hath e ex railed by tetion or detailet to keep it, on.
retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
Nort.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing a diary:—
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
() Impotatos ders, instructions, reports, messages or despatehes received and issued,
TERES
Month and Year SEP 44.
Date
Hour
lace
Fiasbury Bks
Wintertourne
Gunner
Wilts:
5
2
12
14
19
19
22
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
WAR DIARY
-INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
ummary of Events and Information
Commanding Officer.
MAJOR W.L- DyLOR
References to Appendices
/ 019 сер
M/00g ear
arching party, (fe alone of detainent,) retired firm 2. A.
BLA despatched on lave
separatory der to mob for service overseas received from dis H.Q.
- accordance with above order, extension of leave granted t
personnel on leave.
10 OCT 1944
Portion of remaining personnel despotaled on embarkation bave.
Release received from W.O. for vehicles to complete to WE. M/urcept
Veho collected from 12 VRD.
Триз сері
N3521/1218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co.Lta. 51-1641)
ents in your Bulk O
u have requested
re of your doc
ts - Enquire ai
documents are in use
esk for full details
