pg_0084.pdf:
3 Br Inf Div
Planning Monorandum NO. 13
SECURITY
MOST SECRET
S/2010/G/240
18 Mar W:
Copy No.?.
ed.
The following is a brief outline of security measures
to be taken
after leaving plarning H0.
Instructions from higher authority, which are not
yet available, may countermand some of these.
1.
Operation Orders will be written in draft only at present and code
names will be used in these orders.
May references may be used in
conjunction with code nomes.
No reference will be made to map
sheets.
Draft orders will be procuced down to be level.
2.
ABERLOUR will close on 24 Mar for planning, after which a separate
OVERLORD HQ will be maintained at Div HQ (Cameron Barracks) •
Bde HQ may maintoin its own OVERLORD planning room.
The room will
be permanently manned :-
By an X List officer if documents or maps showing place
nanes in clear are displayed.
By an officer who need not be on the X List provided all
documents in (a)
above have been locked in metal containers
by an X List officer.
No HQs or branches other than Inf Edes will retain any OVERLORD material.
Any work on
this subject which they recuire to undertake will be done in the
Div OVARLORD room.
3.
No papers concerning OVERLORD will be handled outside planning rooms
nor will any typing tale place outside planning rooms or
aside for this.
Planning papers will be sent out of these planning rooms
by safe hand of an LO only.
4. Briefing will be carried out on special naps with code names of places.
Final operation orders will be produced in the SOUTH from the drafts
already prepared, but correct place names and mep references will be used.
6.
Maps will be issued to bdes in bulle and put in sealed packets by bdes
together with senled copios of orders for each unit.
Arrangements will be
made for sealed orders and maps to be delivered to the OC troops on each
craft for distribution as required after boarding or sailing.
recipient of the order (who has already been briefod on the bogus map) wil
when he has read the order and studied the correct map, destroy the order before
No operation order will be taken on the continent.
The policy for OVERLORD papers on dispersal from ABERLOUR Ho. will be as
follows: -
(a) NO NIPTUNE papers will be takon away from ABERLOUR HO. by individual
officers.
(b) Inf bdes will take the minimun essential documents, maps and photos in
a sealed box to their static HQ with officer escort.
They will destroy
all other OVERLORD pepers.
A list of documents roteined will be retured to
G (Int) together with a certificate that all other OVERLORD material has
been destroyed.

