— See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
0 171/625
Return by (22/11/2025 1
16:211
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
ind to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
AT Cail he entered up dily, each entry rati and the fi et depic do nep it, en
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
or other pete held he made deaf, that the dicer who its the in tier is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing a diary
ping a diary so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(1) Imp deant osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
() Duty cater ecome due the at tent hear and present dispotions.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
Month anỉ Tun, 20300008 194
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Dell hending
Summary de Brents sod Baftemation
equipment to be hail l LAT. Sarding That
partition here hen issuri —
TENDEr 2 L3.E mind the imitat
chet mce sa constrat desari, he regu
122 17 262% complatal sad Damaried Sa =
at this mita
3.301, el hit shini win MUK 3KT the the shit st chris
Are tar persome of mãs thin
20820-3
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
f mobilsation oi
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
rdinate command
vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
s and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
is representatives.
var diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war ulary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or reterence.
1i1) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
ny sketches or maps relating thereto.
in the text of the diary (para.
a sumnlement the accoull Vi
vill have a brief descriptive,
Annendices Will De.
naming the author. References
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
1) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month wil
don the first day of the succe
lonth direct to the officer 1/c 2nc
or transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
2nd Echelon to be transt.
SPECT NO The The time cored should bo the time the aroma ch to at
Foem C. 2118.
SANTE
c 10 31080-
y Form C. 2118.
rm C. 2118.
THAY:
ppendices
lies Tabl
19
Major E.G. Mathews reported for duty and assumed command of this Unit.
on this date. Major M. F. Barnard struck off strength of this Unit..
Report received from 0 1/c Stores Section 257 Corps Dely Sqn regarding
2GHOPP|1095|125 m
