In June, 1945, the question of disposal of overseas surpluses was examined
as in the case of forces due to be reduced or evacuated, and it was ruled
that the priority of removal or disposal would be Italy,
East.
Throughout 1945, disposal became of increasing importance.
East Africa, Middle
strength of the Army was reduced, more surpluses
became available.
As the
surpluses could not be maintained, as ordnance
These
drastically reduced and there was a pressing
establishments were being
need
return requisitioned
storage space to the owners; in certain cases there was a strong civilian
requirement for such items as load-carrying
vehicles and machinery.
July, 1945, a tentative establishment was published on which the quantities to
In
be retained were assessed and authority given for the disposal of global assets
in excess of these quantities.
Simultaneously, vast quantities of stores in
doubtful condition were accumulating at depots, and monthly meetings were
organized at which the finance branches were empowered to approve repair
or immediate disposal according to the serviceable quantities of the relevant
item in stock. It had already been decided which C.O.D?'s were to be re-
tained in peace, and the immediate problem was the collection of retainable
stocks on those sites and the disposal of surpluses with the minimum handling
and transportation.
Committees were formed to act in liaison with the War Office and the
disposal branches of the Ministry of Supply for the purpose of dealing with
problems imposed by large scale disposals, progressing the rate of these
disposals and directing the evacuation of requisitioned storage space with a
view to its early return to the owners.
CLOTHING AND GENERAL STORES
The end of war problems
which arose in connection
with clothing
and general stores were of a somewhat different nature.
Although it is true that reductions in strength reduced the overall lia-
bility, these reductions were to some extent offset by the general necessity
for a better turn out and for improved standards of accommodation stores.
Similarly war aftermath tasks in occupied enemy territory involved the use
of great numbers of tools etc. by locally recruited labour almost on the scale
of war-time projects.
Nevertheless an immediate review of the general situation with regard to
current stocks of stores due in on the larger contracts, was undertaken after
V.E. day and contracts for certain types of stores (e.g. field cookers and
tentage) were drastically reduced. Similarly a further review was carried out
after V.J. day and further arbitrary cuts and cancellations on outstanding
contracts effected.
At the same time as each periodic revision review was
made, the maintenance figures
were scaled down by
factors which
were
arrived at from a consideration of overall reduction in strength and the type
of store involved.
In some cases, e..., depot handling equipment, the aftermath tasks actually
called for an increase in the quantity of equipment in use ; these combined
with the cessation of Lend-Lease and the shortage of dollars resulted in the
development and production of British type fork lift trucks to meet our needs,
all war-time supplies having come from U.S.A. or Canada.
92
Disposal of surplus stocks was arranged through the Ministry of Supply
or the Ministry of Works but here again the heavy civilian demand tor a
large range of clothing and general stores raised special problems.
Shortages
on the civilian market and the inevitable impression at the end of a war
that Service Departments held huge surpluses of the very articles that civilians
could not get, led to Cabinet investigation of stock levels and considerable
pressure to dispose of any stores with a civil use not required for immediate
issue. Apart from true surpluses therefore, the possibility of release of many
items to the civilian market had to be considered together with the prospects
of their replacement.
At the same time Service orders involving new production of goods in
civilian short supply were subjected, on Cabinet direction, to the most detailed
scrutiny and investigation by the Joint War Production Staff in conjunction
with the Board of Trade and in certain cases requirements were even scrutin-
ized by the Chancellor of the Exchequer himself to ensure that Service needs.
did not interfere with exports of civilian requirements.
It is not surprising
therefore that proposals for improved living conditions in the Service were
subjected to indefinite delay.
+I7
WO 277/21
18
67612
93
D* 2
