LOUS 10% SERVICES
acts for similar work.
As a result 301 and 302 B.O.Ds. were able to
arrase the numbers of civilian clerks, releasing A.O.ks. for other areas.
the trade testing of A.U.Ks. presened a ainculty. lests or clerk
were standard for all areas and were based on k.A.S.C. requirements.
sent could not, therefore, be rewarded for increasing his knowledge of
Orinance procedure.
After strong representation by the D.D.O.S., a definite
Hat African Army Ordnance Corps
(W.A.A.O.C.) was recognized.
ew Corps had its own trade tests, which were similar to British Army tests.
Prevention of pilferage was another difficulty.
The R.A.O.C. were not
at to maintain a suficient guard to stop it entirely, but alertness on the
out of both oficers and N.C.Os. did much to curb it. It was found that
i his theatre, where there was a large light-fingered local population, it
as most important to provide adequate perimeter fences, security checks
and guards.
Following the Allied landings in North Africa in 1942 and the removal
d the French threat to British West Africa it was decided to despatch over-
eas one heavy A.A. brigade and one West African division with corps
increment and base troops.
This was the first mobilization task to be faced,
and the experience gained pointed to the need of a firm plan, worked out
well in advance, for handing in surplus stores and for making the issues
to complete scales.
The organization improved and when the 82nd West
African Division and the Divisional Staff (the second to be mobilized)
assembled, a carefully laid scheme was quickly decided and the issue of
stores proceeded smoothly.
The first flight left with few deficiencies and
tase were made up on later flights. The programme for returning unwanted
scores also went according to plan and included the exchange of 3,000
vehicles.
Personnel from the B.O.Ds. were taken to form the ordnance
fied parks of the divisions mobilized.
Local resources were confined to wooden articles (which were very good
(spite the shortage of timber), soap (also very good), and a limited amount
di local leather (not fit for boots).
All other articles and raw materials
had to e imported. At Lagos there was an excellent civilian tyre retreading
Mat and an industrial gas factory: both had to import materials.
It was found expedient to centralize, at G.H.Q., the provision work for
alf our B.O.Ds. for all stores other than M.T. spares.
There was the dis-
advantage that delays occurred owingy tests. time taken to forward to G.H.Q.
3. documents giving the data on which central provision could be made
These delays had to be accepted.
and tele laundry units were sent over to complete the mobilization
l be divisions which were going overseas.
It was, however, decided that
thee laundries should be merged to form the ordnance laundry unit for
the theatre. It became a static base unit and was able to cope with a large
number of troops and i toltal services in the colony.
The designation of
Soul was " No. 3 West African Lauelry Unit". Its output varied fron
Meen 15,000 1b. or 11,000 pieces to 20,000 le+. or 14,000 pieces weekly.
315
-22787/57
wo 217/21
