nd, therefore, in France, apart from the small number held by
corps
ranance field parks, the reserves accumulated behind the corps areas were
As the production rate increased, however, it became necessary to
ive serious thought to the problem of shipping, servicing, storing and issuing
le immense reserves of vehicles destined to be allocated to each theatre of
аг.
Eventually, it was decided to include a vehicle company within the
tablishment of a B.O.D.
The vehicle company consisted of a headquarters,
transit vehicle park and a number, normally three, of vehicle groups
ch of which comprised four vehicle parks.
The transit vehicle
park,
ving a strong R.E.M.E. element, was the sub-unit through which all
hicles entering the theatre would pass for servicing before despatch to the
hicle parks for storage. It was designed to be capable of operating in
o self-administrative parts, one for tracked vehicles and the other for
eeled vehicles.
The vehicle group acted as a controlling headquarers
the four parks which made up the group.
Each vehicle park was designed
hold 800 tracked or wheeled vehicles and 300 motor cycles.
The system
upply was based on the theory that the parks would be located in echelon
ween the army area and the base, vehicles being issued forward from park
ark to save a long turnround and hence to economize on drivers.
As a result of the experience gained in France, the war establishment of
O.D., which consisted of a small headquarters and three large ammuni-
companies, was re-constituted.
The headquarters was strengthened
corresponding reductions were made in the companies.
This resulted
better balanced unit and more flexibility in the economic staffing of
ts of varying size.
hus it became possible to form a depot of any size merely by increasing
ducing the number of ammunition companies, although the standard
t, capable of holding a minimum of 21,000 tons, still consisted of a
quarters and three companies.
rt ordnance detachments and port ammunition detachments were intro-
as independent units for employment at ports of entry in order to
e base depots of the task of finding the personnel for these duties.
ally these detachments were controlled by the D.D.O.S., L. of C., but
they were placed under the direct control of the officer commanding
icks group.
e reasons for forming ordnance maintenance companies have already
xplained.
Each company originally consisted of a headquarters, a
section comprising a regulating station sub-section and three supply
roadhead sub-sections, and an ammunition section comprising three
lition railhead sub-sections.
Later tank railhead sub-sections were
hed to receive tracked vehicles (other than carriers) from the base,
them and ensure that they were complete and battleworthy before
/ to the armoured replacement group.
the war progressed it became more and more obvious that forces
rapidly and fighting at great distances from the base, needed in
a mobile supply organization to ensure a swift service of essential
arts and the prompt replacement of weapons, vehicles, etc., lost in
It was realized that large mobile reserves of selected items of war
nt would therefore have to be maintained in the forward areas, and
58
that to achieve this the R.A.O.C, organization of field parks needed radical
alteration.
The organization into corps ordnance field
sub-parks on a formation basis,
parks, comprising
eventually evolved as
described below.
and divisional ordnance field parks was
(a) In the corps ordnance field park there was a small headquarters,
under a lieut.-colonel, located near rear corps headquarters, the
function of which was the general co-ordination and control of all
sub-parks in the corps.
(b) Each corps ordnance field park had one corps and army troops sub-
park consisting of a headquarters and three sections holding respec-
tively complete equipments, spare parts and a reserve of "B"
vehicles.
(c) Armoured and infantry ordnance sub-parks were provided as corps
troops on the basis of one a division; these sub-units each con-
sisted of a headquarters, three sections, No. 1 section to carry spare
parts, No. 2 section, complete weapons and equipment and No. 3
section, reserve wheeled vehicles and carriers.
(d) Armoured, infantry and airborne divisional field parks were pro-
vided as divisional troops on the basis of one a division; each
field park was divided into a headquarters and three brigade sub-
sections, capable when necessary of operating independently with
brigades.
Divisional field parks were scaled to hold only M.T. and
signal spares and a small proportion of complete wireless sets.
All units' indents for warlike and M.T. stores were channelled
through field parks which replenished their stocks from the next
echelon to the rear, i.e., divisional field parks from sub-parks and
sub-parks from the advanced base or B.O.D.
In order to provide R.E.M.E. workshops of all echelons with a constant
supply of their day to day requirements, a stores section R.A.O.C., attached
to each workshop, held and maintained a working stock of spare parts and
expendable items.
In the case of second and third line workshops the store
sections replenished stock from sub-parks of corps ordnance field parks and
in the case of fourth Iine workshops from the B.O.D.
During this period much study was devoted to the organization and
system needed to maintain the war equipment and ammunition of assaulting
forces during the initial stages of an opposed landing.
To meet this require-
ment a new R.A.O.C. field unit, the ordnance beach detachment, was evolved
as part of the beach group organization.
Each detachment consisted of five
oficers and 65 other ranks, all of the highest medical category, and the
unit was divided into a stores section and an ammunition section.
The role
of these sections was to form dumps in the beach maintenance area from
which to maintain the assault forces until ordnance depots could be estab-
lished
In order to facilitate their task under the difficult conditions envis-
aged, the stores to be handled by these detachments were made up into
special packs known as landing reserves (L.Rs.).
The composition of each
landing reserve was very carefully calculated to include
essentials only,
ie, the items and quantities most likely to prove operationally urgent and
vital to maintain the assauling foriesly to prove
The stores were packed
67612
59
+ 717
WO 277/21
18
