These pamphlets were suficiently detailed to enable R.A.O.C. personnel to
trained in their various duties in their units before the invasion of Europe
d to act as a work of reference after operations had begun.
It was of the utmost importance that all units, not only R.A.O.C., should
aw how the R.A.O.C. organization fitted into the general scheme for the
asion of Europe, and to let the fighting troops know how they could
terially contribute to a smooth system for the supply of ordnance stores.
Units could not be expected in the busy pre-invasion days to devote much
• and study to this subject.
Something was required which would be
ble, easy to read and readily assimilated. Two pamphlets were, therefore,
luced to enable units to get the broad outlines of the system, but with
cient detail to enable quartermasters to know exactly what they had to
o get ordnance stores. These pamphlets were entitled " Ordnance in the
and "Movement into Battle".
The former gave an outline of the
O.C. organization and methods of supply with detailed instructions on
od of indenting.
The latter showed the phasing into the war theatre of
rganization and system of supply in pictorial form.
the meantime, the revision of R.A.O.S. Parts 4 to 6 was in progress
le revised editions were sent for printing in July, 1944. In this revision
.S. Part 5 was broken down into separate pamphlets in a similar manner
l in replacement of, the provisional "Army Ordnance Services in the
74
PART II
ORDNANCE STORES AND EQUIPMENT
CHAPTER V
EVOLUTION OF PROVISION
The role of the R.A.O.C. as provider of stores to the Army entails, firstly,
an assessment of the needs of the Army far in advance of the time when
the stores will be required for use, secondly, the actual procurement of the
stores, and finally the distribution of these stores in such a manner that they
are available to the user at the right time and place.
The process by which this assessment, procurement and distribution is
effected is known by the comprehensive term
"provision"
In 1939 the R.A.O.C. provision organization comprised branches
the War Office, a provision branch at each of the C.O.Ds. then existing
and at each command ordnance depot.
The evolution of the War Office
provision branches is given in some detail in Chapter I and need not be
repeated here.
The provision branches at the C.O.Ds. were termed "p" branches and
their technical activities were controlled by the War Office.
Each "p" branch
dealt with the classes of stores held by the depot to which it was attached.
The provision branches at the command ordnance depots at home and
abroad were under command control.
The functions of these three types of provision branches were, very
roughly: —
(a) Branches at command ordnance depots were responsible for cal-
culating the requirements (for a specified period) of the troops
within the command and notifying these requirements to the relevant
C.O.D. provision branch together with data regarding consumption
and stocks in possession.
(b) Branches at C.O.Ds. were responsible for consolidating the require-
ments of all commands and taking action under War Office direc-
tion with the Ministry of Supply (M. of S.) to obtain stores from
outside sources and for making arrangements for the distribution
of stocks.
(c) War Office branches were responsible for compiling the scales of
equipment, for policy, for
providing C.O.Ds. with information
regarding the future composition of the Army and its equipment,
and for deciding quantities to be held as war reserves and for
other special purposes.
In describing the organization and action taken to provide ordnance
stores it is necessary to use terms which, although in common use in the
R.A.O.C. during the 1939-45 War, may not be familiar to readers of this
volume. The elementary principles which govern provision are therefore
given to convey the meaning of the commoner terms, other terms being
explained later in the chapter.
75
WO 277/21
18
