PART V
OPERATIONS IN NORTH-WEST EUROPE
CHAPTER XIV
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN NORTH-WEST EUROPE, 1944-1945
The Planning Period
At 0800 hours on 6th June, 1944, the first elements of the Allied Expeditionary
Force landed on the coast of Normandy.
At the moment when the Supreme Commander gave the order for the
operation to commence, Second Army and First Canadian Army, both of
which remained throughout the campaign
21 Army Group, consisted of: —
under the command of H.Q.
Six armoured divisions (including one Polish armoured division).
Ten infantry divisions.
Two airborne divisions.
Nine independent armoured brigades.
Two special service (commando) brigades.
G.H.Q., Army and Corp Troops.
Certain Allied contingents.
Clearly a force of this size required a considerable number of adminis-
trative troops to operate the ports, railways, communications and installations
on its lines of communication.
The operation of many of these was through-
out controlled centrally by H.Q., 21 Army Group, although matters affecting
their local administration were delegated to H.Q., Lines of Communication
(L. of C.).
So far as the R.A.O.C. were concerned the D.O.S., 21 Army Group
(Brigadier J. G. Denniston), exercised control of A.O.Ds. (including Vehicle
Companies) and B.A.Ds.
DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY BETWEEN WAR OFFICE AND
H.Q. 21 ARMY GROUP
It was a War Office responsibility to form the R.A.O.C. units in the
21 Army Group Order of Battle, to equip them and to arrange training for
them, in agreement with the policy of 21 Army Group.
It was also a
War Office responsibility to provide, pack and despatch the stores, vehicles
and equipment to ports of embarkation on a programme arranged by 21
Army Group.
Similarly, War Office
was responsible for mounting the
operation, i.e., for arrangements for concentration, marshalling and embarka-
tion of the units and for all issues of replacement stores, ammunition and
vehicles in marshalling areas.
The operational part of the planning, and planning for the maintenance
of the Force after arrival in the theatre of war, was the responsibility of
H.Q., 21 Army Group.
Second Army was charged with all planning from
D Day to D + 14 (subsequently extended to D + 17) under the general
218
direction of H.Q., 21 Army. Group.
This involved assessing the require-
ments of administrative units and stores from D to D + 41 and preparing
a programme of daily maintenance requirements and administrative per-
sonnel for the period D to D + 17, including the requirements of the Royal
Navy and the
Royal Air Force.
Close liaison between War Orce and
21 Army Group was, however, essential for the proper fulfilment of both
the War Office and the Army Group responsibilities.
To some extent, therefore, it was necessary for 21 Army Group to partici-
pate in the planning of matters which were primarily a War Office responsi-
bility.
Thus, 21 Army Group was represented
at the weekly meeting, to
discuss problems in connection with mounting, which was held at War Office
during the months prior to D-Day, and which representatives of certain
Ordnance Branches of War Office and of D.Ds.O.S., Commands also attended.
COMMENCEMENT OF PLANNING
Planning for an invasion of the continent of Europe originated under
G.H.Q., Home Forces, long before the formation of 21 Army Group ; even
in 1942 outline plans were in existence.
In June 1943, H.Q., 21 Army Group came into existence and the greater
part of G.H.Q., Home Forces (including the whole of the Ordnance Direc-
torate) became H.Q., 21 Army Group with the sole purpose of planning
for, and subsequently carrying out, the invasion.
"Janurin" the which an constant exercises took plase, the two largest being
an actual landing and the setting up of a beach
maintenance area were tested, and " Harlequin" in which the mounting was
From both these, valuable lessons were learnt.
R.A.O.C. WAR ESTABLISHMENTS
Contemporaneously with these developments, the R.A.O.C. Field Organiza-
tion was reviewed by the R.A.O.C. Standing Committee on Field Organization,
set up by War Office to reap the benefit of experience gained in the Middle
East and elsewhere and to adapt it to meet the needs of a short sea voyage
polauon.
As a result, in the autumn of 1943, new war establishments were
promulgated for the whole range of R.A.O.C. field units.
The principal new feature was that the main base of the invading army was
to be in the United Kingdom, with an advanced base only on the continent.
Hence Central Ordnance Depots (C.O.Ds.) were to take the place of Base
Ordnance Depots (B.O.Ds.), and a new style A.O.D. was formed to operate
in the theatre of war.
Unlike the B.O.D., the A.O.D. was not intended to hold a full range of
items, and indents for items not scaled or held were to be flown back to an
Indent Clearing Centre in the United Kingdom and from there distributed to
the appropriate C.O.Ds. Stores despatched in response to these indents were
to be routed through a main base stores transit depot to port.
From the port,
they were to be taken by special coaster (the ordnance ship) and delivered
in the theatre to the stores transit sub-depot (S.T.S.D.) of the A.O.D. for
delivery to formations.
219
67612
WO 277/21
18
