The trains were designated Standard Ammunition
Trains
(S.A.T.).
Shortly afterwards the title was altered to Ammunition Section En Cas
Mobile) or A.S.E. in short.
The trains were loaded at B.A.Ds., as far as stocks permitted, and sent
for stabling as follows: —
(a) Trains required to be within 12 hours of A.R.H. to Petit Houvin
four miles S. of St. Pol.
(b) Trains required to be within 36 hours of A.R.H. to the Rennes-
The trains were not fixed to definite sidings, but could be moved as the
necessities of traffic dictated.
Complications arising from Security Measures
There was great difficulty in the beginning in persuading the Staff that
it was necessary for ordnance depots to have a force order of battle, loca-
tion lists, and prompt notification of all changes thereto, in order that con-
signments of ordnance stores to units could be correctly addressed and
despatched.
In the first month of the campaign, the desire for secrecy by the use
of serial numbers, code addresses and other markings complicated the
despatch of stores to units to such an extent that Movement Control were
daily refusing trucks labelled correctly to the best knowledge of the B.O.D.
Even as late as the middle of December, an enquiry into a complaint
from the Signal Officer in Chief (S.O. in C.) about the non-issue of certain
stores from the A.O.D. produced the information that the depot had not
been permitted a location list.
Workshop Services
It was realized that workshop services would be needed immediately on
The headquarters and advance section of
the A.O.W. were accordingly sent with the first R.A.O.C. contingent to
act as the nucleus of a B.O.W. until a complete B.O.W. could be installed.
Suitable accommodation in a large garage had already been allotted, and
by 19th September the machinery was installed and working.
In order to operate fully, this unit needed an ordnance workshop com-
pany but as the allotted company did not embark until a fortnight later,
a company was loaned from No. 2 B.O.W. which had arrived but was not
No. 2 B.O.W. arrived at Nantes on 14th September. Reconnaissance and
negotiation with the French authorities for suitable workshop buildings had
Reconnaissance throughout the area continued
but, whenever any suitable building was found and applied for, the French
replied that the Comite des Forges
required the accommodation for the
A garage of some 5,000 sq. ft. was taken over on requisition for the repair
of small arms, and negotiation continued with the French authorities, who,
ultimately realizing that our need was essential, allotted six buildings, giving
a total floor space of 266,000 sq. ft., on 4th October.
This enabled the
B.O.W. to start its installation, and to relieve the A.O.W., which moved
to Arras on 31st October.
Four Army field workshops (A.F.Ws.) were sent to France at the
ning of the campaign, i.e., one for each Division.
It was fortunate that there were no active operations shortly after the
force landed, as the units were incompletely organized, and untrained.
large number of the officers and at least 80 per cent. of the other ranks
belonged to the Supplementary Reserve, many of whom were put into uniform
Willing though they were, they
knew nothing of the Army and were entirely lacking in military training,
including the use of their weapons.
No. 1 Army Field Workshop arrived in France ahead of the 1st Corps
to organize a breakdown service on the roads from the ports to the assembly
The locations were Chateaubriant on the St. Nazaire-Laval route,
Rennes on the Brest-Laval route and Domfront on the Cherbourg-Laval
route. It was intended that this duty should be undertaken by an A.F.W.
from the 2nd Corps, when the Ist Corps had reached the assembly area,
but it was later allocated to L. of C. recovery sections of the G.H.Q. troops
Generally speaking it was found that these A.F.Ws. were too large for
the conditions in North-West Europe.
They took up a great deal of road
space when on the march, and it was only with difficulty
that accommoda-
tion could be found for their installations, especially the main shop.
consequence was that the main shops had either to be placed at inconvenient
sites, or divided into two locations.
It was a moot point whether repair sections should be sent forward or
retained with the main shop, and it was left to the O.C. to settle in con-
sultation with the staff of the division which the workshop served.
the sections remained in the main shop, they were kept as separate entities,
so that they could be despatched forward quickly.
Normally, the technical control of the recovery sections remained with
the O.C. A.F.W., and the Senior Ordnance Mechanical Engineer (S.O.M.E.)
of the division possessed no control over their work, save when they were
specifically formed into a divisional workshop.
The organization of G.H.Q. Troops Workshop R.A.O.C.
a main workshop, whose function was to serve units in G.H.Q. area; a
main recovery section capable of acting as a workshop in addition to carry-
ing out light recovery work primarily for the artillery units of G.H.Q.
troops, and six L. of C. recovery sections.
These sections were equipped
for heavy recovery work and had no workshop machinery.
intended to work between A.F.Ws., G.H.Q. troops workshop and railhead.
The main shop and four recovery sections arrived in France at the end
of September, 1939.
To meet the frequent demands for recovery work on
the routes from the ports to the assembly area, Nos. 1, 2
recovery sections were sent, as soon as they landed, to Domfront, Rennes
and Craon (40 miles S.E. of Rennes), respectively. It was intended that
wer
WO 277/21
