The rapidly changing situation following the development of the war with
Japan caused a vast increase of India's domestic requirements to equip and
maintain her own defence forces.
Frequently, therefore,
D.D.O.S. (P) India
would require most urgently for his own use stores becoming available from
production, which were equally urgently required by
C.P.O. in aid of its
agreed dues in and for urgent shipment in satisfaction of long outstanding
requirements from M.E.
It was a matter of continual negotiation and mutual
adjustment.
With regard to other participating countries, the situation was even more
complex.
Each of the participating Dominions and Colonies possessed, within
its own boundaries,
certain production facilities over a limited
range
of
ancies.
They were all busy mobilizing and equipping forces for operations
in M.E. or elsewhere and had their own provision difficulties.
They
were
all desperately in need of a wide range of equipment and raw material.
The
United Kingdom had
met their requirements as far as possible and was
continuing to do so.
India was struggling with the same
problem herself
and at the same time, as the largest
producer of a wide range of articles,
was endeavouring to supply the needs of the other Dominions.
One important hypothesis upon which the organization was based was
that each participating country had the authority to use all it required of
its own products for its own equipment and maintenance.
It was only the
declared surplus productive capacity in each Dominion which was to be
available for the common pool for distribution under the direction of the
C.P.O. after requisition by
the Council.
Estimates were called for from each participating country to arrive over
the period July-September,
December, 1942.
1941, to cover the requirement period April-
Instructions were issued to all
programme upon which
vocabulary
sections
countries
indicating the
to -be
submission and the field to be covered.
staggered for
By the end of August, 1941, it was evident that the Dominions would
not be able to comply with the request for forecasts of their requirements.
They were also in no position, at that time,
advance demands.
Burma and Malaya did,
submit any form of firm
in
information was available from other participating
fact,
do this.
but no
In view of the urgent necessity to make some sort of initial " buy
countries at this stage.
", it was
decided to begin without further delay the compilation of token demands
upon the Council.
These were, in fact, estimates
data, and could only be guesses.
based upon the vaguest
The whole situation was so fluid that any
form of accurate calculation was impossible.
One unfortunate result was that having submitted what were assumed to
be the best possible guesses, a sudden demand for
some particular item
would be received which swamped the guess-work provision and necessitated
amendment of an existing demand.
Ultimately, as was only to be expected,
the branch stood accused of over-provision in many directions, although at
to
the time continual supplementary demands had to be submitted in response
urgent requests from participating
countries.
Changes
of policy
administration in the Group, changes in orders of battle, changes in the whole
battle area from Tobruk to Hong Kong, changes of political decisions in
the Dominions- all these made for violent fluctuations of requirements which
caused either urgent additional requisitions, or over
provision.
112
One factor which caused endless difficulty was the repeated change between
India and M.E. of responsibility for the administrative command of the
forces operating in Iraq.
Each change meant an adjustment of all dues
in as between C.P.O. (Ordnance) and D.D.O.S. (P) India.
Another problem
arose from the political necessity for Australia to maintain her troops in
Egypt direct.
It was, in fact, found that C.P.O., in making provision on
such orders of battle as they could obtain, was in some cases duplicating
supplies already sent direct by Australia. In particular, this concerned many
items of clothing.
At a later stage, C.P.O. undertook the supply of certain stores via South
Africa to West African Colonies.
Local Provision Offices
It had already been decided that an essential link between the C.P.O.
and the military authorities in each Dominion should be established in each
participating country.
Whereas the Council members as representing their
governments had direct access to their own Supply Ministries, the Provision
Office had no direct contact with the military
staff in each Dominion.
Therefore, each Dominion was requested to set up a local liaison office
which could collaborate with each of its Services and act as a clearance
house for correspondence and documentation as between the Dominion and
C.P.O. In July, 1941, a conference was held at New Delhi and was attended
by representatives from India, Malaya, Burma, New Zealand, M.E., South
Africa and Australia and a comprehensive agenda for the future guidance
of C.P.O. and local provision offices throughout the Group was discussed.
Valuable contacts between individuals were made, and a better understanding
of the combined functions of the organization was obtained by everybody
present.
The task of the local provision offices was by no means-an easy one.
Theirs was the duty to receive the demands from their own Governments,
to prepare these in a form acceptable to C.P.O., to progress supply with
C.P.O., to receive copies of Council requisitions on their Governments for
production in response to C.P.O. requirements, to arrange receipt and custody
of stores produced and due for export at call from C.P.O., to produce shipping
forecasts for C.P.O. and above all to resist, as far as possible, the tendency
to repossess stores ear-marked for C.P.O. before they could be exported.
Without these local provision offices, the whole network of Eastern Group
provision and supply could not have existed.
Establishment of C.P.O. Depot, Dehu
A conference in Simla in the autumn of 1941 resulted in the selection
of a desert site at Dehu Road near Poona for the construction of a depot
for the reception of stores for C.P.O. use alone.
It was estimated that the
depot would require 4,000,000 sq. ft. of covered accommodation.
Open
storage was unlimited.
The depot was financed by the British Treasury by
agreement with the Government of India, and construction was begun late
in 1941.
A C.O.O. from the Indian Army Ordnance Corps (I.A.O.C.) was
appointed, labour recruited and, by the spring of 1942 the beginnings of
what was to become a very large depot took shape.
Stores began to arrive
113
wester It
WO 277/21
18
