thereafter issues were arranged so that spares for certain equipments were
shipped each month; for example, No. 11 Wireless Sets in January, May
and September and No. 19 Wireless Sets in February. June and October
In the case of new equipments, cieht months spares were shipped with the
equipments and subsequent maintenance followed on a hased programme
These issues were made on the pack system: two packs were designed, the
first included items with a high maintenance rate and covered a predeter-
mined number of equipments for a definite period, the second comprised
slower moving items and completed the maintenance required for the same
number of equipments for 12 months.
When
the North Africa campaign
was being planned, these packs were re-designed and were set out in four
(for M.T. five) standard scales and related to R.E.M.E. repair policy and
Echelon Repair Schedules.
They were based on a defined number of equip-
ments and a four-monthly period.
The system of automatic maintenance succeeded in its objects which were
to eliminate the work and delay in the submission of demands, many of
which failed to arrive; to economize in issues; and to enable theatres to
foretell approximately the quantities and dates of future receipts.
It was realized that when active operations ceased in each theatre, and
the requirements of spares decreased, the continuation of automatic main-
tenance would cause over-provision.
In July, 1944, therefore, automatic main-
tenance ceased to the Middle East, East and West Africa.
Thereafter, initial
maintenance of eight months or twelve months in the case of "B" vehicles
was shipped with equipments, subsequent maintenance being by demand at
four-monthly intervals.
NORTH AMERICAN MAINTENANCE
The supply of spares from North America suffered from initial difficulties
similar to those met with in this country.
Before the U.S. industry developed
its production to war rates, there was a tendency to produce a much smaller
percentage of spares than was the British policy.
into
The American system of supply of spares was adopted, separating them
" organizational"
spares
and
maintenance.
The scales
branch in
America in consultation with the War Office drew up a scale of " organiza-
tional" spares for 100 equipments and a maintenance list covering 100 equip-
ments for 12 months.
"Organizational" spares were designed in the U.S. Army to cover unit
spares and part of the repair organization requirements; this did not always
coincide with our
allotment for
unit spares
12
months'
maintenance
was provided for each 100 equipments and was or was not repeated according
to the nature of the equipment.
The maintenance for 100 equipments for
12 months was termed a " set" and a half-set was issuable and shipped with
the main
equipment.
Thus, spares shipped with an equipment from North America consisted
of the complete " Organization Spares"
further six
months'
and six months' maintenance.
maintenance
original date of shipment and this
was shipped within
four
months of the
was in certain cases followed by
an
additional six months' maintenance in every subsequent six months during
v02947
F1 7
WO 277/21
18
which the equipments remained in use. Demands were only submitted where
scheduled quantities proved insufficient, for quantities lost by enemy actior
Within a theatre of war, and in respect of spares for certain vehicles.
This system was modified later in accordance with the requirements
and types of stores and the progress of the war.
In November, 1944, U.S.A.
types of artillery equipment, fire control instruments and small arms were
maintained automatically for one year, subsequent maintenance being on
quarterly demand.
British types were maintained automatically for two years.
In February, 1945, first year concurrent maintenance for U.S.A. types were
cancelled and organization spares only shipped as heretofore.
of engineer equipments,
U.S.
In the case
Engineer Corps reduced the supply of spares
automatically issued with main items from twelve months' to six months'
supply, subsequent maintenance being on half-yearly demand.
In March,
1945, U.S. Signal Corps reduced the automatic maintenance period for certain
radar and signal stores from two years to one year, thereafter by quarterly
demand.
With the end of the war and of lease-lend, the supply of stores from U.S.A.
ceased.
All dues in were cancelled and no further demands were made,
except for the maintenance of these equipments which it was long term G.S.
policy to retain in the service.
LANDING RESERVES (L.RS.) AND BEACH MAINTENANCE PACKS (B.M.Ps.)
Just before the North African campaign, the system of delivery of
ordnance stores was so organized that supply could be effectively carried out
over the beaches before an A.O.D. was established.
It was vitally necessary
to give priority to those equipments and stores which were most likely to be
required so that Ordnance
Beach Detachments (O.B.Ds.) and temporary
they were fully established and organized to cope with the load.
The system of delivery was divided into two stages: —
(a) maintenance by L.Rs. held by O.B.Ds. situated in the beach main-
tenance area.
(b) maintenance by B.M.Ps. held by a temporary ordnance depot situated
in the rear maintenance area.
These were followed by maintenance from an A.O.D. carrying a pre-
arranged scale of spares.
L.Rs. consisted of reserves of equipments and stores necessary to maintain
the force for a period of 30 days, and were normally prepared on a brigade
group basis.
the first line repair.
They included such replacement spares as were necessary for
They were landed immediately after the assault troops
had gained a foothold and were delivered to the ordnance detachment.
B.M.Ps. consisted of standard quantities of replacement equipments and
spare parts necessary to augment L.Rs. and to continue maintenance of the
force including second line repair.
They were scaled on a divisional group
basis and represented o days maintenance for the maintenance for the
division and attached corps troops.
Each B.M.P. was roughly three landing
67612
