FORWARD MAINTENANCE AMMUNITION SECTIONS (F.M.A.Ss.)
Continuing the system employed by Eighth Army in the Desert, forward
ammunition sections were employed in Italy up till July, 1944.
independent,
self supporting
units, allotted to
army or corps control and
charged with the task of handling the forward dumps of ammunition reserves.
In July, 1944, these sections, renamed F.M.A.Ss., were absorbed as sub-
unis inul e ne ornance mantenance compars, a do a uniforme a 1d
bring
all forward R.A.O.C.
ammunition,
L. of C. terminal detachments
R.A.O.C.
under one K.A.U.C. commander.
Normally sited in the F.M.A., these sections proved an indispensable
link in the chain of ammunition supply,
and,
during periods of
intense
battle activity, displayed great endurance in handling,
day and night,
prodigious quantities of ammunition needed to replace battle expenditure.
ORDNANCE BEACH DETACHMENTS (AMMUNITION SECTIONS)
The ammunition sections of 2 and 8 O.B.Ds. carried out their tasks
successfully at the Salerno and Anzio landings.
When their beach maintenance duties were completed, O.B.D. ammuni-
tion sections proved extremely
useful, to supplement larger
ammunition
units, to handle ammunition left behind in vacated depots as the armies
advanced and as a reserve to meet any
urgent unforeseen commitment
needing highly
trained personnel.
This brief account of ammunition supply would not be complete without
reference to the R.A.O.C. ammunition detachments at the ports and the sub-
sections at army railheads.
e a boca raing in
Efficiency in their allotted tasks required the
ability to sort ammunition consignments accurately and rapidly at the ports
to ensure a rapid turn round of ships and clearance of docks and at the
railheads to make certain of the smooth flow of replenishments forward to
the F.M.A.Ss.
Development of the system of supply of ordnance stores
IMPROVISATION IN THE INITIAL STAGES
As recorded earlier in this chapter, the original intention was to supply
ordnance stores to the force in Italy by the short sea voyage
system, a
system which greatly reduces and simplifies the task of setting up ordnance
depots in the war theatre.
During the first two months or so of the campaign in Italy, the D.O.S.
sucesstuly improvise a stop a maintenance system by pooling both
the personnel and the stocks of the O.B.Ds., to form a temporary ordnance
depot at Taranto, and simultaneously setting up 500 A.O.D. at Bari.
THE SHORT SEA VOYAGE SYSTEM
The nart develanmente were the cetting un in the Nanlas arag of 557
chart sen voyage system as son a s5t A cala e encende en stacked
A.O.D., and, while this was in progress, the important decision to drop the
ready to operate as a B.O.D.
204
Although 500 A.O.D. was initially stocked with warlike stores (including
M.T. stores) as well as with clothing and general stores, it was decided that
the unit should be given adequate time to carry out the lengthy and complex
task of binning its stock of warlike stores, before being called on to make
issues of those
stores to the troops.
Consequently the initial issue task
allotted to 500 A.O.D. was confined to clothing and general stores and the
issue load for
warlike stores was placed on the B.O.Ds. in Middle East
Command.
This entailed the despatch of units' indents by air to G.H.Q.,
Middle East Command, whence supply in detail was arranged from the
B.O.Ds. in Egypt.
This method of supply was carried out very successfully,
apart from the unavoidable delay, amounting to six weeks, in the transporta-
tion of the stores.
This delay was deliberately accepted as a lesser evil than
the confusion which would inevitably have resulted from prematurely placing
the load on 500 A.O.D. during its preparatory task of setting up shop.
For the same reason, no attempt was made to hustle the newly forming
557 B.O.D. into assuming its issue task before it was properly stocked and
organized.
With clear-cut commitments,
500 A.O.D. developed very rapidly.
The
sub-depot handling clothing and general stores expanded to over one million
square feet of covered storage accommodation and, with the aid of extra
personnel transferred from the relatively inactive warlike stores sub-depots,
efficiently tackled its increasing issues load.
DEVELOPMENT OF 557 B.O.D.
Meanwhile urgent action was in progress to develop 557 A.O.D. Naples
into a B.O.D.
stocked with the whole range of ordnance stores required to
maintain the Force.
The staff at this depot was augmented by the transfer
of all available R.A.O.C.
personnel from the temporary ordnance depot at
Taranto and from 32 B.O.D. at Bone, N. Africa, a unit now in its closing
down stage.
By 15th February, 1944, 557 B.O.D.
was able to undertake the issue of
clothing and general stores to all units in 10th Corps.
A month later, on
15th March, the B.O.D.
assumed responsibility for the issue
of clothing,
general and warlike stores to the whole Force.
The first reconnaissance,
in November, 1943, had resulted in the siting
of this depot in two rather widely separated locations, 40 miles apart, 1 and
3 sub-depots at Pontecagnano (8 miles south of Salerno) and 2 sub-depot
at Portici
At Pontecagnano the site comprised large and lofty brick tobacco
drying sheds well suited for ordnance storage, with ample room in the
surrounding fields to expand by building Romney hutting.
The site chosen
at Portici, in a densely populated area, lacked the advantage of space for
expansion.
From these beginnings, the B.O.D. grew into an immense and widely-
scattered depot, ultimately comprising
24 sub-installations, stretching over a
distance of 60 miles from Capua to Naples to Pontecagnano, and providing
more than 3,000,000 sq. ft. of covered storage.
Of this total some 1,700,000
sq. ft. were provided by building temporary hutting
The scattered layout
was dictated by various factors
suitable existing
such as the paucity
buildings and the congestion, both military and civil,
in the Naples area.
205
WO 277/21
28
