SERVICES
as possible, and dropped free.
Improvised hessian parachutes were tried
with only a small measure of success.
Twice the bulk of ammunition held
in 7th Division "box " was destroyed by Japanese mortar fire.
Eventually
parachutes taking a 150 to 3000b. lined hee a available, and the position
cased. The valuable experience obtained here was utilized a few weeks later
when Imphal and Kohima were cut off.
Sth and Tth Divisions' "boxes" held off all enemy attacks and eventually
the Japanese were isolated, thus allowing normal ammunition supply to be
resumed from 60 and 62 O.F.Ds.
Issues forward of the O.F Ds. were difficult, as 3-ton and 15-cwt. lorries,
and jeeps, sampans and even porters had to be used to get the ammunition
to the troops. À very large percentage of wooden packages, especially those
made in India, did not stand up to the handling.
This was a source of
worry throughout the whole of the campaign, much of the inspecting ordnance
officers' and ammunition examiners' time being taken in the repair of con-
tainers to the detriment of their proper task of inspecting and repairing live
No sooner had the position on the Arakan front been stabilized than a
major offensive was launched by the Japanese on the Assam front,
IV Indian Corps was holding a sector which followed approximately the
southern and south-western boundary of Assam, with troops covering Imphal
and Kohima from the east.
The Japanese came in from the west at Tiddim and on the Tamu-Palel
road from the east, thus forcing the evacuation of the two forward O.F.Ds.
(51 and 52) at Tiddim and Moreh. As much ammunition as possible was
issued to troops withdrawing northwards and as much of the remainder as
possible destroyed: however, approximately
400-500 tons had to be
In the meantime, Imphal became threatened by an advance from the
Ukhrul area (40 miles north-east of Imphal) and later, Kohima was attacked
The Army Commander decided to fight it out
on the Imphal plain, and troops took up positions where they could
engage the enemy as he entered the plain from the jungle.
defensive "boxes" were formed in this area and reserve ammunition was
failed.
This reserve was to be used only if normal supply
One divisional headquarters established itself in 441 A.A.D.
of the holdings at 441 A.A.D. (approximately 3,500 tons) were evacuated
to the Imphal area, the remaining stocks being left for the troops holding
the line south of Imphal. Loads were dumped at Imphal anywhere over an
area of approximately 30-40 acres in order to get the quickest turn-round
of lorries.
and stacked in them.
Recesses were cut into the hillsides and the ammunition sorted
Additional ammunition was, in the meantime,
being
rushed in from the forward base at Manipur Road owing to the likelihood
of the Dimapur-Imphal road being cut.
This continued until the road was
actually cut, a number of lorry loads being captured and burnt.
Approxi-
forward in the short time available.
marly 4.500-5,000 tons of the important types of ammunition were ferried
282
The next few months was an anxious time. In spite of supplies received
air (which were extremely limited), stocks of ammunition decreased
dally.
When Imphal was finally relieved, holdings of all the important
types were extremely low, especially grenades which were in short supply
in India and in large demand in forward areas.
The road was now cut at Kohima and a report being received that
a Japanese column was marching on Manipur Road, the brigade at Kohima
was moved to defend Manipur pending the arrival of reinforcements from
India.
In view of the possibility of the loss of 445 A.A.D. at Manipur Road,
it was decided to evacuate all
the troops being brought in to
stocks other than those needed to maintain
defend Manipur.
Quantities of ammunition
were, therefore, backloaded by rail to 54 O.F.D. at Gauhati.
An additional
depot, stocked from Manipur Road, was opened near Dergaon (west of Jorhat)
for the use of the troops in that area.
the base never materialized.
Fortunately, however, the threat to
The 2nd Division (33 Corps) and a certain amount of armour now
began to arrive at Manipur Road mostly without stocks of first-line ammuni-
tion owing to the rapidity of the move.
This was a serious embarrassment
for a time, as Manipur Road stocks had been depleted by issue forward to
Imphal.
There were no stocks of 3.7 howitzer ammunition or No. 36
grenades.
In order to get important types of ammunition forward as quickly as
possible, a " trap "
was instituted at the river rail-head at Gauhati, using
personnel from 445 A.A.D.
Ammunition was unloaded and sorted and only
those types immediately required sent forward, the remainder being held
at 54 O.F.D., which was expanded for that purpose.
put at each trans-shipment point on the Brahmaputra to locate, report
progress, and hasten movement of all types of ammunition in short supply.
Before the Japanese attack on the Assam front, expenditure of ammuni-
tion had been extremely light, and little was in transit to forward areas.
Consequently, as reports of continual troop movements in the upper Chindwin
area had been received it had been decided, 31 weeks before the line
was cut, to send forward approximately 6,000 tons as an insurance against
depots being cut off or overrun.
The first consignments of the 6,000 tons
began to arrive at Manipur Road at the same time as 33 Corps Troops, and
enabled the attack on Kohima and subsequent advance to Imphal to be
maintained.
The 2nd Division with its armour eventually moved up to relieve Kohima
and the necessary dumps were formed behind them.
In spite of the splitting
of depot staffs and the continued movement of stocks the supply of ammuni-
tion was maintained.
Until relieved, Kohima garrison were supplied by
air, but owing to
the restricted dropping zones (usually the top of a hill) and the close
proximity of the enemy, a good deal of the ammunition was dropped into the
Japanese lines, or otherwise could not be recovered.
The enemy used
most of this captured ammunition against us, and subsequent reports confirm
the effectiveness of our 3" mortar bombs.
67612
283
w02904/17
WO 277/23
