stretchers. Simultaneously with the establishment of these dumps recon-
naissances were made to find sites a few miles inland for the
establishment
of beach maintenance area dumps to hold the ammunition and the landing
reserves with which it was intended to maintain the force for the first four
weeks.
On 8th and 9th June parties from 7 B.A.D., 1 Ordnance Maintenance
Company and the Vehicle Company of 17 A.O.D. arrived to reconnoitre
sites for the depots to be established in the R.M.A.
Unfortunately, the
craft carrying the reconnaissance party of 17 A.O.D. was torpedoed and
almost the entire party were lost. Another reconnaissance party was organized
and landed with the advance party of 17 A.O.D. four days later.
H.Q., Second Army assumed administrative responsibility for all stores
and ammunition dumps and depots on 11th June.
On that day H.Q., 17
B.A.D. landed and took over the control, under the direction of H.Q., Second
Army, of all ammunition dumps.
D.D.O.S. Second Army allotted O.B.Ds. in 101 and 102 Beach Sub-
Area for the maintenance of 1 Corps-this became No. 1 L. of C. Terminal :
and O.B.Ds. in 104 Beach Sub-Area for the maintenance of 30 Corps--this
became No. 2 L. of C. Terminal. 8 Corps were maintained by the O.B.Ds.
in 102 Beach Sub-Area.
Advance parties of 17 A.O.D. arrived on 13th June and established a
depot near Vaux-sur-Aure.
The site proved satisfactory but difficulties were
experienced at first because two divisions and a tank transporter column were
also located on the site. The three store companies of
16 A.O.D. landed
with 17 A.O.D. and were merged into and operated with the latter.
From this date landing reserves (L.Rs.) were diverted from the O.B.Ds.
to 17 A.O.D., and by 23rd June receipts of ordnance stores over the
beaches of 101 and 102 Beach Sub-Areas had almost ceased, and all ordnance
stores were being received in 17 A.O.D.
The L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. shipped
to 17 A.O.D., formed the initial stock of the depot which began to issue
stores on 2nd July.
In the meantime the stock of vehicles for replacement of casualties had
been built up. Owing to the small losses in the assault and immediately
afterwards, serious consideration was given to cutting down the replacement
vehicle programme. It was, however, decided that no substantial alteration
should be made to the planned programme and this was found to be a wise
decision, because by the time the battle of Caen was finished, all vehicle
losses suffered by formations in the early days had been made good.
It proved possible to maintain the vehicle strength of all formations then in
the bridgehead and also to build up a small G.H.Q. reserve stock.
Replacement "A" vehicles arrived in the theatre with corps delivery
squadrons between 14th and 24th June.
After 24th June "A"
vehicles were
shipped, unaccompanied, in bulk to depots in the bridgehead from which
they were available for issue to the armoured replacement group organization.
Small numbers of " B" vehicles were taken into the bridgehead by corps
ordnance field parks until 24th June, when the second vehicle company
arrived ; after this date "B"
vehicles were also shipped unaccompanied in
The despatch of replacement vehicles unaccompanied by drivers led
to complications, as on occasions, owing to lack of information about
MAP 6
KIEL
Karlsruke
w0s797/17
WO 277/21
