SERVICES
THE ADVANCED ORDNANCE DEPOT (A.O.D.) AND ADVANCED AMMUNITION
DEPOT (A.A.D.) AT MANIPUR ROAD
Earlier, it had been decided to establish a base at Manipur Road in
order to supply the army by land route after the fall of Rangoon and to
provide a base for operations in Assam should the withdrawal of the Army
from Burma become necessary.
The plan was first to establish 213 A.O.D. and 413 A.A.D. at Manipur
Road and then to push out O.F.Ds. and such minor installations as might
become necessary.
No unit existed at that time for this purpose.
It was,
therefore, decided to send the Chief Ordnance Officer (C.O.O.) designate
forward to start construction and then to form the A.O.D. and A.A.D. as
personnel became available.
Sites selected were merely road frontages in
dense forest; the frontages for the A.O.D. extended roughly one mile on
either side of the sixth milestone on the Dimapur-Imphal Road.
The
A.A.D. was established about a mile away on a frontage of 1,000 yards.
The main road was narrow and the depots needed sufficient length of
internal roads to receive at once all traffic consigned to them, so
as to
avoid blocking the main road.
There was a lack of materials suitable for
building hard standings and internal roads.
The red clay sub-soil made
an excellent foundation when dry but in the monsoon rains roads made of
it became impassable.
Fortunately a reasonable quantity of Decauville
track was available for internal movement.
All store sheds had to be
constructed of split bamboo.
Unfortunately the danger from air attack had been over-emphasized
with the result that roads and tracks were made very narrow and winding;
for the same reason store sheds were kept small and widely dispersed;
this caused • innumerable difhculties when
expansion took
place.
engineer resources were fully employed on the development of the railhead,
but a group of tea planters who arrived with their own labour constructed
the depots with literally nothing provided, except the tarpaulins for the
roofs of the store sheds.
These men refused to be defeated by any obstacle
or by lack of material and the speed and efficiency of their work set an
invaluable example to new drafts as they arrived.
Work began in the first
week in March and the first bulk trains were received on 6th April.
WITHDRAWAL FROM KATHA
On 28th April, the B.O.D. at Katha received orders to destroy all stores
and to march to India via Kalewa, this being at the time the suggested
line of retreat for the entire Army in Burma.
On 30th April a meeting of
senior Army officers, headed by the District Commissioner, decided on the
immediate evacuation of Katha. On this day, all European civilians and
depot military personnel were armed, and it was agreed that all the remain-
ing ordnance stores should be handed over to local Chinese forces.
Secret
documents and records were destroyed.
The depot personnel were formed into two parties each of some 100
fully armed men, and each carrying 10 days' rations.
The line of march
(decided in consultation with the local Forest Officer) was via Mansi to
Hoaiplin.
After a march of some 250 miles, both parties finally arrived
at Kangla-Tongbi Staging Camp, where some 300 ordnance personnel were
270
west 17
WO 277/21.
18
