CHAPTER XXII
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN GIBRALTAR, 1939-1945
Situation before the Outbreak of War
At the outbreak of war ordnance services in Gibraltar were under the
control of an A.D.O.S. with the rank of lieutenant colonel.
consisted of two infantry battalions, a coast artillery regiment and ancillary
services, the total military strength being less than 4,000.
The ordnance needs of the garrison were met by a small depot holding all
classes of stores, an ammunition depot, R.A.O.C. workshops and a W.D.
The total accommodation comprised 171,000 square feet of covered
and 74,000 square feet of uncovered storage space.
The R.A.O.C. strength
was 65. In addition 115 civilians were employed in ordnance installations.
Expansion after Outbreak of War
When war began the Gibraltar garrison, in view of the strategic importance
of the Fortress, was increased and eventually reached a strength of 20,000
To ease the military situation in the event of siege the entire female
and a large proportion of the male population was evacuated to the United
Kingdom, Madeira and elsewhere.
The increase in the strength of the garrison and the necessity to provide
against the contingency of a siege resulted in a large increase in ordnance
store holdings.
Existing military accommodation was insufficient to house
the additional stores and civilian premises had to be requisitioned.
of the risk of aerial attack, underground accommodation was provided by
tunnelling chambers in the rock.
Inside these chambers nissen huts were
erected and used as storehouses for all classes of stores and ammunition.
The influx of stores and ammunition necessitated an increase in personnel
in ordnance installations. As the Gibralterian civilians had been evacuated
it was necessary, pending the arrival of R.A.O.C. reinforcements, to engage
Spanish labour, despite the unfriendly attitude of the Spanish government
at that time.
The existing laundry found it difficult to meet the needs of the increased
garrison and an additional laundry was opened to serve the hospital. It
was realized that in the event of siege, when the majority of the garrison
would be living in underground accommodation within the rock, the pro-
vision of alternative laundry capacity would be vital for the health of the
A special laundry, known as the "Rock" laundry was therefore
built which had several special features.
The drinking water in Gibraltar is
all obtained from Catchments: it was decided that the maximum reserve of
fresh water would be needed during a siege and therefore the " Rock"
laundry was specially constructed to use sea water treated with a special
compound to enable a lather to be obtained.
This laundry also contained a
distillation plant to provide sufficient fresh water for rinsing.
By the end of 1943 reinforcements had arrived and eventually the
R.A.O.C. strength was brought up to about 300.
In April, 1944, when the civilian population began to return, it became
possible to employ female labour in ordnance depots.
As a result about
30 per cent. of the R.A.O.C. in the island was released for service in other
By this time it had become apparent that there would be
no attack which would seriously affect the safety of the fortress.
Throughout the war the efficiency of ordnance services in the island
Units were able to obtain their stores in a few hours and prac-
authorized for issue was available on demand. During
the first half of 1945 shipping tonnage handled amounted to over 6,000 tons
and approximately 126,000 items were issued.
CHAPTER XXIII
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN PERSIA AND IRAQ
The first ordnance depot to be formed was No. 2 I.A.O.C. B.O.D. which
arrived at Iraq in April-May, 1941.
Based on the Indian W.E., it was a self-
contained unit, comprising a Headquarters, Nos. 1, 2 and 3 Sub-Depots, and
aRe ord are st it as pany A quivalent to the headquarters
eventually found at Shaibah, although no covered accommodation was avail-
able at the beginning, and it was not until October, 1941, that the erection
of storehouses was begun.
The lay-out of this depot was based on the conventional plan of three
rail-served sub-depots and a R.S.D. within a perimeter of approximately
Conditions during the first six months could hardly have been
worse, since day temperatures rose to as high as 125 degrees in the shade
and the only protection was to be found in tents. There were also daily
sand storms lasting 6-8 hours at a time, from which there was no protection.
Moreover, the depot had no lifting equipment, no racking and no bins (the
latter were improvised from packing cases and petrol tins).
any timber available for dunnage.
Worse still, in the early days there was
All the off-loading and stacking of stores had to be
carried out, in these deplorable conditions, by ordnance personnel, assisted
by Indian infantry units when the latter could be spared.
In July, 1941, the B.O.D. was augmented and reorganized
a headquarters and two Indian ordnance stores companies.
ordnance units arrived to supplement the existing strength.
By mid-1941 plans were well advanced for the establishment of the first
A.O.D. and a permanent site at Nussayab, some 50 miles south of Baghdad,
was occupied in August, 1942. No. 11 I.A.O.C. A.O.D. exploited this site.
Plans were also prepared for the establishment of an ordnance depot at
This was designed to develop into a B.O.D. to support operations
in Persia should the enemy break through the Caucasus Mountains.
early 1942, steps were also taken to establish A.O.Ds. at Mossul and Kirkuk.
However, none of these plans fully matured and the final set-up at each
place was a railhead ordnance depot. Similar units were established at
Khanaquin and Teheran.
The arrival of further British ordnance units enabled No. 2 I.A.O.C.
B.O.D. to be reorganized as a B.O.D. (R.A.O.C.) by February, 1943.
The run-down of the Persia and Iraq force on completion of the African
campaign, and the removal of the threat to the Caucasus, left large surpluses
of stocks in the B.O.D.
and the A.O.D.
These depots had been scaled,
during the build-up period, to maintain 16 divisions.
A backloading pro-
gramme was carried out, surpluses being disposed of under the instructions
of War Office, H.O. Middle East and the Central Provision Office in India.
