STRICTED
CHAPTER II
EVOLUTION OF THE R.A.O.C. ORGANIZATION
IN HOME COMMANDS
General Organization Before the Outbreak of War
In 1939, for the purpose of army administration, the United Kingdom
was divided into six commands and one district designated Aldershot, Eastern,
Northern, Scottish, Southern and Western Commands and Northern Ireland
District.
Each command was divided into areas varying in number with the
importance, size and number of troops stationed in them.
A.A. Command
is dealt with separately in the second half of this chapter.
Ordnance representation at Command H.Q. was vested in an Assistant
Director of Ordnance Services (A.D.O.S.) holding the rank of Colonel or
Lieut.-Colonel.
In Northern Ireland District there was a Deputy A.D.O.S.
(D.A.D.O.S.).
These officers were responsible for all ordnance services in
their command or district except technical control of the C.O.Ds. which was
exercised direct by the War Office.
The workshop activities of the R.A.O.C. in each command were under
the control of a C.O.M.E.
The ordnance establishment at Command H.Q. was small, usually five or
six officers and a few military and civilian clerks. In Northern Ireland District
H.Q. there were only two ordnance officers.
At Area H.Q., ordnance representation varied considerably.
In Southern
Command there were six areas each having a D.A.D.O.S., whereas in
Scottish Command one D.A.D.O.S., with the rank of Lieut.-Colonel, combined
the duties of D.A.D.O.S. for both Highland and Lowland Areas as well as
commanding the command ordnance depot.
The D.A.D.O.S. of an area was charged with the administration and
control of all ordnance services, including command ordnance depots, in his
arca.
In each command there were one or more command ordnance depots each
under the control of an ordnance officer, usually a major.
These depots were
each allocated an area of supply which did not necessarily adhere to the
geographical boundaries of the command or area in which the depot was
situated.
The depots were responsible for making detailed issues of general
stores, some ammunition and most warlike stores, to units within their area of
supply and for receiving units' surpluses and unserviceable stores.
The
depots at Aldershot and Stirling were also responsible for making detailed
issues of clothing; units in other commands obtained their clothing direct
from the C.O.D.
Depots were organized internally into groups.
Each group stocked and
issued specific classes of stores and dealt with the returned unserviceable
stores as well.
A mobilization group held equipments and stores for issue
to Regular and Territorial Army units to complete them to war scale.
depot had its own method of grouping.
Each
or foreman, either military or civilian, but usually a civilian.
Each group had its own storeholder
The storeholder
was responsible to a group officer who generally controlled two or more
10
The storeholder was an important link in the R.A.O.C. chain of supply
and invariably had an extensive knowledge of ordnance stores and procedure.
He was responsible not only for the issue, receipt and custody of the stores
in his group but also for initiating provision action when his stocks needed
replenishment.
The staff at ordnance depots consisted mostly of civilians of various
grades, but many of the key posts were held by R.A.O.C. personnel.
The regimental organization of the R.A.O.C. in commands consisted of
one or more sections in each command.
These sections had no standard
establishment.
Each section was commanded by an O.C., usually a captain,
who was answerable to the D.A.D.O.S. for the discipline and welfare of his
troops.
Regimental training was confined to Saturday morning drill and spasmodic
courses of lectures on war organization and procedure.
Development of the Organization During the War
The mobilization of the Army and the outbreak of war in August and
September, 1939, caused the
withdrawal of the majority of the regular
R.A.O.C. officers and other ranks from their peace units for posting to field
formations and units.
A large number of civilian employees who were
reservists were called to the Colours.
Replacements of personnel and augmen-
tation of ordnance establishments was effected by drafting in officers from the
reserve and untrained militia men, civilians and A.T.S.
The wholesale changes in staff at a time when depots were involved in the
heavy and urgent task of meeting the requirements of mobilizing units, had
serious repercussions on the efficiency of ordnance services, but the general
organizational structure in home commands remained the same until the
evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force (B.E.F.) from N.W. Europe.
During this period, September, 1939 to June, 1940, the main task was the
mobilization of units.
This entailed a 24-hour service at ordnance depots and
an expansion of accommodation in varying degrees in each command.
Northern Ireland a new depot planned before the outbreak of war was opened
at Kinnegar.
In June, 1940, the return of the B.E.F., the collapse of France and the
necessity for taking measures to combat the probability of a German invasion
of the United Kingdom threw an immense load on the R.A.O.C.
A complete
re-equipping of the Army simultaneously with the mobilization of new units
and the clothing and equipping of the Local Defence Volunteers (later the
Home Guard) necessitated a large expansion of ordnance services in all
commands.
Command H.Q.
the appointment of A.D.O.S. was upgraded to
D.D.O.S. with the rank of Brigadier, and staffs were increased.
Boundaries of commands were changed, and new areas were brought into
being.
Command
ordnance
depots were placed under direct control of
Command H.Q. and the ordnance officers in charge were upgraded to Chief
Ordnance officers with the rank of Lieut.-Colonel.
The
existing
inadequate
W.D.
ordnance
accommodation was seriously
and
additional storage,
much of it most unsuitable
and
11
WO 277/21
18
