Thence they were taken in S.C.U. lorries direct to the S.C.U. transit shed
nearby, to be picked up and sent forward either by air, by road, or by special
fast rail service, e.g. a goods truck attached to a passenger train.
At the
forward terminal, S.C.U, representatives collected the stores, keeping them
separate from other normal consignments.
The corps S.C.Us. (which included one section for each division in the
corps) collected their stores from L. of C. S.C.U. representatives at the forward
L. of C. terminals, and delivered them direct to the ordnance field park
As a result of the speedy delivery service given by the S.C.Us.,
ordnance field parks reduced considerably their holdings of those spare parts
in short supply.
The S.C.Us. channel was also used for the transmission of ordnance field
parks demands back to the base.
The Supply of " A " and " B" Vehicles
The organization and operation of the supply of "A" and "B" vehicles
in Italy proved the most difficult task which faced the R.A.O.C. in that theatre.
The standard organization then in force provided R.A.O.C. vehicle com-
panies which were integral parts of the B.O.Ds. and A.O.Ds.
It was found
that no B.O.D. or A.O.D.
commander was able to control the supply of
vehicles in addition to his own large stores organization but it will be seen
that this was soon realized and put right
This disadvantage in the organiza-
tion was accentuated by the fact that the two armies were operating on
separate axes on either side of the Apennine Range which prevented transfer
of vehicles from east to west or west to east when this became necessary.
Some of the vehicle units arrived in the theatre imperfectly trained and,
during the whole campaign, the supply of R.A.O.C.
personnel allotted for
vehicle work was never sufficient.
Also a severe handicap was the allotment
to the force, as a theatre reserve, of vehicles which had suffered from long
storage in the open in North Africa without adequate preservation.
At a later date the vehicle companies were compelled to take in many
thousands of vehicles from formations being transferred from Italy to the
North-West European Front; the inspection repair and re-kitting of these
vehicles, which were of no value until this had been done,
imposed a
tremendous load on an already over-worked organization.
At the beginning
of the campaign, sub-units of the vehicle companies were phased into the
theatre in the wrong sequence; this seriously impeded progress.
In the early stages very few sites were found which could accommodate
a large number of vehicles; in consequence, vehicles had to be parked
unsystematically in small batches in town squares, side streets, sports stadiums
and orchards, making the operation of vehicle supply abnormally
com-
niicated
However, during the first few months of the campaign,
R.A.O.C
vehicle companies arrived from Sicily, Britain and from the Middle East
and set up base installations near the ports of Naples and Bari,
while
1 Vehicle Park (detached from 10 Vehicle Company) was sent forward under
the direct control of Eighth Army.
By Ist January,
1044 the
essential
frame-work of the organization had been installed and at that
date the
vehicles in R.A.O.C. charge totalled 950 "A" Vehicles, 1,250 "B" Vehicles
and 3,100 returned Vehicles.
210
The organization
was already
being severely tried and it had
necessary to augment the vehicle company strength by employing 150 italian
Air Force personnel as convoy drivers and to require the units of 10 Corps
to collect their own vehicles in the Naples area
A distinct weakness in the establishment was the lack of trained R. A.O.C.
personnel for the
handling
overcome by
the
heavy
vehicles;
assistanict
une
this
Tank
difficulty
was
provided drivers for
the
collection
Recovery Group
R.A.C.
of
A.F.Vs. from
the
which
found that there
was insufficient
Stan
docks.
It was
been evacuated to army and
corps
to deal
with vehicles
which had
collecting points as
such vehicles accumulated in
battle casualties ;
considerable quantities
and suffered
deal from exposure and pilferage.
a great
Another defect was
revealed when it was found
that
the
number of
cranes and crane drivers in the vehicle company establishment was inadequate
to deal with the large receipts of crated vehicles: moreover the
tractors
and trailers required to take these crated vehicles to the R.E.M.E assembly
unit did not exist.
It was necessary to make unofficial arrangements with
the Americans to overcome these difficulties.
In March, 1944, the D.O.S. decided to divorce the vehicle companies
from the A.O.Ds. completely and to merge them into one composite vehicle
company (later 38 Vehicle
Company R.A.O.C.) to serve the whole Force.
His main object in doing this was to have direct one-channel control from
Force Headquarters of vehicle
supply
throughout all vehicle parks; this
object was achieved by the reorganization.
By this time the, vehicle holdings had increased to 27,000 including
7,000 in crates.
In April more vehicle company personnel arrived from
North Africa.
As the operations progressed,
new "A"
and "R"
parks
were opened in forward areas and returned vehicle parks were installed to
deal with returned vehicles.
In June, when the Eighth Army advanced beyond Rome, the number
of vehicles issued and received from all parks
during that one
mion In
reached the immense figure of 64,000 ; by the end of the month 38 Vehicle
Company held a stock of 40,000 vehicles, of which 24,000 were fit and
16,000 unfit
Naples to Rome.
At this stage the headquarters of 38 Company moved from
Further reinforcements of vehicle company personnel now
arrived in
the theatre from the Middle East and from North Africa.
However,
the
load was such that these reinforcements were not sufficient and it was
necessary in order to keep the work going to borrow driver personnel from
wherever they could be obtained ; at one time 860 drivers were on loan
to the unit from Eighth Army.
At last it was realized that these improvizations, although invaluable,
were unsatisfactory and in the late autumn of 1944 a new unit known as
A.F.H.0. Driving Increment and consisting of seven officers and 400 O.Rs.
as formed and moved to Rome to operate as a component of H.O.
38 Vehicle Company.
In the summer of 1944 a base A.F.V. Kit Store had been formed in order
to stock all items 1A a base A F..itStore, to make issues to the
Armoured Renlacement Group (A.R.G.) and to complete the lite of tanks
67612
211
west It
WO 277/21.
28
