going forward. In November, 1944 this unit was renamed 38 "A" Vehicle
Kitting Increment and was moved forward to Pesaro.
Eventually detach-
ments of the kitting increments were established at Ancona, Rome, Naples
and Bisceglie.
During the first three months of 1945 advantage was taken of the winter
lull to overhaul the vehicle company
organization in preparation for the
spring offensive.
At this stage R.A.O.C. holdings
had risen to nearly
60,000 vehicles.
During January still more vehicle company units
arrived
from North Africa, existing parks were reinforced, new parks were opened
and convoy teams were formed.
The
main problem was
The
evacuation
rearwards of the considerable quantities of unfit vehicles which had accumu-
lated in the army area: however, transportaton resources were found to he
inadequate and these accumulations were never cleared.
In January, as the final step in the reorganization, two zone commanders
(Lieutenant-Colonels) were appointed under O.C. 38 Vehicle Company, each
controlling all vehicle groups and parks respectively north and south of
Rome.
During February and March, 1945, formations being transferred to
North-West Europe handed in large quantities of vehicles; for instance,
5th British Division and 1st Canadian Division alone returned some 3,000
vehicles to 13 Vehicle Park Foligno. By the end of March, the vehicle hold-
ings of 38 Vehicle Company had risen to 70,000 but, despite all the difficul-
ties recorded above, there was no breakdown in issue and the supply of
vehicles was successfully carried out right up to the 2nd May, 1945, when
the campaign ended.
THE SYSTEM OF RETURNING STORES AND VEHICLES TO THE BASE
In the early part of the campaign, rail wagons from
the forward areas
arrived at base filled with clothing,
engines and general stores, loaded
higgledy-piggledy into the trucks, and, in consequence, needlessly damaged.
It was evident that speed in clearing railheads had been allowed to override
every other consideration and that proper sorting in forward areas was not
being carried out.
REPAIRABLE ENGINE
ASSEMPT IRS
Prompt
aerion 1
was taken
to remedy this trouble
and an immediate
drive was made to insist on the efficient packing and
handling of repair-
able M.T.
engine assemblies, the essential requirement being to ensure that
each engine was securely packed in the chest in
which the
replacement
engine had been sent forward
Small carpenters' shops staffed by local
civilians were set up at all handling points,
where damaged chests were
repaired.
There was special urgency for the transmission of repairable
engines to base workshops, and Movement
Control
therefore provided a
" green arrow" system by which at every point in transit these consignments
were given priority in movement.
The whole activity of returned stores was investigated and overhauled.
O.Os. at railheads were instructed to
Tesse the R.S.D. task by making up
complete wan loads, instrueted so ces the Re commodities or dlasses
212
of stores, e., clothing, general store of one class, etc.
Units were instructed
in what categories to pack and label their returned stores and to send clothing
and general stores to the formate ed a dump, warlike stores (including
M.T.) to their formation
ordnance field park.
THE RETURN OF NON-SERVICEABLE "A" AND "B" VEHICLES
At the outset of the war, the only provision made for dealing with
returned vehicles in the war theatres was a small returned vehicles section
in each vehicle company.
This did not provide any means of systematically
collecting and evacuating broken down and abandoned vehicles.
In the spring of 1944, an effort to solve this problem was made by forming
corps, and army, collecting points (C.C.Ps. and A.C.Ps.) staffed by joint
R.Á.O.C.-R.E.M.E.
sections.
The
orders were to establish C.C.Ps.
and
A.C.Ps. near railway stations to facilitate subsequent evacuation to the base
when rail facilities became available.
At that period many railway stations
were still out of action from bombing.
Largely through lack of resources of all kinds and partly through mistakes
and inefficiency, it took many months to achieve even a measure of success.
Collecting points were in some cases badly sited, e.g.,
the A.C.P. at Jesi
was located in summer on ground which in winter became a bog.
The
need for separate A.C.Ps. for "A" vehicles and "B" vehicles respectively,
was not foreseen.
There was not enough equipment, cranes and towing
vehicles, to cope with the large numbers of otherwise immovable vehicles.
Many "A" vehicles arrived at collecting points or R.V.Ps. complete
with ammunition, even, on occasions, with their guns loaded.
There was an acute shortage of railway flats and months passed before
a satisfactory allocation for a methodical programme of backloading was
antannen.
As the armies advanced, A.C.Ps. were normally just left behind to be
taken over by 38 Vehicle Company:
Eventually the whole activity was brought under organized control and
a complete system evolved which defined the responsibilities of corps, armies
and L. of C., and the respective functions of R.A.O.C. and R.E.M.E.
Ancillary Ordnance Services Forward (Mobile) Units
MOBILE LAUNDRY AND BATH UNITS (M.L.B.US.)
M.L.B.Us., normally allotted to corps troops on the basis of one for
each division and one for corps troops, were employed in the forward areas
to provide hot baths for the troops, to give them a clean change of clothes
and to launder the soiled clothing handed in.
In general they operated very efficiently and more often than not worked
double shifts in order to meet the heavy demands made on them.
They
were very popular with the troops and contributed to morale as well as to.
hygiene.
By liaison with the Army Kinematograph Services and N.A.A.F.I.
it was frequently arranged in Italy to site a mobile canteen and a cinema
alongside the M.L. Bran ed is combining welfare and entertainment with the
relaxation of a bath and clean clothes.
213
67612
H2
WO 277/21
28
