carly period of inadequate American production of No. 19 radio sets, over
5,000 of the latter were imported from the United Kingdom, under B.A.S
(Ordnance) arrangements.
It should, however, be emphasized that B.A.S.
Lend-Lease.
(Ordnance) were not concerned with financial adjustments involved in reverse
A War Office ruling to this effect was obtained in connection
with the importation and eventual disposal of a number of British A.A. guns
involved in the defence of the Panama Canal.
Caribbean Supplies
B.A.S. (Ordnance) were instructed by War Office in 1943 to receive all
demands for uncontrolled ordnance stores from Bermuda and North and
South Caribbean Commands and to arrange supply from North America
without further reference to War Office.
Supply methods varied with the nature of the stores: these methods, in
order of importance, were as follows: —
(a) By demand on National Defence Headquarters (N.D.H.Q.); Canada,
on recoverable invoices payable by British Army Pay Office in
North America.
(b) Local purchase in Canada with funds supplied by United Kingdom
Payments Office in Ottawa.
(c) Mutual Aid arrangements.
(d) Lend-Lease arrangements.
(e) Cash purchase by B.S.M. in U.S.A.
(A) Local reproduction in the case of Army Forms, stationery, etc.
(g) Transmission of the demand to the United Kingdom as a last resort.
It was originally intended that there should be centralized control of these
issues from Washington, but since the majority of stores had to be obtained
from Canada, it was found better to arrange central control from B.A.S.
(Ordnance), Ottawa.
One of the main reasons for the use of N.D.H.Q. as
the main source of supply was the fact that Caribbean garrisons included a
large number of Canadian troops who, by agreement, demanded through
British channels.
106
West 17
WO 277/21
18
CHAPTER VII
CENTRAL PROVISION OFFICE-EASTERN GROUP
Background to Eastern Group Provision
During 1940, the threat of war spreading eastwards caused rapidly increasing
war efforts in the Dominions, India and the Eastern Colonies.
The pro-
duction of war material of ordnance supply in the United Kingdom
was
already strained to the utmost and was functioning under increasing diffi-
culties.
The problem of equipping rapidly expanding forces in the East,
• building up reserves and supporting the campaign in the Middle East, coupled
with the problem of an ever-increasing shortage of shipping, gave rise to a
serious situation.
As a result, an unco-ordinated system grew up whereby the Dominions,
India and the Far Eastern Colonies demanded from and supplied to each
other both raw materials and complete equipments.
This exchange took
little account of the raw material distribution throughout the region, the
relative productive capacities of the countries concerned, or their priority
of requirements on a long-term basis as between user forces.
The authorities in the United Kingdom were already looking more to
India as a source of supply of a wide range of commodities suitable for
use in the Middle East (M.E.), and they became increasingly anxious
the situation deteriorated.
The need for immediate co-ordinating action was
abundantly clear, since India herself was in urgent need of a very large
proportion of her own resources.
At the instigation of the Viceroy, a conference was held in New Delhi
at the end of 1940, attended by representatives of the Ministry of Supply,
and the General Staff from the United Kingdom, and from the Dominions,
to discuss ways and means for co-ordinating the requirements of the eastern
group of Empire countries.
The conference considered the possibility of
pooling the manufacturing and the raw material resources of the region
and creating a properly controlled system of interchange supply for the
maximum common benefit.
At this conference it was decided to set up in India, a
permanent
council of representatives from all the countries participating in the scheme,
under the chairmanship of a United Kingdom representative.
The council
was to be a civilian body acting broadly in a similar capacity to the
Ministry of Supply in London, and in constant communication with that
organization.
The initial plan was that its members should explore with their respective
Governments the productive capacities of their country, receive from their
Governments information regarding surplus productive capacity
for distribution to other participating
Governments, and co-ordinate this
exchange on a properly organized basis.
Representatives were appointed from the United Kingdom, India, South
Africa, Australia and New Zealand.
1941.
They arrived in New Delhi early in
A military member representing the C.I.G.S. in the United Kingdom
was also appointed by the War Office.
Accommodation was allotted to these
officers in New Delhi, close to the premises occupied by the Indian Supply
Department and conveniently near the administrative centre of the Govern-
ment of India.
