and when the Advanced Base was established in Antwerp it was re-scaled to
supply M.T. spares and assemblies to the advanced base workshops in that
being
used in this role throughout the rest of the campaign.
Forward Trailer Section was scaled to cover the First Canadian Corps and
was initially used as planned. Later, it was taken over by D.D.O.S. Canadian
Army, who used it as an army troops
ordnance field park.
17 Forward
Trailer Section was scaled to supply 8 Corps in its original form (Guards
Armoured and 11 Armoured Divisions-Sherman Tanks-
-and 15 (S) Infantry
Division, it was used virtually as planned since its original scaling made it
useful as an emergency holding for Second Army.
The campaign showed that forward trailer sections more than justified
their existence.
The chief handicaps in their employment were the lack of
prime movers for the trailers and their very small ground clearance.
factors caused them to become " occasionally movable " rather than
These
" semi-
mobile".
ARRANGEMENTS FOR MAINTENANCE IN THE BEACH-HEAD
The types of problem to be faced in planning for maintenance over beaches
are clearly revealed by the 21 Army Group Ordnance Plan and the Second
Army Ordnance Appreciation (Appendices 5 and 6).
Stores maintenance was to be effected first by L.Rs. and then by B.M.Ps.
The principal difficulty encountered was that planning weights were for a
long time unobtainable and not always accurate.
This was to a large extent
inevitable, since every change in equipment or order of battle necessitated
a re-scaling of L.Rs. and B.M.Ps.
Spare parts for new equipments could
be added but it was not always practicable to remove redundant stores from
packed cases.
Nevertheless, it caused a major reorganization in the shipping
programme at a dangerously late stage of planning.
B.M.Ps. were originally scaled on a formation basis. This was theoretically
sound if such formations would be operating independently over a widely
scattered area. As, however, they were to operate together in a comparatively
limited beach-head it was decided, very late in the day, to change the com-
position of B.M.Ps. to a vehicle pack and equipment pack basis.
This made
it unnecessary to ship the full number of B.M.Ps. in order to cover the range
of items required.
At an early stage in planning, it was appreciated that
neither the ordnance beach detachments nor the ordnance maintenance com-
panies would be able to handle B.M.Ps.
It was therefore decided to use
17 A.O.D. for this purpose and eventually it was found necessary to use the
stores companies of 16 Advanced Ordnance Depot also to handle the load.
Other problems which had to be dealt with in the planning stage were: —
(a) Arrangements for the provision of drivers to clear reserve vehicles
from ships to vehicle parks.
(b) Methods of regulating the priority of indents.
(c) The list of theatre controlled stores and procedure for demanding
(a) Mend of shipping unaccompanied war equipment, and its receipt
in the beach-head.
(e) Arrangements for the collection and return to the United Kingdom
on landing craft of stretchers, blankets and inflatable lifebelts.
224
U.S. PIPE LINI
VAD.
MEDICAl
BUFFER
BAD.
R•FA •F
MED
R-E•M
To face Page 224
MAP 5
CON
iRFTS
WO 277/21
18
CAEN
