Since Simla was so isolated and it was essential to maintain close contact
with Supply Directorates, Ordnance branches were created at Delhi, Calcutta,
Bombay and Karachi.
Eventually liaison officers were also appointed to work
with C.P.O. Depot Dehu and D.D.O.S.(P) M.E. in Cairo.
These links proved
invaluable and saved much time and correspondence.
W.O. Stock Control
In February, 1944, the War Office decided that the Middle East and
C.P.O. should report monthly the stocks held of certain items of Indian
production; control by War Office of the issue of these items would achieve
the best use of the available stock.
After considerable investigation, including the visit of a special mission
to Simla, a procedure was evolved by which the Middle East demanded
Many factors
affected the selection of the range of items, e.g. the fact that the Burma
campaign was causing the diversion of more and more Indian production
for use in the campaign, and the fact that Australian and South African
production was being stimulated and both these countries were maintaining
their own armed forces.
In practice difficulties arose from the fact that, at the same time, War
Office would order issues to any theatre of the same stocks from which
Middle East were being supplied direct: C.P.O. had no knowledge of the
issue instructions which might be in transit from the War Office.
However, on the whole the system did produce the required result and
War Office were able to utilize C.P.O. stocks, some of which were excessive
and dormant, to good advantage.
These excessive stocks had arisen partly
owing to the guess provision which had been made at the start, and partly
from over provision of certain items which India found it very easy to produce
in the early stages, e.g. jute goods.
India's Ban on C.P.O. Orders
During the autumn of 1944 the Government of India decided that war
production of all stores and, in particular clothing, was restricting the quanti-
ties available to the civil population to such a degree that their welfare was
being reduced to too low a level.
C.P.O.'s outstanding orders without warning.
The Government therefore cancelled all
Considerable negotiation then
ensued which produced agreement that these orders would not be cancelled
but would be suspended for the time being and that new orders would not be
placed without the approval of the Government of India.
At this stage, the Government of India prepared a list of stores (termed
"India only items"), for which no demands could be accepted by
from the C.P.O.
India
This range of items was found to include nearly all the
items which were in short supply in the United Kingdom and which War
Office relied on C.P.O. for supply, such as tentage,
clothing and many
other items vital for the Italian campaign and to the immense transit camp
which by then M.E. had become.
Accordingly, the Controller General
of Army Provision (C.G.A.P.) and D.D.O.S. went to London in September,
1944, to discuss the situation with government departments at the same
118
time as a Government of India mission (the " Hydari" Mission) were pre-
senting their case.
As a result, the " India only" list was reduced to a
comparatively few items, and permission was given for production to con-
tinue on all outstanding C.P.O. orders, other than these items.
But the
thin edge of the wedge had been inserted, and after this, production for the
C.P.O. in India quite definitely took second place.
It is true to say, however, that at this stage of the war, India was main--
taining the Burma campaign from her own production of all ordnance stores
other than warlike stores ; she could not be blamed, therefore, if indigenous
production of certain items was insufficient to meet the demands of other
theatres.
Production in other Eastern Group Countries
The crisis had been referred to other producing Eastern Group coun-
tries with requests that they would attempt to fill the gap wherever possible.
In order to stimulate production and place additional orders, a combined
C.P.O. and M.O.S.M. party headed by C.G.A.P. visited Australia and South
Africa.
Both these countries were producing good quality stores, but over
a very restricted range, and both agreed to increase this range considerably.
However, by this time Australia was feeling the effects of the Pacific war
and put a temporary ban on all C.P.O. orders for warlike stores.
This
was not serious since the range and quantity of items produced by Australia
were comparatively small.
Ordnance Depot, Dehu
Administrative difficulty arose from the fact that, although C.P.O. had
the sole right to order issues from the stocks at Dehu, administration
the depot was the responsibility of D.O.S. India.
Originally this depot had
been too rapidly stocked without
proper accounting action.
the stock returns furnished to C.P.O. seldom represented the true physical
stocks at Dehu. It was not until the C.O.S.
War Office visited India in
1944 and inspected this depot that the accounting arrangements were put
on a proper footing.
C.P.O.'s stocks in Dehu and other depots were
diverted by G.H.Q. India to meet India's own requirements.
This of course
resulted in failure to satisfy issue instructions sent by C.P.O. on the basis
of previous stock returns.
7/17
WO 277/21
18
By the middle of 1945 it became clear that C.P.O. should close down.
A list of stores which War Office wished to retain was prepared and
a plan made to hold these in Dehu and surrender the balance of C.P.O.
holdings in India to D.O.S. India.
Similar action was taken with holdings
in other Eastern Group Countries. A complete review of "dues in" was
made which resulted in wholesale cancellations.
The Dominion officers went first, followed by the remainder of the
R.A.O.C. staff, leaving the I.A.O.C. to close down the organization.
