to be traversed, these men, untrained in tank driving, succeeded in removing
the whole of the tanks concerned to Sidi Barrani, with practically no serious
casualties.
The tanks were then taken to the base on R.A.S.C. transporters.
Subsequently, the gun tractors and trailers were taken over by the R.A.S.C.
and formed into an R.A.S.C. transport company.
In the
case of "B"
vehicles, the strength of the R.A.O.C. available, even with the assistance
of workshops, was quite inadequate to clear the numbers involved.
Accord-
ingly, a collecting point was set up on the Tobruk-Bardia road at the
point at which the Tobruk by-pass joined it, and R.A.O.C. and workshop
drivers were employed using all available "B" vehicles in their possession
to tow the derelicts from the Tobruk area to this point.
Here they were
cleared to the Halfaya area by the simple expedient of stopping every three-
ton or larger lorry that was going eastward and making it tow a derelict
vehicle manned by drivers obtained from parties of stragglers or from any
other available source.
This meant that although much additional damage
was undoubtedly done to vehicles, between
1,500 and 1,600 were cleared
within a week from the Tobruk area.
The "B" vehicles left behind were
only fit to be broken down for their component parts and in the next two
or three months very many of them were so treated.
Every vehicle sent
down the L. of C. was loaded with valuable stores from 500 A.O.D., so that
in the event of the fall of Tobruk, as then seemed likely, as little equipment
as possible would fall into the enemy's hands.
R.A.O.C. Stores Convoy Unit Expanded
In the event, however, the enemy did not capture Tobruk at this stage,
and the partial evacuation of stores had unfortunately reduced to a low level
the A.O.D.'s ability to serve the troops.
Further, owing to the difficulty of
transporting rations and water to the town, the strength of the depot personnel
had been arbitrarily reduced to little over 100, a number quite inadequate
to maintain an efficient service.
ceased to exist
Furthermore, the air delivery service almost
Therefore, the only method by which a really speedy
delivery of urgently needed stores could be maintained was to increase the
capacity of the R.A.O.C. stores convoy unit.
This was done by basing it
upon Mersa Matruh instead of on the base and arranging with Movements
for special through trucks to be despatched daily by rail to Mersa Matruh.
Forward of Mersa Matruh the unit was organized to run a daily service which
for individual jobs.
enabled a greater quantity of stores to be carried but allowed fewer lorries
Industrial gas was still in short supply and arrangements
were, therefore, made for a quantity to be sent forward daily by means of this
Though this reorganization increased somewhat the total time from
the base to the units, the increased capacity made the sacrifice worth while.
Preparations for Renewed British Offensive
In March, 1942,
beyond were ordered.
preparations for a further advance to Benghazi and
was in process of extension at El Adem.
The railway had been extended to Fort Capuzzo and
Capuzzo but it was not possible to bring forward the stocks at Mischeifa.
A new railhead was opened at Fort
fresh forward base was built up at El Adem which was staffed by still further
denuding base installations and the L. of C.
reorganization of the R.A.O.C. field parks
At the same time, an extensive
became necessary in order to
176
conform to a reorganization of workshops which increased the size of the
brigade workshops, eliminated the divisional workshops as such, and replaced
them by armoured or infantry troops workshops.
The workshops' reorganiza.
tion provided also for the formation of army workshops to carry out 3rd line
repairs.
Build up of Forward Reserves of Ammunition and Stores
This reorganization was substantially completed and all available units
deployed by the middle of April.
Meanwhile, a number of forward reserve
dumps (originally called "boxes") had been prepared on the frontier between
Egypt and Libya, each stocked with ammunition and a small quantity of
selected ordnance stores.
Maintenance personnel had to be provided by re-
ducing the strength of certain forward ammunition detachments.
Forward Reserves of Vehicles
The army vehicle holding park was busily occupied in receiving and issuing
replacement vehicles and guns, and it was here that the system of utilizing
drivers from base reinforcement camps to deliver vehicles to the Army showed
its weak points.
The drivers had no personal or unit interest in the vehicles
they were delivering, and appeared to be careless in driving and maintenance,
or inadequately trained.
It was not uncommon to find 20 per cent. of the
vehicles reaching the vehicle park unfit for issue and 5 per cent. requiring
workshop attention.
This created a heavy load for vehicle holding park, for
it was necessary to give every vehicle received-and the numbers ran into
hundreds—a thorough servicing.-
anti-tank guns arrived to replace the existing 2-pounders.
In the middle of May the first 6-pounder
Unfortunately, the
enemy attack on 27th May took place when only a very few of these
6-pounders had been distributed and units who had received them had
scarcely had time to acquaint themselves with the new weapon.
R.A.O.C. Control Posts
During earlier periods of movement, the R.A.O.C. had experienced great
difficulties in finding the units to whom they were required to deliver vehicles
or stores, since under desert conditions notifications of moves took some time
to reach R.A.O.C. units in the rear.
A series of R.A.O.C. road control posts
was, therefore, set up along the L. of C. tee positions of which were made
known to the ordnance representatives at district and formations and to com-
manders of workshops.
Every R.A.O.C. unit changing its position was re-
quired to send particulars of its new site to the nearest road control post,
A.D..S. doing art slars fo its new sina to tho
The installation of these
posts proved of the greatest possible value during the retreat to Bl Alamein,
which took place shortly afterwards.
Recovery and Salvage of Derelict Vehicles and Equipment
At this time there was no satisfactory organization to dispose of unservice-
able and damaged of das not vehicles which were beyond the repair capacity
of formations workshops.
As a result many such vehicles had been lost or
unnecescarily "cannibalisad and the lite he the whirles misappranciated
Accordingly, a small vited" and to hold unserviceable "B" vehicles was
improvised and staffed by personnel from 500 A.O.D.
This was located near
177
WOs947/77
WO 277/21
28
