of C.P.O. in regard to stores urgently required by himself.
A system of veto
developed so that even if C.P.O. knew that requisitions
had been placed
on India, that by no means implied final acceptance of the order.
The matter inevitably went further. Driven by their own crises, participat-
ing countries throughout the Group began to invoke the right to possess any
stores destined for C.P.O. but not actually despatched.
These matters are mentioned as illustrating the difficulties under which
C.P.O. (Ordnance) worked.
One example of the uncertainty of supply must be quoted for the informa-
tion of those organizing any scheme of this kind in the future.
It was found
that several participating countries undertook to produce
from
components which they themselves imported from
other participants or
from some outside source.
Australia would undertake
to supply
technical apparatus built from components obtained from America.
C.P.O.
and the Council did not know of this until, with the breaking of the Pacific
supply route, Australia could no longer continue production of the main
article and had to cancel the contract.
Shipping Problems
As the world shortage of shipping became increasingly
imperative to regulate cargoes and to economize transport of war material in
every practicable way.
Consequently, C.P.O. was called upon in 1942 to
formulate monthly shipping forecasts two months ahead in regard to tonnages
for export to every theatre or member of the Group from every participat-
ing country. In addition, it became necessary to organize sea routes and ports
of call strictly in accordance with the most economical use of shipping and
the essential movement of war material.
C.P.O. was asked to give con-
signees forecasts of sailing and discharge ports in the whole Group.
This was a problem so beset. with unknown factors as to be virtually
insoluble.
Local provision officers did their best to supply the information
but the domestic policies in each Dominion varied so much and at such
short notice that forecasts were
frequently useless.
For example,
the
Australian local officer had to say whether stores for Mombasa would leave
irom Sydney, Perth or Adelaide three months later, or whether stores for.
Durban or Suez, Bombay or Calcutta would leave from these or some other
ports.
Each local office in the Group was making similar guesses.
Every-
body concerned worked at the problem conscientiously but with little success.
In India itself, forecasts given for exports from Bombay to Freemantle of
Cape Town brought ships to port expecting cargo, only to find that, owing
to an unforeseen hold up on the railway system, delivery to dock could not
he made and stores had bean diverted to the other side of the Continent
Though many discussions with movement and shipping
authorities took
place throughout the period, the production of really reliable shipping fore
casts remained a difficult problem.
C.P.O. eventually posted
its own
representative in the main Indian ports to assist in progressing urgent cargoes
neighbouring depots to
ships' hold.
These officers did most
valuable work and undoubtedly the flow of stores was greatly improved.
116
The forecasts referred to above were not restricted to total tonnages,
but had to indicate the broad categories of stores involved.
Thus a con-
signment for export from Bombay to Suez had to be broken down into
tonnages
of clothing, ammunition,
tentage,
barbed wire, sandbags,
cre
Arising from this, users were called upon to cable their own priorities of
requirements in order that cargoes could be organized to meet their needs.
By the summer of 1942, C.P.O. was giving issue orders on its stocks in
Indian (including Dehu) at approximately 18,000 tons a month.
Little though
this was in the face of huge requirements, stores accumulated at ports because
of the shipping situation.
At one stage C.P.O. urged the use of native
coastal craft to carry at least some of the urgently required material from
Karachi to Port Sudan.
For various reasons, however, this plea failed and
stores continued to pile up both at Dehu and at port for some considerable
ume.
Faulty documentation at source was also responsible for large accumula-
tions of unidentifiable stores at the quay-side.
Continual efforts were made to improve case and bale stencilling, case
construction, and documentation.
Throughout, C.P.O. received the greatest
assistance from D.D.O.S.(P) India.
Ministry of Supply Mission
In 1943 two important changes took place.
The first was in organization.
It had been apparent for some time that the Eastern Group Supply Council
(E.G.S.C.) was unnecessarily large and too unwieldy to undertake the prac-
tical work of supply.
The Ministry of Supply therefore took over all res-
ponsibility for the placing of orders on Eastern Group Countries, and though
the E.G.S.C. was not officially dissolved until later, a Ministry of Supply
Mission (M.O.S.M.) was sent out to take over its functions.
This mission
consisted of several officials of the M. of S. experienced in work of this
nature, with a chairman at the head, a secretary, three Supply Officers and
a few clerks. It had a definite Charter and worked strictly under the direc-
tion of a branch of M. of S. in London specially created for the purpose.
Briefly its function was to receive demands from C.P.O. Military branches,
locate production and place orders on E.G. Countries, and pay the bills.
Unfortunately at its inception, the mission attempted to exceed its func-
tions by interfering with the actual process of provision, and queried most
demands put forward.
Thus a great deal of time was wasted in fruitless®
explanations which merely created mistrust between both sides. It was some
months before this was put right.
Move to Simla
In the summer of 1943 the second change took place.
This was a change
of location for C.P.O. (E.G.).
G.H.Q. India, with the Burma war in progress,
had expanded in Delhi to such an extent, that several directorates including
C.P.O. and M.O.S.M. were moved to Simla.
The move had the grave dis-
advantage that intimate touch was lost with the India Supply Directorate in
Delhi and the branches of G.H.Q.
However there was the advantage that
at Simla the military branches of C.P.O. and M.O.S.M. were housed in the
same building ; this produced close relations and rapid decisions.
117
67612
wes
WO 277/21
18
E 2
