ICES
OUS
The change-over from peace to war provision in May, 1941, imposed two
heavy tasks on the small European staff concerned.
These were, firstly, the
stepping up of monthly maintenance figures in the light of the estimated
increased wastage under war conditions, which necessitated a complete review
of some 60,000 items (increased to 90,000 approximately by end January,
1942), and, secondly the change-over to monthly reviews in place of the peace-
time annual review, i.e. 12 times as many reviews.,
A considerable number of different types of stores were used for the same
purpose by each of the British,
Australian and Indian forces and this made
extra work for Ordnance installations which would not have been necessary
if types had been standard between the countries.
An example is clothing for
which the British, Australian and Indian tables of sizes were all different.
The main difficulty in the provision of M.T. spares was due to the large
number of makes and types of vehicles.
Spares for British vehicles came from
the United Kingdom, those for American vehicles from India, and the follow-
ing dificulties arose: -
(a) Units from India arrived without the majority of the maintenance
spares, which should have accompanied them.
(b) India stated she could supply Malaya's needs for spares of American
vehicles, but was unable to do so.
(c) In the case of certain American vehicles, types of the same make
manufactured in India, Australia, America, Canada, South Africa
and the United Kingdom each differed in detail, with the result that
certain components were not interchangeable.
Another difficulty was catering for the large number of Fords and
Chevrolets which were purchased locally.
Although the spare situation
became acute it took some months of negotiation before permission was
obtained to make use of the Singapore dollar exchange and it was not until
August, 1941, that some millions of dollars worth of Ford and Chevrolet
spares were purchased, through local dealers, from America.
was not in possession of scales for spares for American service or locally pur-
chased vehicles, with the result that full scales had to be prepared before
This lack of scales was also felt when orders were given to
form an ordnance field park at 48 hours' notice.
In this case, scales of M.T.
spares, armament spares, etc., had to be worked out and then revised according
to the availability of stock.
sponding increase in man-power resulted in great difficulties. In the base area
and to a limited extent up country, native labour, both clerical and manual,
was employed but sufficient staff was not available for adequte supervision.
Moreover, such reinforcements as arrived belonged to three different Ordnance
Corps-British, Indian and Australian each trained in different procedures
and methods of working.
the ordnance corps of the Empire became very evident.
Normally the Indian Ordnance Corps was allocated to ordnance installa-
tions in Corps Area, the Australians to the Johore area and the R.A.O.C.
manned
all Base installations, but even this plan did not assist smooth
working in the chain of supply.
290
By August, 1941, the garrison had increased by nearly 800 per cent.
to approximately 60,000. The B.O.D./B.A.D. to serve this force had expanded
from 5 officers and 60 other ranks to 9 officers and approximately 140 other
ranks R.A.O.C. plus 2 officers and approximately 50 other ranks of I.A.O.C.
and Australian Army Ordnance Corps (A.A.O.C.). Each R.A.O.C. reinforce-
ment arrived about six months after the need for increased staff had arisen,
with the result that a continuous strain was imposed on the existing staff.
With regard to staff there was also the vexed question of Asiatic clerks.
In Singapore, they had to be used to a considerable extent.
Unfortunately,
it was quite impossible to employ Asiatics of a sufficiently high standard
of education, owing to the low rate of wages offered.
Had there been a
better wage to attract the Eurasian, there would have been a more efficient
staff and one capable of greater efforts in time of stress, e.g., on the additional
work required in preparation of monthly reviews previously mentioned in
connection with provision.
away.
such stations could be effected only at the expense of security.
When the
large increases in reserves of garrison were despatched, at least a portion of the
necessary R.A.O.C. reinforcements should have been sent out at once in
order to deal with the influx of stores.
Ordnance Services during the Campaign
In the early hours of 8th December, 1941, Japanese forces landed at Kota
Bahru simultaneously with their declaration of war.
During the next two
days, two other columns crossed the frontier from Thailand.
plete command of sea and air, the enemy advanced rapidly, Penang being
evacuated by 17th December and Kuala Lumpur by mid-January. On 29th
January our forces crossed to the island of Singapore by the causeway,
which was blown up behind them.
On 8th February, the enemy launched
their final attack-against Singapore island-and on 15th February the G.O.C.
signed the order of capitulation.
During the latter part of January and
early February, the 18th Division arrived from the United Kingdom but it
was then too late to retrieve the position.
It will be seen from the above that a retreat of over 400 miles was carried
out in less than two months and, in these circumstances, it was impossible
for the ordnance services to function according to plan.
The 2nd and 3rd echelon ammunition was in I.A.O.C. hands at the
appointed places ready to hand over to the R.I.A.S.C. of 3rd Indian Corps
to be put on wheels, but it was reported that these latter units could not
carry out their legitimate function because the ammunition sections were
taken by the staff for other purposes. Daily expenditure returns of ammuni-
tion were never received at Singapore, but right from the start the Corps
signalled for trainload after trainload of all types of ammunition, normal
channels of replenishment being ignored.
This caused such a congestion
in the forward areas that many trainloads of ammunition had to be returned
to Singapore without being unloaded and, in some cases, with the truck.
seals unbroken ; it is true to say that there were trains passing cach other.
going in
ammunition.
opposite directions
and containing exactly
similar types of
WO 277/21
