During February, a re-organization had take place in the atrangements
for receipt of air freight.
Hitherto R.A.O.C.
detachments from ordnance
maintenance companies had been placed an ost latelds but this became
unnecessary on the formation of Air Composite Platoons, R.A.S.C., which
incorporated R.A.O.C. detachments.
After the crossing of the Rhine, R.A.O.C. was again faced with the
difficulties of distributing stores to widely dispersed units.
decided to ground the stocks of corps ordance sub-parks and other army
store-holding units in the rear areas.
From the transport thus released, an
ordnance convoy unit was formed to take forward stores from army road-
heads to corps and divisions.
Vehicles in the army reserve parks were also
formed into convoys driven by R.A.S.C. personnel.
To meet the commitment of providing amenities for the increasing number
of liberated ex-prisoners of war, displaced persons and internees of concen-
tration camps, some 700 tons of blankets and clothing were flown from the
Advanced Base to the forward areas.
Mobile laundry and bath units (includ-
ing a detachment for the concentration camp at Belsen) were also sent forward
to provide laundry and bathing facilities.
As a result of the experience gained
during the advance through France and Belgium, mobile laundry and bath
units were re-organized before Operation " Plunder" so that in addition to
their normal laundry work they could undertake to wash blankets.
As the
laundries attached to casualty clearing stations (C.C.Ss.) were found to be
not fully employed, they were withdrawn and attached to corps mobile laundry
and bath units to increase the corps laundry capacity.
Ordnance Services in Formations
ASSISTANT DIRECTORS OF ORDNANCE SERVICES
In general, A.Ds.O.S. carried out their duties very much in accordance
with the normal training and no lessons of outstanding novelty and importance
were learnt from their activities.
The major points are referred to below but
must be viewed against the background provided by the operational picture;
in particular, the switching of divisions from one corps to another, often at
very short notice, exercised a powerful influence on the practice adopted
Almost invariably A.Ds.O.S. of divisions were located at rear divisional
H.Q. Only in one instance (43 Division) was an A.D.O.S. appointed O.C.
Divisional Administration Area.
In this case, he retained the appointment
throughout the campaign.
In every case, the A.D.O.S. dump became something very much more
than a bulk-breaking point and it became essential for the A.D.O.S. to keep
" something up his sleeve".
In order to carry out their tasks satisfactorily, A.Ds.O.S. found that they
required more staff and transport than was provided on formation establish-
ments; this was particularly so in the case of A.D.O.S. corps troops and
A.D.O.S. army troops.
In the case of the latter, both Second Army and
Canadian Army found that the A.D.O.S. needed an ordnance field park to
deal with army troops.
Trailer Section were eventually used for the purpose.
59 Divisional Ordnance Field Park and 16 Forward
244
Usually the H.Q. and No. 2 section of the ordnance sub-park were placed
under the administrative command of the A.D.O.S. division.
ORDNANCE FIELD PARKS
The methods of handling field parks differed to some extent in each army
and even in each corps and division: the following was the most widely
adopted practice.
Divisional ordnance field parks were planned to consist of H.Q. and a
brigade section for each brigade of the division, each brigade section being
capable of operating independently with its brigade; only in isolated cases,
however, was it found necessary to detach a brigade section in support of
its brigade.
Usually the whole ordnance field park operated as one unit.
The retention of all sections with separate store holdings, therefore, proved
uneconomical and the general practice was to merge two sections and retain
one as a potential mobile unit.
This system effected very considerable
economies in holdings and enabled store-lorries to be released to carry extra
items or larger quantities of fast-moving items already held.
Although the basic structure of corps ordnance field parks comprising
H.Q., corps and army troops sub-park, and infantry ordnance sub-parks or
armoured ordnance sub-parks on the scale of one for each division, remained
unaltered, the following two fundamental changes in the method of operation
were made:-
(a) The 1 and 3 sections of ordnance sub-parks were amalgamated under
corps control to form a corps vehicle and controlled stores park
and a corps stores convoy unit.
The first of these held the corps
reserves of vehicles and controlled stores thus providing better
control and enabling a more economical use to be made of stocks.
(b) The corps stores convoy unit, which provided a much needed means
of getting priority stores to divisions, held the corps reserves of
engine assemblies, tracks, bogies, idler wheels and other essential
vehicle spares.
This holding under corps control, together with
means of getting stores rapidly forward proved invaluable, especially
When operations were fluid and divisional ordnance field parks and
sub-parks were constantly moving.
The H.Q. and 2 sections of
intantry and armoured ordnance sub-parks were put under opera-
tional command of their respective formations instead of remaining
as corps troops. By this means divisions had their sub-parks in the
divisional area and were able to locate them to the best advantage
to meet operational requirements.
This practice gave
closer
co-operation between A.D.O.S. division and O.C. ordnance sub-
park, which proved invaluable when the composition of corps kept
changing.
The R.E.M.E. decision to cease identifying any 3rd line workshops with
particular formations and to maintain them in static locations for as long as
possible relieved ordnance sub-parks of one of the main functions for which
they were planned, namely the supply of spares to R.E.M.E. 3rd line work-
Such workshops could no longer be based on a relevant ordnance
sub-park and stores for them were consigned from the advanced or home
245
67612
WO 277/21.
