War Reserve Schedules, compiled by the War Office, detailed the items
and quantities of stores to be held by B.O.Ds., A.O.Ds. and ordnance field
It was planned to hold these stores during peace in C.O.Ds. in the
United Kingdom and to ship them to the war theatre in accordance with
a shipping programme already prepared, but owing to tardy and inadequate
financial provision to meet the Army's requirements for war, a large pro-
portion of the war reserves envisaged by these schedules had still to be
manufactured when war was declared.
Another step, in anticipation of war, was taken at the time of the Munich
crisis in 1938 when a British military mission went to France and selected
sites and buildings for base administrative services including
those
for
B.O.Ds., B.O.Ws. and B.A.Ds.
The sites were selected in conjunction with
the French military authorities who agreed to their allocation to the B.E.F.
in the event of war.
During 1938 the R.A.O.C. carried out experiments designed to modernize
the existing system for the receipt, issue and accounting for ordnance stores.
These experiments resulted in the adoption of a completely new procedure
for R.A.O.C. in theatres of war,
but except at the C.O.D. Chilwell where
the new system had been put partially into use, there was not time to train
R.A.O.C. personnel generally in the new system until after the outbreak of
war.
For security reasons, the maintenance project and first key plan were
not made available, before mobilization, to the D.O.S. designate of the force
nor to the senior officers in his organization.
opportunity for the D.O.S. and his staff to study the ordnance problems of
the theatre until after they
had embarked.
When mobilization
was ordered, the various schemes were put into
operation.
The D.O.S. (Brigadier A. C. V. Gibson), P.O.M.E. (Brigadier
J. D. White), and personnel of the Ordnance Directorate assembled at
Aldershot on the 2nd and 3rd September, 1939.
The base and L. of C.
units assembled at ordnance depots at the same time and formation repre-
sentatives reported direct to their formation headquarters.
The personnel of the R.A.O.C. units were a mixture of regulars, T.A.,
ranks, 42 were either Supplementary Reservists or militia
So far
as the limited time between joining their units and going overseas permitted,
personnel were classified according to their abilities and apparent possibilities
and earmarked for specific work on arrival in France.
The D.O.S. and P.O.M.E. crossed to Cherbourg on 4th September and
arrived in the assembly area at Le Mans on the 5th.
The main body of
the Directorate and the personnel of No. 1 B.O.D., No. 2 B.O.W., Nos. 1
following week.
and 2 B.A.Ds. and of the A.O.D. and A.O.W. went to France during the
At Le Mans it was impossible to get the Directorate into proper shape
owing to the very inadequate office accommodation allotted, but opportunity
was taken to study and discuss the
maintenance project, to confer on
134
WO 277/21
Apart from the fact that the allotted offices were inadequate, long delay
occurred in the arrival of G.H.Q.
war
stationery.
equipment, office machinery and
bought.
Furniture had to be borrowed, typewriters hired and stationery
The system of despatching units' mobilization equipments to the theatre
did not work successfully in the case of G.H.Q. and headquarters of services,
whose equipments were in transit more than two weeks and then arrived
sadly depleted by pilfering.
The weaknesses in the system were that units'
mobilization equipments were loaded into store ships which discharged at a
different port from the unit personnel; equipments not loaded on their
allotted ship were left until spare cargo space could be found in later ships;
and the arrangements to prevent pilfering at the ports were inadequate.
Of
the sixteen large stationery boxes packed for the ordnance directorate, only
four arrived and these were filled with millboards.
All base ordnance units
experienced the same difficulties of delay and deficiencies.
On the 26th September, 1st Corps began its move from the assembly area
to its allotted sector on the Belgian frontier which it took over from the
French and was there joined soon afterwards by the 3rd Division of 2nd
Corps.
This had the immediate effect of lengthening the L. of C. by some
250 miles.
Simultaneously, G.H.Q., moved forward from Le Mans to the vicinity
of Arras, the various directorates of G.H.Q. being sited in a number of
villages.
The Ordnance Directorate was sited at Barly about ten miles
west by south of Arras where it remained until the retreat in May, 1940.
H.Q., L. of C. area was set up in Le Mans.
The long L. of C.
rendered imperative the appointment of a senior
ordnance officer to H.Q., L. of C. Area.
Accordingly, the D.O.S. detached
his deputy, who remained at Le Mans.
The lack of a D.D.O.S. at his H.Q.
proved a handicap to the D.O.S. as he was obliged to deal personally with
matters which would normally fall to a deputy, but it was not until April,
1940, that authority was given for the appointment of a D.D.O.S. at G.H.Q.
During September base sub-areas were formed in the vicinities of Nantes,
Brest, and Cherbourg and a medical base sub-area at Dieppe.
No. 1 B.O.D., No. 2 B.O.W. and No. 1 B.A.D. were sited in the Nantes
sub-area and No. 2 B.A.D. in the Brest. Sub-Area.
Some of the buildings
for the B.O.D. in Nantes selected by the Military Mission in agreement with
the French Authorities in 1938 were found to be occupied by departments
of the French government or by contractors engaged on work for that govern-
ment; others were dilapidated or lacking in structural strength.
the storage space required bo a Bring it
In addition,
for the maintenance of a fully
mechanised army had been seriously under-estimated.
Poor and insufficient
storage accommodation was therefore one of the serious problems confront-
ing the C.O.O., No. 1 B.O.D. on arrival in Nantes and it continued to be one
until the end.
135
