At first ships were loaded on a tactical basis but later they were loaded
according to capacity which meant that important stores
were often shut
out at the last moment.
The shipment of vehicles was particularly affected
by this practice and resulted in a serious shortage of load carrying, transport
in the early days of the campaign.
These difficulties slowed down the establishment of the two B.O.Ds. to
such an extent that the O.B.Ds. had to continue to maintain the troops for
a longer time than was at first intended ; it was not until three months had
gone by that they
were entirely relieved.
The chief demands in the early
days were for clothing, batteries and torches.
At Bougie the O.B.D. had
to refit two infantry battalions whose stores had been lost by enemy action
but this was exceptional, there being very little demand, at this stage, for
arms
and equipment.
The First Advance on Tunisia
By the 13th November, Advanced H.Q. First Army had been established
at Algiers and the fighting troops had begun a general
move
eastwards.
Tabarka was occupied by advanced troops of 36 Brigade on 15th November.
A few days later
contact with the enemy was made by 36 Brigade at Djebel
Abiod and by 11 Brigade Group in the Beja Area.
From this time until the end of December much bitter fighting took place
with considerable losses of vehicles and equipment.
On 24th December, 1942,
it was decided that any major attack on Tunis would have to be deferred
until the rainy season had ended.
Establishment of Ordnance Depots
During these two months ordnance installations were being established at
their various locations.
No. 1 B.O.D. was sited at Algiers.
Accommodation was difficult to obtain
owing to rival claims by the American and French troops.
Eventually storage
space
was secured in a large tobacco factory and two garages.
The sub-
depots were sited near each other in the centre of Algiers.
This allowed no
room for expansion but as the intention was to make Bone the main supply
base and eventually close the depot at Algiers this disadvantage was considered
unimportant
No. 3 B.O.D. was sited at Bone.
Storage accommodation here also was
dificult to obtain bus the R.A.O.C. succeeded in getting about 700,000 sg. ft.
of covered accommodation, mainly in tobacco storehouses.
The capacity of the ports of Algiers and Bone was not sufficient to cope
with the flow of stores at a rate to enable a quick build-up of stocks in the
theatre and use had to be made of the small ports of Philippeville and Bougic.
A subsidiary ordnance depot was opened at each of these ports, that at
Bougie was controlled by i B.O.D. Algiers and the depot at Philippeville by
and to the handlino hulky items such as clothing and accommodation
3 B.O.D., Bone.
The activities of these depots were restricted as far as
stores.
Establishment of Ammuniton Depots
Two B.A.Ds. were
Algiers, and No. 3 at Randon, near Bone.
opened in the theatre, No. 1, near Maison Carre,
Tor ' all tone was coon
No. 1 BA.D., although scaled
receiving much larger quantities of ammunition,
190
WO 277/2k
