Planning was at once begun for the new ordnance
store de
ammunition depots, the selection of sites, the range of stocks to
bo neid,
the areas of supply and the system of replenishment.
It was decided to form a base ammunition depot (16 B.A.D.) at Nola,
north of Mount Vesuvius and to set up 557 A.O.D. as the principal A.O.D.,
stocked with all classes of ordnance stores (clothing, general stores and war-
like stores) and located in the Naples-Salerno area.
By 15th January, 1944,
557 A.O.D. opened as an issuing depot for clothing and general stores and
on 15th February, 1944, for warlike stores.
The development of these and
other depots in the theatre is described in some detail later in this chapter.
Meanwhile, in addition to the formation and stocking of stores and
ammunition depots and vehicle parks, the various mobile and semi-mobile
R.A.O.C. field units-i.e., the ordnance field parks and stores convoy units,
the mobile laundry and bath units, the ordnance maintenance company and
the mobile ammunition and stores repair units— were actively taking up their
allotted tasks, some of them new units formed on new war establishments
being tried out in the field for the first time.
The ordnance field parks which initially operated in Italy were on the
same organization as that evolved and successfully operated in Middle East
Command; but, towards the end of 1943, a reorganization was effected with
the main objects of simplification and of economy in stores and man-power.
It cut out divisional sub-parks, an important economy, and reduced the
standard types of parks to three, viz., divisional, corps and army.
Swift
replenishment of field park stocks and a speedy, reliable delivery service
between the parks and the base depots were recognized as the indispensable
requirements to enable the new organization to operate with full efficiency.
The R.A.O.C. stores convoy units (S.C.Us.) originally a Middle East
innovation, were accordingly retained in the Ordnance Order of Battle for
Italy and their organization developed to provide the L. of C. S.C.U. to deliver
operationally urgent ordnance stores from base to L. of C. terminal, corps
S.C.Us. to deliver to corps troops and divisional field parks, and S.C.U. air
sections at airfields to handle urgent stores consigned by air.
For the first time in any war theatre a new R.A.O.C. field unit, the
ordnance maintenance company was employed in the Italian campaign.
This
was a composite unit, evolved from experience in earlier campaigns since
1939, which provided under one unit headquarters the numerous ordnance
sections required to staff roadheads and railheads and to handle the forward
reserves of ammunition and ordnance stores usually accumulated in the
Forward Maintenance Area (F.M.A.) for pending operations.
In essentials
the new unit proved a success, but weaknesses were soon noted, chiefly that
the numerous sections became too widely scattered for fully efficient control
by one commander and that they were overloaded with excessive quantities
of ammunition and stores.
Mobile laundry and bath units (M.L.B.Us.) had already operated with good
results in other theatres.
In Italy, by augmenting their war establishment
with civilians, facilities were provided in some laundries for the repair of
clothing in forward areas.
196
wes get 14
WO 277/21
28
