Formation of the Central Provision Office (C.P.O.)
In order to deal with the technical aspects of the problem, it was decided.
to set up a Central Military Office to work in conjunction with the
Supply Council.
This Military Provision Office was designed to deal with
the technical requirements of the participating countries, both collectively
and individually.
It was, in fact, to be regarded as a branch of the War
Office, working in relation to the Council in a similar way to the War Office
and the M. of S. at home.
The Provision Office was under the control of
the military member of the Council in his capacity of Controller General
of Army Provision, Eastern Group.
This officer maintained direct contact
with the Director General of Army Requirements in the War Office.
At an early stage, a representative section of the Air Ministry was added
to the Provision Office, in view of the particularly urgent specialized require-
ments of the Royal Air Force in India, Iraq and Egypt.
In addition, the Royal Navy appointed an officer in an advisory capacity
to sit on the Council and to advise the Provision Office on matters peculiar
to that service.
The Central Provision Office (Army) was divided into sections dealing
with matters peculiar to :-
Royal Engineers and Royal Corps of Signals.
Transportation.
Medical Services.
Ordnance.
Each of these services provided their own representative from the United
Kingdom initially.
The Director General took up temporary Headquarters together with
the Supply Council in New Delhi, at the end of March, 1941.
together with the Council, his Headquarters moved to Simla.
Inception of the Ordnance Branch C.P.O.
Early in 1941, a R.A.O.C. officer, representing the C.O.S. at the War
Office, was sent to New Delhi to take charge of the formation
of the
Ordnance Branch of the C.P.O.
His first task was to study the problem as it affected the D.O.S., India
at the time, since more information was available in India than elsewhere
in the Group.
India had made great efforts to meet the
needs of all
applicants as far as she could, and had available a considerable amount
of data which was to prove of infinite value to those charged with starting the
C.P.O.
The new organization was to be permanently located in India (the largest
producer within the Group) and inevitably would be very closely associated
with the procedures
peculiar to Indian administration.
It was therefore
decided that the C.P.Ô. Ordnance Branch should originate from the Indian
Provision Office, I.A.O.C.
From the outset, the new Deputy Director of
Ordnance Services (D.D.O.S. (C.P.O.)) maintained the closest collaboration
with the Deputy Director of Ordnance Services (Provision), (D.D.O.S. (P.))
He made a close study of the methods employed, the peculiarities of staff,
administrative questions, office layout and other matters upon which to base
the future branch.
The general directive issued in London was broadly to the effect that
the Ordnance branch should concentrate upon co-ordinating requirements
of the Group as a whole for clothing and general stores, and meeting demands
by cross supply based upon information and direction from the Supply
Council.
Special emphasis was, of course, placed upon the urgent opera-
tional needs of the mixed forces in the Middle East.
At first there was some confusion regarding the degree to which C.P.O.
should act as a fully fledged provision organization rather than merely a
co-ordinating office meeting demands from available supplies in each country
in the Group.
It was obvious at once that the development of production
could only be fostered by foreknowledge of the long term requirements of
the Group as a whole.
Thus C.P.O. immediately undertook the main task
of organizing itself into a provision office in the fullest sense.
The methods
employed are given in subsequent paragraphs.
The functions of the branch went far beyond provision in the sense of
obtaining stores for somebody else to issue.
They included the functions
of a huge issuing, progressing, and shipping organization, with centralized
control of the issue of all stores provided by itself, both in detail and in bulk.
In spite of the initial directive to concentrate upon clothing and general
stores, it was found that quite a large range of warlike stores was already
in India and other coúntries.
It was, therefore, necessary to
envisage the ultimate development of a full-scale provision organization,
working on lines similar to those operating in the United Kingdom, with
sections prepared to deal with the long-term requirements, both individual
and collective, of
all participating countries over the whole range of items
which are the normal responsibility of R.A.O.C.
This policy was to be amply justified when eventually more and more
commodities and equipments became the responsibility of the Ordnance
branch. When in 1942 the M. of S. in the United Kingdom delegated produc-
tion of certain major equipments to
Australia, India and South Africa,
progress of supply, distribution (on orders from United Kingdom) and subse-
quent maintenance also became a C.P.O. (Ordnance) responsibility.
The Ordnance branch even became responsible for such matters as the
provision of paper for printing maps and the provision and upkeep of type-
writers and all forms of office equipment not at that time within the province
Personnel for the Ordnance Branch
Arrangements were made with the participating Dominions and Colonies
to post ordnance officers to the C.P.O. in New Delhi, with the aim of forming
a combined representative team.
These officers from Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa, United Kingdom and India herself, assembled in New Delhi
during the late spring and early summer of 1941.
They arrived in the main, under a complete misapprehension as to their
duties, having for the most part been informed by their home organizations
that they were independent representatives appointed with a view to obtaining
WO 277/21:
18
