CB
Outs ‹0%
with four ammunition rail/roadhead sections and eight forward maintenance
ammunition sections had arrived in the theatre.
These units were deployed
to assist B.A.Ds., as the corps areas had not extended sufficiently to warrant
the use of all forward maintenance ammunition sections.
The need for co-ordinating theatre stocks became apparent and Second
Army took over control of all ammunition in the beach maintenance area.
Ammunition continued to pour over the beaches mainly in accordance with
a pre-arranged Second Army programme until 23rd June.
From 24th June
supply of ammunition was based on 21 Army Group Special Wastage Rates
for Second British Army and First Canadian Army weapons.
By early July
however it was possible to base supply on F.F.C. Intense Rates (expected
ammunition consumption in active operations) for all weapons in the theatre.
On 12th July, 1944, 12 B.A.D. arrived in Normandy and acted as an overflow
depot. No. 2 B.A.D. arrived in the theatre 21st July, 1944, and started to
receive ammunition on 4th August.
After 5th August, the quantities
ammunition sent into the theatre were related to the replenishment of actual
expenditure and the quantities required for reserves.
After the first few. days of the campaign, when they were at the disposal
of Second Army, the work of base ammunition depots, port ammunition
detachments and the field ammunition repair factories was controlled directly
by Ordnance H.Q. of 21 Army Group or by H.Q., L. of C. in the case of the
smaller units engaged in port and battlefield clearance.
The arrangements within 21 Army Group for the control of ammunition
were for the General Staff to notify their battle requirements of ammunition
to Q.(A.E.) who after finding out the stock position from Ordnance agreed
with the General Staff the quantities which should be made available for
firing. After General Staff and Q.(A.E.) had informed Army Commanders
of the agreed quantities, Ordnance were left to supply such quantities on
demand.
Ultimately this procedure was restricted to a list of some dozen
items, the remainder being issued on demand if available.
After the break-through from Falaise, the rapid advance of the troops
presented a difficult ammunition supply problem.
Supplies were maintained
by
using forward
maintenance
ammunition
sections
and
ammunition
rail/roadhead sections as stepping stones, but normally as soon as these
units had ammunition on the ground a further forward movement became
necessary.
Fortunately the expenditure of ammunition was slight from this
time until after the liberation of Brussels and Antwerp, and was almost
confined to ammunition for small arms and armoured fighting
vehicle
weapons, for which first line holdings
were sufficient to enable units to
carry on for over 300 miles without replenishment.
When a line was ultimately formed in North Belgium and Holland, it
was necessary to bring forward the larger storage units to cover mainten-
ance there and also for the Canadians' ascaults on the French Ports. Scheld
estuary and Walcheren.
to Brussels.
At the same time, 21 Army Group H.Q. moved
To cover the lag in the removal of stocks to the Advanced
Base. large antine of ammunition were fown into Polium direct from
1945.
the United Kingdom, but all rear stocks were moved forward by February,
258
A B.A.D. was temporarily sited near Boulogne for maintenance of the
Canadian Army, but by early 1945 the number of B.A.Ds. had settled down
to three, located and operating in Belgium.
The siting of large ammunition
dumps on roads in such a densely populated country was no
easy task.
The normal safety rules governing distances of dumps from habitations could
not be obeyed.
In February, a fourth B.A.D. was opened in Belgium to act
as a transit depot for the large quantities of ammunition being built up for
the crossing of the Rhine.
The planning for the crossing of the Rhine involved the accumulation,
in a comparatively short time, of the largest quantities of ammunition in
the campaign and the adoption of the policy that all Armies' demands were
to be met without restriction.
Ordnance H.Q.
were left very largely to
decide priorities between the respective Armies' demands.
In order to meet in time the demands from the Armies for special assault
items of the very latest type, special arrangements, both with the War Office
provision branch and Movement, were necessary.
Large quantities of smoke
generators were also used and, to meet demands, not only were special
shipments made and entrained direct from port to Army, but supplies were
obtained from U.S. Forces in the theatre.
The following system of provision and supply, subject to minor variations
to meet the needs of the moment, was carried on throughout the campaign,
during which over a million tons of ammunition was received in the theatre
and over 700,000 tons expended.
(a) Provision. Receipt on x day from War Office of notification of
main types of ammunition available for arrival in the theatre
x + 20 to x + 30.
(b) Shipping.
Bids made on x + 3 days for shipping tonnage required
for arrival x. + 20 to x
+ 30 from United Kingdom
(and later,
when channel ports were available, for arrival x + 60 to x + 90
from North America).
(c) Demands.
On x + 5 detailed breakdown for x + 20 to x + 30
sent to War Office for loading (later sent in two
parts, i.e.
before for loading in coasters and additionally for the subsequent
ten-day period for loading in deep draught ships).
Air freight
and /or daily express coaster service were used to obtain urgently
needed items at short notice.
(d) Arrival.• Ammunition arrived daily as demanded for x + 20 to
x + 30 and was moved directly into B.A.Ds.
(e) Army Maintenance.
Armies telephoned, daily at first and subse-
quently for each five-day period, the tonnage required and the
breakdown thereof.
Army Group bid for trains by starting points
as and when necessary, and telephoned issue orders for loading
to appropriate depots.
There were also standard training issues
which
were made monthly on an automatic basis against training
scales previously
laid down by General Staff; in addition very
numerous road issues, sometimes up to 3,000 tons per day,
demanded by Armies on Ordnance H.Q. and the necessary
issues
arranged.
259
West 17
WO 277/21
18
