damage in handling and through exposure to the weather, became unfit
for issue to the troops.
In addition there were numerous modifications to
compose nts, which were needed to correct fault in desi give manufacture
various natures of ammunition such as the
exchange of fuzes or other
or to alter the performance of the ammunition e.g. to give longer range.
All this work required the expert direction and close supervision of I.O.Os.
and ammunition examiners (A.Es.), but throughout the campaign in
Italy
the supply of these technical personnel never equalled the demand.
In
consequence only the higher priority tasks could be tackled
and heavy
arrears accumulated.
At its peak this accumulation amounted to as much as 20,000 tons,
at each depot, of various natures of ammunition needing inspection and repair,
including natures in short supply.
The safeguarding of B.A.D. stocks from sabotage and pilfering was
a constant problem and pilfering became an acute nuisance especially at
16 B.A.D.
Special security sections were utilized as
well as the normal
guards and patrols, but, although this resulted in an increase in the numbers
of thieves caught, it failed to reduce appreciably the high rate of pilferage.
ADVANCED AMMUNITION DEPOTS
After handing over their stocks to the two B.A.Ds., 3 and 501 A.A.Ds.,
the two units which, under Eighth Army command, had operated in Italy
from the outset of the campaign, moved forward.
501 A.A.D. moved in
January, 1944 to Teano and again, some two months later to Mignano,
where the unit, operating within five miles of enemy artillery, was shelled
almost daily.
At this time A.A.Ds. laid out their stocks on the standard system, then
in force for ammunition depots in the field, but early experience at Mignano
proved that an A.A.D. could not operate so far forward without serious
osses of ammunition, unless stocks were extensively dispersed in small stacks.
501 A.A.D. therefore evolved a new system, the main features of which
were a big reduction in the tonnage allowed in a stack and a big increase
in the safety distances between stacks.
Experience soon proved that these
simple measures were very effective
in minimizing damage from enemy
shelling and bombing, an obvious advantage which easily outweighed the
disadvantage of spreading out the stacks along much greater lengths of
It was decided at the same time that, having thus reduced explosive
risks by extended dispersion, it would be justifiable to depart from the
standard method of storing separately the components of B.L. gun ammuni-
tion
and Q.F. separate rounds—i.e. shells, fuzes
etc. in one stack and
cartridges in another.
These natures were accordingly stored in stacks of
complete rounds and the desirable object of speeding up the rates of issue
to units was achieved.
The above measures, which restricted stacks to 30
or less, and
extende doove measures, which restricted stacks to 30 wone henceforward
adopted by both the A.A.Ds. serving
Eighth Army as standard practice.
In open country such as in the Adriatic sector, it was found possible on
occasions to site Á.A.Ds. in fields, but as a general rule roads were used
and field sites avoided, owing to the risk of floods from the torrential rains.
202
By the late summer of 1944 both A. A.Ds. allotted to Eighth Army were
sited for a short period at Monte Marciano, north of Ancona, whence they
moved forward in pace with the advancing army, putting down ammunition
reserves
successfully
at Pesaro.
Viserba,
Cesena,
Ferrara.
During periods of movement the A.A.D.
Massa Lombarda
and.
stock was restricted to
main natures only, and amounted to a tonnage of between 8,000 and 13.000
TOMS
To preserve continuity of supply
3 and 501 A.A.Ds.
partnership one depot leap-frogging the
when there was a lull in operational
other.
During the
worked in
winter 1944-45
movement. S01
A.A.D.
Cesena
built up a stock of 30,000 tons comprising all natures of ammunition used
by Eighth Army.
21, 25 and 5 A.A.Ds.
were employed in addition to the
two A.A.Ds.
allotted to Eighth Army:
It was 21 A.A.D. which operated the supply of
ammunition in the Anzio beach-head, a task carried out
under
adverse
conditions and requiring much resolution and resource
Enemy
shell fire
was frequent and persistent and ammunition losses considerable in the early
days.
The
A.A.D.
Thererore
resorted to stacking in very small units
three or six tons, and dug the reserves of demolition explosives into the
reverse slopes
of
disused railway embankment.
Losses from enemy
action were thus reduced to relatively very small proportions and a satis-
factory supply was maintained to the troops.
Replenishment of 21 A.A.D.'s
stocks was effected from 16 B.A.D. by
despatch in 3-ton lorries, which were
conveyed to Anzio
port in L.C.Ts.
The laden lorries were driven direct
from L.C.Ts. to 21 A.A.D., which discharged them and then reloaded them
with ammunition empties, fired cartridge cases, etc., for return to the B.A.D.
When enemy air attacks had been suitably reduced, replenishment by L.C.Ts.
gave place to the
use of ordinary cargo vessels,
which discharged into
amphibious vehicles (DUKWs), which delivered the ammunition direct to the
A.A.D. sites
After the breakout from Anzio beach-head 21 A.A.D. cleared its ammuni-
tion stocks forward and on Ist September, 1944, moved to Monte S. Savino
near. Arezzo
to take over ammunition reserves formerly held there by
S01 A AD
Large quantities were under flood water, the unfortunate result
of selecting in summer a cite which was useless in the rainy season
this misfortune 250,000 25 pounder cartridges were damaged and temporarily
unfit for use.
21 A.A.D. tackled the repair problem and made a very large
percentage of these cartridges ready for issue in serviceable condition at a
time when there was an acute shortage of 25 pounder ammunition.
The role allotted to 25 A.A.D.
was exceptional.
After leaving Sicily
this unit was
ordered to Monte Marciano,
north of Ancona,
to torm a
static advanced depot holding tonnages more appropriate to a B.A.D. than
to an A.A.D.
Ammunition stocks were laid out on the standard system for ammunition
depots in the field and the tonnage stocked rose to the great figure of 80,000
tons, with a daily movement of 2,000 tons at the peak of activity, figures
which denoted a remarkable achievement by an A.A.D. augmented by only
three ordnance ammunition companies.
S A.A.D., the last A.A.D. from North Africa to join the allied armies
in Tialy, arrived during the summer of 1944, was sited at Colle Salvetti and
allotted to serve the British element of the U.S. Fifth Army, a role which
it carried out until hostilities ceased.
203
wester/it
WO 277/21
28
