SERVICES
The whole of the R.A.O.C. clothing group and the greater part ot the
barrack and hospital stores group in the Ordnance Depot at Marina Pinto
were destroyed by bombing in January, 1942, and a number of ordnance
personnel were buried under many thousands of tons of stone and debris.
All records were lost, but as the bulk of the stocks were well dispersed in
the island, the R.A.O.C. was able to maintain issues.
In March and April, 1942 the R.A.O.C. faced its heaviest losses when
the workshops at Ospizio were completely destroyed by continuous and
heavy bombing which lasted over a period of several days.
time 70 per cent. of the ordnance depot at Ospizio was destroyed, involving
considerable loss of general stores and camp equipment.
depot was also heavily damaged but happily there was little loss of stock.
Further heavy damage occurred in the Marina Pinto depot.
When the Maltese stone storehouses were bombed the stone roofs and
floors collapsed and the stone walls disintegrated.
an attack there was usually a vast heap of debris and rubble, perhaps
40 feet high, with bales, cases and loose articles buried underneath.
salving of these stores was a tremendous task, but owing to the precarious
shipping situation it had to be undertaken.
by the lack of transport for the removal of the debris.
It took five months
to dig to the bottom of the bombed clothing group storehouse in the Marina
A further difficulty was that roads to and from the main
ordnance installations were often blocked, so that even when depots escaped
damage, their operations were hindered.
A large amount of small arms ammunition was salved from ships sunk
in the harbours or off the coast of Malta, nearly half of which was found
Bomb disposal created an unexpected task for Ordnance.
R.A.O.C. was responsible for all bomb disposal on the island, other than
in the dockyard and on aerodromes.
The work was carried out by two
R.A.O.C. I.O.Os. who worked under
the direction and control of the
The latter received from the G.S. details of unexploded bombs,
and decided the priority of removal or destruction.
ploded bombs were located and disposed of by these two R.A.O.C. officers,*
each of whom was awarded the George Cross.
At the close of 1940, a
R.E. bomb disposal section arrived from the United Kingdom and this
allowed the I.O.Os. to resume their normal task of ammunition inspection
Ordnance Services under Siege
On the outbreak of war, the provision of ordnance stores was made in
good time for an ever-increasing supply to sustain the fortress.
ships arrived in May, 1940, with 5,000 tons of ordnance stores and ammuni-
Between the 3rd and 7th June, 1940, six ships carrying a further
9,000 tons of vital stores and ammunition reached Malta.
They also brought
80,000 coils of Dannert wire for the urgently required coastal defences.
The intervention of Italy, however, virtually closed the Mediterranean, and
merchant ships bringing stores and reinforcements had to be escorted in
convoys, thus slowing down the re-equipment of Malta.
* Majors R. L. Jones and W. M. Eastman.
Little local purchase could be made, since Malta produces and manu-
factures practically nothing.
For
example, tropical and hospital clothing
was made up locally under R.A.O.C:
control until the island's stocks of
textiles were exhausted.
sation took place.
When materials were exhausted, further improvi-
When the stocks of timber had all been used, bedsteads
were manufactured in R.A.O.C. workshops from surplus iron rod normally
used for reinforcing concrete, and over these frames canvas was stretched.
After a time, the stocks of canvas were exhausted.
It will be appreciated that the chief problem during the Malta siege
was the maintenance of supplies. It was not only a question of demanding
and getting the necessary stocks, but of ensuring that they were asked for
in the right proportions, so that the utmost use could be made of the
Competition between the services and the
A balance had to be struck between
the requirements of the services and of the Civil Government-it was
essential to ensure, as far as possible, that all requirements were assessed
Guns would be of no use without sufficient ammuni-
tion-guns and ammunition would still be of no use unless the personnel
manning them could be fed. An officer to co-ordinate supplies was appointed
on the personal staff of the Governor, to maintain the closest liaison and
to ensure that supplies, when received, were handed over to the three
services and the Civil Government in the proportion agreed.
Ordnance provision was, therefore, of great consequence for besieged
Thus from late 1941 the whole life of the island revolved around the
Unfortunately, the situation deteriorated.
From
January, 1942, onwards an increasing number of air attacks were made on
Some convoys, in par-
ticular those coming from the Middle East, were completely destroyed or
dispersed. Meanwhile, the island was being subjected to unprecedented air
attacks which resulted in still further aggravating the supply position.
The loss of ordnance stores in consequence of bombing of the depots and
destruction of convoys was the greatest difficulty with which the R.A.O.C.
had to contend, but it was certainly not the only one.
sinkings of ships, very few War Office and other technical publications (such
as vocabularies and parts lists) reached Malta.
Without these essential publi-
cations, the provision of stores, particularly of warlike stores, was made even
more difficult.
Cables were frequently sent from Malta requesting despatch by air of
urgently required warlike stores, but practically none was received by plane.
Such R.A.F. planes as were available were used in the main for carrying
spares and stores required to maintain in action Malta's own fighters and
Again, practically no warlike stores were received by submarine,
because the vessel engaged in ferrying during the intensive bombing period
(December, 1941-May, 1942) was used primarily for priority naval stores,
