The same channel was to be used in the reverse direction for returning
major mechanical transport (M.T.) assemblies for repair by base workshops
in the United Kingdom and for the return of empty industrial gas cylinders
for refilling.
In November, 1943, the target area for the assault was known and a plan
was in existence, based on the original conception of G.H.Q. Home Forces, of
an assault on a one corps front.
At this time, the Os.C. of thh forming
R.A.O.C. units were occupied in forming, training and mobilizing their units.
Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services (A.Ds.O.S.) of divisions and corps
troops were occupied in training their own units and in duties connected with
the mobilization of their formations.
H.Os., 21 Army Group and Second
Army were organizing themselves for the first stages of planning.
Towards the end of November, 1943, a study week was held at the
R.A.O.C.
Training
Establishment,
Leicester, which was attended by
lieutenant-colonels, R.A.O.C., and above in 21 Army Group.
all
This was the
first occasion on which the D.O.S. outlined the policy, as it was then visualized.
for the planning of the operation without, of course, describing the operational
plan.
In December, 1943, H.Q., Second Army had settled down to preliminary
planning and H.Q. 21 Army Group was engaged in planning an operation
known as "Rankin C".
This was to be put into action in the event of a Ger-
man collapse as a result of air bombardments.
It involved the despatch of an
expeditionary force to Germany, which would be based on the ports of
Rotterdam,
Antwerp
and
eventually
Hamburg.
Although operation
"Rankin C" did not take place, it did have a definite value as a planning
exercise, and the drill adopted for it was subsequently followed in planning
operation "Overlord".
In January, 1944, General Montgomery became Commander-in-Chief, and
shortly afterwards, the original plan was revised.
The target area remained
the same, but instead of one assault corps (three divisions) the assault was to
be made on a two corps (five divisions) front.
Planning for " Overlord" then began in detail and shortly afterwards an
outline Order of Battle was published (though it was subsequently frequently
amended) and "y" day-the target date for readiness for the operation-
was given as 31st May, 1944.
PREPARATION OF R.A.O.C. UNITS
Close liaison was maintained between 21 Army Group and War Office al
all times, on the question of mobilizing and training the R.A.O.C. field force
11n1LS.
Generally speaking, the corps and divisional units had already been
formed and were with their formations, and as ordnance beach detachments
returned from Italy they were attached to assault corps for further training
with their beach groups.
The G.H.Q. and Army units had to be formed,
mobilized and equipped from scratch.
Training was carried out in three parts; technical training for the job
which the units were to do, training in regimental administration and
" toughening" training.
In addition, it was necessary to give specialist training
to personnel of units which were to operate new types of equipment, such a
Army Industrial Gas Units and Mobile Laundries.
220
Several 21 Army Group
Ordnance
exercises were
important being Exercise
" Snowball"
arranged, the most
and Pxercise
" Transit "
Exercise
"Snowball" was carried out by 17 A.O.D. with actual Beach Maintenance
Packs (B.M.Ps.) and as a result invaluable information was gained on the
problem of handling B.M.Ps. in quantity.
" Transit" was designed to test the
operation of a S.T.S.D. and units of 12 Corps in Kent received all their stores
the C.O.Ds. via a S.T.S.D. set up at Ashford.
The main point
about these Exercises which must be stressed was the importance of handling
actual stores.
During the training period, stocks for field parks were being prepared.
some cases, scaling was started too late with the result that stores holding
units embarked without their full scale of stores.
SCALING AND ARRANGEMENIS FOR SHIPPING OF STORES AND EQUIPMENT
Before starting to estimate the quantity and types of stores and equipment
to be shipped into the theatre, it was essential to have a reasonably firm Order
of Battle for formations expected to be ashore in the early days.
Maintenance
for these formations was in the form of Brigade Landing Reserves carrying
30 days' requirements of spares for first echelon repairs and of clothing and
general stores, and by B.M.Ps. packed
on a divisional basis, containing a
further 30 days' stock including spares for second echelon repair.
Based on a broad picture of the number of divisions landing day by day,
estimates were made of the stores, vehicles and ammunitión required to main-
tain them.
These estimates were then converted into dead weight tonnages
(happily dead weight and not shipping (cubic). tonnages were used in all
bidding meetings and shipping allocations).
Meetings attended by all Services
and presided over by " Q'
were then held to allocate the available shipping
space between the various interests.
In the early stages, bidding was on a
day to day basis and bids invariably exceeded the available shipping space so
that cuts had to be accepted.
High priority was always given by the Staff to
ammunition,
but difficulty was found in obtaining an adequate tonnage for
A serious handicap was that L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. had to be included
complete or not at all, so that a cut of less than the weight of a complete
pack could not be accepted.
Further, all last-minute changes in the plan of
assault necessitated changes in the stores shipping programme and the switch-
ing of landing reserves from one beach to another, with
the
attendant
difficulties of remarking boxes.
In the later stages shipping space proved sufficient, but one outstanding
difficulty remained : namelv. the need to bid several weeks in advance of
sailing.
After the final tonnage allocation,
stores programmes had to be
revised and passed to War Office for issue instructions to be given to the
appropriate C.O.Ds.
The C.O.Ds. were responsible for making applications
for freight 26 days before sailing dates.
This could not be done until the
stores were packed.
Consequently, tonnage bids had in most cases to be
submitted some 50 days before the date when the stores would sail and.
in the case of pre-packed stores (such as L.Rs. and B.M.Ps.), bids were
required 37 days before.
The result was that bids could only be more or less.
intelligent guesses with the inevitable temptation to play safe by over-bidding-
67612
221
H*2
WO 277/21
28
