SER
D + 30—Arrival of base hospital laundry.
D + 30- Base laundry with wheeled equipment would take over from
L. of C. and army troops laundries.
D + 40- Arrival of a second base hospital laundry.
D + 60-One base hospital laundry working.
D + 70-Second base hospital laundry working.
It was estimated that two base hospital laundries would take the full load
a third would be kept in reserve to go forward to the Advanced Base.
The plan outlined above worked perfectly.
Thereafter, the laundry and
bath services for 21 Army Group grew rapidly as the organization expanded
and civilian facilities were taken over under R.A.O.C.
control.
Throughout the battles in North-West Europe bath service proved entirely
adequate.
INDUSTRIAL GAS UNITS
The estimated requirements of principal gases by the Services were :-
Oxygen—700,000 cu. ft. weekly.
Acetylene—350,000 cu. ft. weekly.
The principal users were R.E.M.E., R.E., Salvage, R.A.S.C. and R.A.M.C.
in that order.
It was known that the output of army industrial gas units (A.I.G.Us.)
was small compared with the requirements of the force, and that the base
industrial gas units (B.I.G.Us.) could not be operating much before D + 70,
The following plan was, therefore, decided upon: —
D to D + 40-The force would be supplied with gases from Main
War Office were prepared to ship the full requirements for
40 days without relying on the return of any empty cylinders.
the same time, the A.I.G.Us. would be sent over between D + 16
to D + 30 to cover urgent requirements such as medical oxygen,
and to bridge any gaps in the shipping.
D + 40 to D + 90- The B.I.G.Us. would be sent over to relieve the
cylinder turn-round to the United Kingdom,
the use of civilian gas factories
would be possible.
The shipment of cylinders from the United Kingdom and their subsequent
return went fairly well.
There was a shortage of acetylene for a period
of three weeks.
The A.I.G.Us. came over to time and were allotted two
to each Army.
They supplied approximately two-fifths of the armies' total
requirements. 1 B.I.G.U. came over at D +
60 and was sited in Caen.
At the break-out from the bridgehead, the A.I.G.Us. went ahead with
the armies.
order.
On reaching Rouen a large gas factory was found in running
A detachment of 1 B.I.G.U. was sent forward and the plant was
quickly put into operation.
of cylinders to and from the United Kingdom.
As a result it was possible to cancel shipments
The A.I.G.Us. found adequate civilian gas factories in Belgium in which
they were able to produce the full requirements of the force.
In December
No. 3 B.IG.U. was called over from the United Kingdom to take over
this commitment, War Office being notified that 2 B.I.G.U., which was
still in the United Kingdom, would not be required.
262
OFFICERS' SHOPS
The first officers' shop in the Advanced Base was opened at Brussels
in excellent premises.
The armies were supplied through mobile officers'
shops on the basis of one to each corps, but as they operated from vehicles
the range and quantity of the stores they held were necessarily limited.
Royal Canadian Ordnance Corps
The Royal Canadian Ordnance Corps operated in some respects rather
differently from the R.A.O.C.
Examples of these different methods are
given below.
The R.C.O.C. was seldom able to obtain sufficient R.C.A.S.C. transport.
They were, therefore, forced,
during the rapid advance through North-West
Europe, to devise various schemes for delivering stores.
All available load carrying vehicles held by
ordnance
field parks,
ordnance sub-parks, mobile laundries, etc., were unloaded and formed into
an improvised transport unit which carried out the function that otherwise
might have been expected of R.C.A.S.C.
After the break-out from the bridgehead, the replacement vehicles moving
forward from the base vehicle park were utilized as load carriers for ordnance
stores forward as far as the Army roadhead.
This transport was organized
by H.Q., 21 Army Group.
Canadian mobile laundry and mobile bath units came into the theatre with
their parent formations and operated with them throughout the campaign.
These units were not built to form any base organization.
21 Army Group was not able to cope with the original move of replace-
ment vehicles from the R.M.A. in Normandy to the advanced base in
Brussels.
To relieve this situation, the vehicle company from the Canadian
C.O.D. in the United Kingdom was brought into the theatre and undertook
the moving of 21 Army Group's vehicle stocks over the long L. of C.
This
was a vital contribution and a most important factor in enabling rapid
replacement of vehicles to be made during the early stages of the campaigns
in Belgium and Holland.
During Operation " Veritable", the Canadian Army roadhead was called
upon to undertake roadhead services for the largest build-up undertaken in
21 Army Group.
At this time, the greater part of Second British Army
was based on Canadian Army roadhead.
The load on this roadhead was increased not only by the additional
formations served,
but also by the large quantities of special equipment
required for the operation.
Thousands of tons of winter equipment such
as ice-bar tracks for tanks were handled at a time when the flow of other
stores was unusually heavy.
This work was accomplished by the Canadian
Army ros unusually heavy. additional assistance from 21 Army Coone
or Second Army.
This organization was able to provide, in addition to the
above-mentioned services, help to the D.Ds.O.S. of corps.
During emergen-
cies, hundtioned services, help to usands of tons of stores were delivered
forward to corps at a time when the transport resources of the corps were
strained to the limit moving ammunition and petrol.
263
we29u7t
17
WO 277/21
18
