By the end of May, 1940, the overall situation of the R.A.O.C. organiza-
tion and its commitments presented a picture of a harassed, disintegrating
organization, grappling with a confused, fast changing and contradictory
mass of commitments.
On 21st May the personnel of No. 2 B.O.D. Le Havre were ordered to
evacuate the depot and did so.
On 22nd May this order was countermanded
and instructions were given for the depot to be reopened and staffed.
This
depot was bombed on a number of occasions with considerable casualties
to labour parties at the docks but the evacuation of all stocks, approximately
14.000 tons, ordered on 27th May was in due course practically completed,
by despatch to England and to No. 1 B.O.D. Nantes.
The evacuation of
No. 1 B.O.W. Le Havre proceeded simultaneously.
All B.A.Ds. were still in operation, except that the special stocks at
No. 21 B.A.D. Fécamp had already been completely evacuated to England,
and No. 3 B.A.D. personnel had been prematurely ordered to leave.
B.A.D. was however very quickly restaffed and carried out much valuable
Armoured Division and various
simultaneously evacuating large quantities of ammunition for despatch to
No. 2 B.O.W. Nantes was still working at pressure and achieving a
The main B.E.F. was withdrawing on Dunkirk for evacuation, its main-
tenance having passed to War Office control when all communication with
The ordnance problems till the end of May therefore resolved itself into
the following main tasks:
maintain the supply of ordnance stores and ammunition and
workshop repair services
for 51st Division
and lst Armoured
initial war equipment to improvised fighting units-these
included the Beauman division, Vick-force and a variety of units
hastily formed into infantry battalions, R.A. batteries etc. from base
reinforcements, Pioneer Corps etc.
In most cases the available stocks
were inadequate to permit issue of more than the minimum essentials
and as a result the units were ill-equipped;
(c) to hold reserves of ordnance stores (selected items of operational im-
portance) and ammunition for despatch to the main B.E.F. in the
event of a relief column being able to get through. Orders to cancel
these reserves were given by Commander, L. of C. area on 29th May,
1940 ;
(d) the initial evacuation to England of selected surpluses of stores and
24th May, 1940,
Office ordered urgent
despatch to England of 50,000 rifles, 50,000 respirators and 12,500
(e) to evacuate all stocks from 2 B.O.D. Le Havre and 3 B.A.D. (Saint
Saens) and the B.O.W. Le Havre ; and
(D to transfer, progressively, to England all surplus R. A.O.C. personnel.
158
The chief difficulties were that many conflicting orders were given, in some
instances direct instructions being given by War Office to the B.O.Ds., instruc-
tions at variance with the current orders of the Commander, L. of C. area,
last minute cancellations of orders to form and equip new units, delays in com-
munications through the abnormal pressure on R. Signals and the uncertainty
of future policy.
The inevitable effect was to disrupt the normal system of
ordnance services, which became more and more a disorganized improvisation.
All R.A.O.C. units nevertheless carried on steadily with their allotted tasks
and worked very hard both to comply with issues to the troops and to ensure
the maximum possible evacuation of base stocks to England.
During this period, the A.O.D. personnel were set to the task of collecting
and evacuating camp equipment and accommodation stores, of which some
thousands of tons had been abandoned in reinforcement depots in the area
North of Rouen.
While the main flow of ordnance stores and ammunition was homeward
bound, there was at the same time considerable activity in receiving from
vehicles, weapons and certain natures of
ammunition, specially demanded for issue to the formations still fighting in
the desperate attempt to relieve the right flank of the B.E.F.
The 1st Armoured Division which began disembarkation on 20th May was
immediately committed piecemeal to battle.
By 29th May, it was reported
that the division had already suffered battle casualties to 50 per cent. of its
tanks, that it was hoped to recover the majority of them and to repair at least
half of the casualties. Plans had already been made to locate forward, some
six miles in front of Louviers, the mobile ordnance workshop and field park
sections, the latter holding a forward reserve of A.F.V. spares consisting of
2 per cent. spare tracks, sprockets, bogie wheels, springs, engines, gearboxes,
dynamos, starters, etc. Location of these units was later changed to Lisieux.
The supporting static advanced ordnance workshop and A.F.V. sub-depot,
holding a larger reserve of A.F.V. components and spares were located well to
During the period 20th May to 8th June, urgent consignments of A.F.V.
spares were received from England; in each instance they were collected by
at ship's side and delivered immediately to the field park sections.
and A.F.V. sub-depot for issue to the workshops already heavily engaged in
Despatch from England by air was arranged for
special
requirements and to obviate delay War Office agreed that demands for A.F.V.
spares could be teleprinted direct to War Office (O.S.5) by the A.D.O.S. Ist
At this time there were only two Scammel tank trans-
porters in the B.E.F., both with the Armoured Division. The speed with which
the division went into action after disembarkation and the heavy casualties
sustained in its first engagement made it impossible, in the time, to create and
operate an adequate servicing organization for recovery and repair of tanks,
and the supply of spare parts and components.
results achieved by the R.A.O.C. units concerned were very commendable,
but they were not destined to serve much purpose as the division was, by the
first week in June, considered to be no longer fit for offensive operations,
having so few fit tanks to fight with.
Recovery and repair of tanks continued,
however, up till 12th June, heavy repairs being put on rail for despatch to
WO 277/21
18
