10 Vehicle Company was formed out of 10 Vehicle Reception Depot
(V.R.D.) (recently taken over by R.A.O.C. from R.A.S.C.), reinforced by
the vehicle sections of 1 and 3 Corps Ordnance Field Parks.
All vehicles
which came forward by road, after having run 1,500 miles had to be put
through the advanced base workshops before they were fit for stock or issue
by 10 Vehicle Company.
For the remainder of the campaign, ammunition, stores and vehicles were
issued from these three installations in detail; detailed issues, as distinct
from bulk issues of stores, entailing separate packing and consignment of
individual units' demands.
The advance continued during January and early February, 1943, as far
as Mareth.
In the meantime at the Anglo-American conference at Casablanca
in January, it had been decided that the Eighth Army, when it crossed the
border into Tunisia, would come under the command of the C.-in-C. Allied
Forces in N. Africa and planning began for a joint assault on Tunis and
Bizerta by the First and Eighth British Armies and the U.S. Forces.
Maintenance of Eighth Army was, however, to continue from Middle East
Command which also undertook partial maintenance of the First Army as
soon as the two armies met.
The Final Advance into Tumisia
The Battle of the Mareth Line began on the 20th March, and after a week's
intensive fighting the enemy was driven back.
F.M.C. stocks were now despatched from the Delta for Sfax and Sousse
but the convoy had to wait for a short while at Tripoli until the two ports
were captured on the 10th and 12th April.
After the fall of the Mareth Line, ammunition, stores and vehicles and
reserves for the First Army, which had been built up by the ordnance installa-
tions in Tripoli, were brought forward, passed through the Gabes Gap and
dumped near Sfax.
By now the line was over 400 miles beyond Tripoli, and the L. of C.
from the Tripoli A.O.D.,
A.A.D. and vehicle company was in its turn
becoming long and difficult.
The R.A.O.C. vehicle and stores convey unit,
operating forward from Tripoli, experienced one of its busiest periods.
But
the flow of ammunition, stores, and vehicles was successfully maintained up
to the end of the N. African campaign, which came with the final surrender
of Rommel's Afrika Korps at Cape Bon on the 12th May,
1943.
Preparations to Invade Sicily and Italy
During the next reparanons, intensive preparations were made for the
invasion of Sinly and Toly, the plans which had been made several weeks
earlier provided for the maintenance of the, invasion fomes during the early
stages by Middle East Command.
Units were re-equipped, selected reserves for the assault and beach main-
tenanes were calanted and snarially packed and follow-up consignments to
stock the A.O.Ds. were got ready, alf of which threw an immense load oa
the base ordnance installations.
These installations had developed into a
highly efficient or anization which proved able,
with notable success. to
183
7/17
WO 277/2k.
