NESTRICTED
Part V deals with the planning of ordnance services for Operation
OVERLORD and the R.A.O.C. field activities in the subsequent campaign
in N.W. Europe.
The remaining parts cover ordnance services in India and the Far East
and in miscellaneous war theatres and overseas garrisons.
It will be seen therefore that the reader is given first a description of the
organizational development of the R.A.O.C. with an account of the methods
adopted, then a description of the more vital problems involved in war-time
provision and control of army equipment and ammunition and, thirdly, a
record of the way in which the organization and methods were actually applied
and operated in the various war theatres.
This arrangement will, it is hoped,
be found convenient and helpful for future reference and study.
RESTRICTED
west 17
WO 277/25
PART 1
THE EVOLUTION OF ORDNANCE SERVICES
CHAPTER I
EVOLUTION OF THE R.A.O.C. ORGANIZATION
AND FUNCTIONS AT THE WAR OFFICE
Situation Before The Outbreak Of War.
Before the Munich crisis, the Ordnance Services at the War Office formed
part of the department of the Master General of Ordnance (M.G.O.).
They
were directed by a Director of Ordnance Services (D.O.S.—Major-General
B. A. Hill).
The latter was assisted, on the stores side, by a Principal
Ordnance Officer (P.O.O.); and, on the engineering side, by a Principal
Ordnance Mechanical Engineer (P.O.M.E.).
The P.O.O. (Major-General L. L. Hoare) was charged with the general
supervision and administration of all central depots, and was responsible for
the technical administration of all command depots.
The P.O.M.E. (Major-General A. R. Valon) supervised all the ordnance
engineering services, and prepared specifications and technical data to assist
in the provision and inspection of machine tools and other special plant
required by the R.A.O.C.
Responsibility for the provision of army equipment was at this time dis-
Director of Artillery (D. of A.) provided
small arms, ammunition,
and the Director of Mechanization
(D. of M.) provided all "A" and "B" vehicles (except those driven by
R.A.S.C. drivers), as well as signal and engineering stores.
Under the Q.M.G., the Director of Supplies and Transport (D.S.T.)
provided all vehicles used by the R.A.S.C.
Finally, under the D.O.S., the P.O.O. was responsible for the design,
provision and inspection of clothing and general stores.
The provision problem was further complicated by the fact that, although
the D. of A., and D. of M., were responsible for the provision of warlike
stores and Mechanical Transport (M.T.) stores, the bulk of the detailed work
was carried out by the R.A.O.C. provision branches located at the central
ordnance depots (C.O.Ds.) and under the control of the P.O.O.
These
provision branches provided the bulk of the provision figures to the D. of A.
and D. of M., and received direct from these two Directors instructions for
issue, although they formed part of the staff of the P.O.O., who was
responsible to the D. of A., and D. of M., for the accuracy and speed of
issue.
The P.O.O., therefore, served three directors, but was responsible only
to the D.O.S. for the management and efficiency of his central depots, including
those holding warlike and M.T. stores.
