protection afforded was such that only a few rounds were destroyed. Ammuni-
tion sub-depots were constructed in several quarries, the accommodation being
improvised in huts made of Malta stone with 4-6 inch concrete roofs. These
huts were placed close to the quarry walls and widely dispersed. Their func-
tion was to enable rapid issue of A.A. ammunition to be made continuously
from a large number of points and without any long. " carry" from depot
underground magazines.
Though the island is only 90 square miles in area,
the ammunition sub-depots were so well selected and camouflaged that they
were never attacked by hostile planes, though they were able to give speedy
replenishment to A.A. batteries.
R.A.O.C. workshop facilities grew from the small peace-time general work-
shops to four large static workshops. These were widely dispersed and each was
self-contained for power, not being dependent on the civilian supply of elec-
tricity. Owing to the small size of the island, mobile workshops were not
necessary. In view of the shortage of stores and spares, considerable improvi-
sation was necessary to meet the requirements of the General Staff and to
maintain equipments. A large amount of manufacturing work was carried
out at the R.A.O.C. workshops.
were made, as well as essential spare parts for guns, A.A. instruments and
M.T.
materials available. The most important task which fell to the workshop
services was maintenance of the equipments and instruments of the A.A.
defences, which reached tremendous proportions for the size of the island.
The A.A. guns were in intense action for long periods and this resulted in
heavy wear of mechanism and fire control gear.
ordnance workshops services, never more than approximately 5 per cent.
of the A.A. artillery was out of action at any one time.
At the end of
September, 1942, the R.A.O.C. workshops services in Malta were handed over
In anticipation of the Italian entry into the war, the Malta force was pro-
Two infantry battalions arrived just before the Italian
intervention, but the fortress remained largely denuded of anti-aircraft guns,
which totalled only about 20 in all. By 1941 the infantry had been increased
still further, and in February, 1942 when the invasion of Malta appeared
probable, additional troops arrived from Tobruk. The garrison then num-
bered nearly 30,000 troops as against only 4,000 when the war broke out.
Meanwhile, R.A.O.C. reinforcements lagged behind, because priority had to
be given to the transport of fighting troops, especially A.A. and infantry
personnel, who were needed for the defence of the garrison. No R.A.O.C.
reinforcements arrived until the beginning of 1941 and, until mid-1942, the
R.A.O.C. remained well below its W.E.
This shortage of R.A.O.C. technical personnel was especially felt in the
early months of 1942, owing to casualties and the heavy destruction of ord-
nance depots and workshops by bombing. In April, 1942, at the most severe
stage of the bombardment, the deficiency of R.A.O.C. clerks was 35 per cent.
and of R.A.O.C. storemen, 20 per cent.
This shortage of technical personnel
was especially felt in the case of radar and wireless stores, with which the
Maltese civilian staft were quite unfamiliar. The shortages were partly due
to the non-arrival of drafts sent from the Middle East. On three occasions,
convoys bringing R.A.O.C. reinforcements were destroyed or dispersed.
318
senior ordnance appointment was
In January, 1941, consequent upon the expansion of the garrison, the
upgraded to D.D.O.S. and that of Chief
Services (Engineering) (A.D.O.S.(E) ).
Ordnance Mechanical Engineer (C.O.M.E.) to Assistant Director of Ordnance
Long before the really intensive German air attacks took place, it had
been realized that, from a storage point of view, dispersion would be essential.
As there was insufficient underground bombproof storage accommodation
to house the vast quantity of ordnance stores flooding into Malta, a large
number of small buildings were requisitioned all over the island. Eventually,
these buildings numbered over 100. They consisted mainly of concrete-floored
garages of 1,000-5,000 square feet and some local schools and halls. These
dispersed storage points were organized on a wholesale and retail principle.
Detail issues of a particular type of store, e.g. clothing, were made from one
dispersed storehouse only. Nearby storehouses were used to hold the bulk
stocks. Naturally, the wide dispersal increased the transport and control diffi-
culties.
dispersal, since
Transport would have been difficult enough had there been no
there was practically no petrol available on the island.
Personnel travelled on foot or by bicycle, and detail storehouses were
replenished by horse-drawn Maltese carts.
Although immediate steps had been taken to exploit to the full the existing
underground storehouses in the ordnance depots at Marina Pinto and Sa
Maison, the accommodation was far from ideal, owing to dampness. Later,
further difficulties arose when entrances were blocked after heavy raids. How-
ever, none of these bombproof storehouses was destroyed.
Schemes for
R.A.O.C. requirements of additional bombproof storage accommodation had
been prepared in 1941, but were delayed owing to their low priority, the lack
of R.E. tunnelling companies, and the over-riding needs for underground gun
operation rooms, telephone exchanges, electric power plant, and similar instal-
lations. However, by March, 1942 a bombproof ordnance sub-depot had been
constructed in the rock at Gargur and, when nearly 70 per cent. of the
ordnance depot at Ospizio was destroyed, this new accommodation was avail-
able for warlike technical stores. Plans had also been made for extending
the rock storehouses in the ordnance depot at Marina Pinto, but these did
not materialize until late in 1942, by which time further bombproof storage
accommodation adjacent to the partly destroyed depot at Ospizio had been
constructed.
As events proved, the policy of wide dispersal, despite the great adminis-
trative and other problems which it created, enabled the R.A.O.C. to operate
throughout the heavy bombardment. It was realized that it was not sufficient
to disperse vital warlike stores such as A.A. gun barrels in bombproof
shelters, since these could be blocked; hence the policy adopted was to
have tunnels cut in the rock-walls of suitable quarries and to store 10 to 25
A.A. gun barrels in each tunnel. In addition, each A.A. battery was issued
with a number of spare gun barrels, suitably preserved, which were stored
in slit
trenches and covered with sandbags or Malta stone.
resulted in wide dispersion of the gun barrels and enabled the batteries to
make quick replacements. a need which arose frequently owing to the
abnormal rate of fire which they were called upon to maintain.
therefore
The pre-war ordnance depots were located in the harbour areas, and.
suffered severe damage during the intensive bombing periods.
319
