TRICTEN
and be ever on the watch that his stocks were adequately
and promptly
replenished, that units' indents were met
as soon as the stores
became
available and that his records were accurately maintained.
Changes in Procedure During the War
The withdrawal of trained personnel, the vast increase in the work load
and the dispersion of stocks rendered accurate storekeeping by peace-time
methods difficult in war.
Stores had to be issued to units without notice.
Issues were recorded
on temporary vouchers but the pressure was so great that weeks elapsed
before proper documents were prepared and entered on the accounts.
June, 1940, depot records had become behindhand and inaccurate.
Vouchers
were being sent to units after they had gone over to France with the B.E.F.
Accounts did not show the true state of stocks, with the result that replenish-
ment of depot stocks was not being made with sufficient accuracy.
The
shortage of supplies resulted in an accumulation of indents which could not
be met. Units were moving frequently and secretly, with the result that
storeholders were holding indents for units that had left their area of supply.
A new system of registration of documents and accounting
known as
the control system and "Visidex" accounting had been introduced just before
the war for use in B.O.Ds.
This system enabled transactions to be watched
to finality by the depot office instead of by the storeholder; it provided
vouchers for the unit at the time an issue was made and it initiated pro-
vision action from the depot store account instead of from the storehouse
tally. It was considered more efficient than the old system and the C.O.S.
accordingly gave instructions for a modified version of the B.O.D. procedure
to be instituted at command ordnance depots.
A similar system was introduced at C.O.Ds. with the important result
that, for all comparable functions, the same standardized store accounting
processes were operated at all ordnance issuing installations at home and
in the field, and with the added advantages of simplifying the training of
R.A.O.C. personnel and of minimizing the loss in efficiency hitherto caused
by the interchange of R.A.O.C. personnel between depots.
The change-over was effected by the end of 1941. Depots were permitted
to start the new account by physical stocktaking and disregarding any dis-
crepancies between the old and new accounts.
During the process of change-
over it was also decided to conserve man-power by dispensing with the
storehouse tally and maintaining only one account.
scheme was brought into being.
Thus the single account
The dispersion of stocks and shortage of supplies necessitated a careful
distribution of such stores as were available.
To meet this, a system of
central stock control was introduced whereby one office in each command
was informed daily of all changes in the stock position at each command
ordnance depot.
This office was responsible for placing demands on the
C.O.Ds. to replenish the stocks of all the command ordnance depots in the
In 1943, as a further step in the conservation of man-power, a new form
and R.E.M.E. installations.
of combined indent and issue voucher was introduced, for use by R.A.S.C.
This form eliminated the necessity for the
preparation of a great number of vouchers in ordnance depots in that the
form prepared by the unit was based by the R.A.O.C. as the issue voucher.
This resulted in a large saving of typists employed in ordnance depots with
a negligible increase in work on the part of units.
Command Ordnance Services
Although it is impossible within the scope of this chapter to give a detailed
account of the vast and varied ordnance activities in commands in meeting
units' requirements, and in opening and closing the various installations to
meet the changing conditions of war, such activities can be indicated by a
few examples. In Southern Command alone, in 1944, 370,000 indents from
units were dealt with, entailing the handling of approximately 400,000 tons
The three depots in this command before the war expanded into
In addition to the issue of stores, R.A.O.C. in commands carried out
many essential services to the troops, such as the receipt of unserviceable
and surplus stores from units and the provision of laundry, dry cleaning,
boot repairing and tailoring services.
Before the war the store groups of ordnance depots were concerned with
the receipt of surplus and unserviceable stores returned by units, in addition
to dealing with the serviceable stores.
This involved sorting, minor repair
and initiating action for the repair of stores in workshops.
After the outbreak of war, it quickly became apparent that a separate
organization was needed to deal with the returned stores in order to free
group personnel for their primary task of issuing stores to units, and to
reduce wastage by getting any of the returned stores which could be repaired
into a serviceable condition as quickly as possible.
At first a separate group was formed in each depot to deal exclusively
with returned stores but later, when R.E.M.E. was formed, separate depots
subsidiary to command depots were established.
depots operated in a similar manner to the R.S.D. of a B.O.D. They were
responsible for receiving from units all general stores and clothing, repairing
and cleaning them whenever practicable and passing the stores when service-
able back into depot stocks.
Stores of a technical nature were sent to
R.E.M.E. workshops for repair.
The activities of R.S.Ds. became so important and involved such immense
quantities of stores that special control over their output had to be exercised
by War Office.
In some instances R.S.Ds. were called on to manufacture
stores but this led to congestion and some abuse, such activities were therefore
discouraged.
At the beginning of the war, and for some little while onwards, contract
services administered by D.Ds.O.S. Commands were small.
powers of D.D.O.S. were limited to a sum of £50 for contract repairs.
restricted work to single small jobs.
From the middle of 1943 onwards, contract activity was very largely
extended notwithstanding that the financial powers which had been increased
in 1942 still remained low, viz. £100.
WO 277/21.
18
