summer and autumn of 1942, and advantage
was taken to develop the
R.A.O.C. organization in accordance with the lessons learned
operations.
The
R.A.O.C. vehicle
and
stores
convoy
which
hitherto operated in Egypt on a limited basis and without official recognition,
was now placed on a firm basis, and corps stores convoy units were provided
as forward links operating in front of roadhead.
The air delivery service
was also improved and
R.A.O.C. personnel
were provided in the establishment of R.Á.O.C. vehicle and stores convoy
units for rear and forward landing grounds.
A special stock of stores of operational importance, selected by
the
Staff at G.H.Q. in conjunction with H.Q.
Eighth Army,
was placed
6 A.O.D. Alexandria at the call of the Eighth Army.
'hece ctores consisten
mainly of small arms, signal stores, optical and fire directing instruments and
spare barrels for artillery.
Orders were also prepared for the issue of stores
to stock an advanced base in Cyrenaica, and the R.A.O.C.
11nife to
staff
this advanced base were formed and held in
readiness to
move
Two
mobile officers' shops were also prepared in the base
ready
moving
to the forward area as soon as required.
Arrangements for Air Supply by Parachute Dropping
One important innovation for the coming offensive was the preparation
of equipment for the supply of ordnance stores and ammunition by parachute.
Local pattern supply-dropping equipment had been designed, and 25,000
sets of parachutes and harness were manufactured by the R.A.O.C. in the
Returned Stores Depot (R.S.D.) of 4 B.O.D.
Dropping trials had been
carried out, and stocks of filled, labelled and harnessed containers of common
types of ammunition together with the proportionate numbers of parachutes,
types old at ordnance dumps alongside R.A.F. airports at the base, and
at the forward landing grounds.
Empty containers and packing materials
were also held at B.A.Ds. and B.O.Ds. So that ammunition of less common
natures and urgently required M.T. and other spares could be sent to the
airport ready for immediate dropping.
Build up of Ammunition Reserves
To ensure the efficient maintenance of ammunition supply, a detailed
programme was prepared for the build up of reserves and the establishment
of forward dumps.
The Middle East system of pooled 3rd line transport,
and field ammunition sections working in conjunction with forward main-
tenance companies, was used.
A preliminary dumping programme was
begun on Ist October, 1942, which included 268,000 rounds of 25 pounder,
12,800 rounds of 4.5 in. and 6,400 rounds of 5.5 in.
In addition, all Eighth
Army rates for reserves were doubled, and seven days' reserve at these
increased rates was held at 4 A.A.D. Alexandria.
Stocking up 4 A.A.D.
to this increased scale proceeded simultaneously with the dumping programme.
General Montgomery
Assumes Command of Eighth Army,
13th August, 1942
On the 13th August, 1942, General Montgomery* had assumed comman
of the Eighth Army, and a period of a Maniation within the Army followed,
* Later Field Marshal Viscount Montene of Alamein, K.G, G.C.B., DSO.
including the formation of an additional corps—10th Corps
Twelve weeks
of intensive planning, training and preparation followed.
Deceptive measures
including the formation of dummy dumps were taken
to make the enemy
believe an offensive was to be launched in the south
The task of providing
and manufacturing special devices for the deception of the enemy had been
allotted to
the
R.A.O.C.
first
these devices were limited to dummy
guns, tanks
and vehicles
but later
they included dummy landing craft and
railway
stock.
Eight thousand four hundred
devices were manufactured
for the offensive.
In the B.O.W
at Alexandria a number of Matilda tanks
were converted into flail tanks for the clearance of minefields.
Two ordnance factories were established, one near Cairo and the other
at Wadi Saraan in Palestine, for the production of anti-tank mines.
These
two factories were eventually able to produce 900,000 mines a month.
Battle of El Alamein begins 23rd October, 1942
Towards midnight on 23rd October, 1942, the great attack was launched®
and the
Eighth Army struck the first blow in an offensive which eventually
was to carry it successfully forward across N. Africa and into Europe.
R.A.O.C. Organization in Eighth Army
The ordnance service within the Eighth Army at this stage comprised
the newly reorganized ordnance field park units consisting of one army
troops ordnance field park together with corps troops ordnance field parks
for each corps (both these units handling forward vehicle holdings as well
as spare parts) ; in addition separate brigade ordnance field parks were
provided for each brigade not served by a divisional park.
At F.M.Cs. there was now a firm scale of four forward ammunition detach-
ments and two forward store detachments for each corps; these units
handled ammunition and ordnance stores in transit and in dumps.
railhead there were corresponding ammunition and stores detachments for
The vehicle and stores convoy unit was re-established and,
as the L. of C. lengthened, it was reinforced until eventually it contained
over 30 road sections and operated from Tobruk to Tripoli, a distance of
nearly 1,000 miles.
The Operational Maintenance Problems
Expenditure of ammunition and material during the winter of 1942-1943
was colossal.
During the first ten days in the Battle of El Alamein 370,000
rounds of 25-pounder ammunition alone were expended.
In No. 5 B.O.D.
during October 40,000 tons of stores and 13,000 vehicles were handled.
The heavy expenditure, the rapidity of the advance and the enormous
length of the L. of C. provided a maintenance problem greater by far than
any previously faced by the R.A.O.C.
Some idea of the problem may be visualized if it is remembered that
1942, Benghazi,
Tobruk, 435 miles by road from Alexandria, was taken on 13th November,
675 miles further west,
miles further west, on 20th November and Tripoli,
was occupied on 23rd January,
1943.
Thus the
L. of C. was lengthened to 1,415 miles in the short period of three months
during which five major battles were fought.
181
67612
G 2:
was guy/17
WO 277/215
