With the fusion of the vehicle and spares organization of the R.A.O.C.
and R.A.S.C., in 1942 the R.A.S.C. depot at Feltham was converted into a
C.O.D. and continued to handle M.T. stores.
It was also in 1942 that a
new C.O.D. was built at Bicester to hold a range of all warlike stores except
ammunition, and therefore, a large portion of this Depot was allocated for
The following distribution of M.T. stores
the storage of M.T. spares.
between the C.O.Ds. continued throughout the war: -
Chilwell- Spares for British made "A" and "B" vehicles, and until the
end of 1943, some spares for American makes.
Feltham-Spares for British made "B" vehicles and carriers.
Derby and Bicester-Spares for British and American made "A" and
'B" vehicles.
During the first three years of the war the M.T. spares required by home
units and overseas theatres were issued from Chilwell and Derby, but from
January, 1943, the home issue load was divided between Derby, Feltham
and Bicester.
These depots also undertook issues to overseas theatres of
stores which were not held at Chilwell,
This policy obtained up to August, 1945, with the exception that Chilwell,
in addition to meeting the needs of overseas theatres, also supplied units which
were mobilizing in the United Kingdom before going overseas.
During 1942, there was a noticeable all-round improvement in the general
supply position of M.T. stores, enabling better service to units and a steady
building-up of reserves.
Considerable consignments were assembled
and
specially packed for the forces landing in North Africa.
In 1943, the M.T. C.O.Ds. began the immense and complex task of
packing and documenting the M.T. landing reserves (L.Rs.) and beach main-
tenance packs (B.M.Ps.) for the invasion of North-West Europe.
Great care
was taken in the preservation, cartoning, identification, documentation and
waterproof-packing of these vitally important stores, and the huge programme,
combined with the normal issues which were being made at the same time,
threw a great strain on the organization. The task was spread over the four
C.O.Ds., Chilwell, Derby, Bicester and Feltham. After packing, the complete
L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. were concentrated and collated at Chilwell and held there,
in readiness for shipment, until called forward to the ports shortly before
"D"-day. Every available stacking area in Chilwell was used to accommo-
date this vast consignment.
The task continued, night and day, throughout the winter of 1943-44 and
early spring of 1944, and resources of both storage space and man-power
were taxed to the utmost.
At the same time, heavy issues of units' first aid
M.T. outfits were being made to mobilizing units, to ordnance field parks and
to workshop stores sections attached to formations earmarked for the invasion.
By May, 1944, increased shipments of M.T. spares were arriving from
America and in great quantities from home manufacturers.
During the period immediately before "D"-day, the M.T. sub-depot at
West Hallam was given the vital task of preparing and issuing to units the
wading and waterproofing equipment which was to be fitted to vehicles taking
part in the assault landings.
As the equipment was required for the spearhead
of the invasion, it was imperative that there should be no mistakes. Personnel
WOs7e7/14
WO 277/21
18
were trained to familiarize themselves with every item for which they were
individually responsible in order that they could immediately identify any part
on sight.
The various items of the equipment were made up into complete vehicle
kits, some of which included approximately 100 different items.
care was exercised in the sorting, labelling and packing operations, and the
packing areas were laid out with the express object of eliminating errors.
To ensure that no difficulty in fitting the items of the kit to the vehicle would
ultimately be experienced by units, R.A.C. personnel fitted the various items
in each kit to appropriate specimen vehicles which were brought to West
Hallam for that purpose.
This experimental fitting was observed by staff
of the Inspectorate of Fighting Vehicles who immediately arranged for any
modification, the necessity for which was brought to light at this stage.
the end of April, 1944, many kits were packed and collection by units began.
The magnitude of the work in connection with the issues of wading equip-
ment from West Hallam during the period of 1st April to 30th May, 1944,
may be judged by the fact that 6,253 tons of stores were involved requiring
nearly 3,000 lorries to collect them. Over 628,000 parts of " A" vehicle
hardware were handled.
Shortly before "D"-day, special arrangements were made to complete
the M.T. vehicles of all units of 21 Army Group with all accessories, vehicle
As from "D"-day, the C.O.Ds. assumed their additional role as main
base depots under the maintenance project for 21 Army Group, which pro-
vided for indents from individual units and ordnance field parks of the force
to be despatched daily by air to the R.A.O.C. Indent Clearing Centre (I.C.C.)
at Greenford and thence distributed the same day by special R.A.O.C. D.R.
service to the main base depots.
Each depot was required to organize its
resources to meet immediately every
specially urgent indent or demand
(" white hot." or "red hot"), to treat all indents as operationally urgent and
to effect actual despatch within 48 hours.
Concurrently with the task of maintaining 21 Army Group, and supplying
other operational theatres, the M.T. organization was, in the latter half of
1944, busily engaged in organizing special preservation and packing arrange-
ments for the M.T. stores consignments destined later for the war theatre in
South East Asia.
It was known that the swiftly destructive effects of humid, tropical climatic
conditions could be prevented only by scientific preservation and
special
This entailed the use of approved preservative mixtures
It comprised coating the article
with preservative attaching an identification tag, wrapping in grease resisting
paper, packing in a carton, sealing the carton with gummed paper tape,
attaching adhesive identification labels and covering the latter with cellulose
tape, dipping the wrapped and sealed carton in hot wax, packing the cartons
in cases fitted with waterproof bag liners sealed with waterproof adhesive,
and finally marking the cases with distinctive markings to denote tropic
proofed stores.
