28. RETURNED STORES AND CLOTHING
(a) Two Returned Stores Coys. will be operating by D + 90.
Their equip-
ments consist of trailer mounted machinery designed to
carry out straight-
forward repairs to Ordnance clothing and general stores.
(b) The priority of work in the early stages will depend on the supply
position of particular stores at the time, but first priority will probably be
given to cookers, shelters and tentage, and camp equipment generally.
(c) Boots and clothing which cannot be repaired by unit personnel will
be returned to Returned Stores Coys.
Returned Stores
Coys. will return
to U.K. clothing and stores, repair of which is beyond their capacity. Vote 9
stores will be passed to R.E.M.E. Workshops for repair.
29. INDUSTRIAL GASES
(a) Capacity of plant each Army Industrial Gas Unit per week.
Oxygen 60,000 cubic feet and Acetylene 15,600 cubic feet.
Each Base Industrial Gas Unit, Oxygen 120,000 cubic feet and Acetylene
62,400 cubic feet.
(b) The forecast maximum requirements for all users.
Oxygen 680,000 cubic feet per week.
Acetylene 250,000 cubic feet per week.
Carbon Dioxide 100,000 Ibs. per week.
Hydrogen 5,000 cubic feet per week.
Nitrogen 70,000 cubic feet per week.
(c) Industrial Gases will be provided in cylinders filled in the U.K. until
all gas units are in full production in the theatre.
Hydrogen is being supplied
from R.A.F. Balloon Sites, and Carbon Dioxide will continue to be shipped
until resources can be found within the theatre.
I.-Position of Ordnance Field Parks at D + 18.
II.-Phasing and Break-down of Ordnance Tonnage
Annexure III.—Phasing of Ordnance Units after D + 18.
IV.—Advanced Ordnance Depot Scaling.
V.—Labour Allotment to Ordnance Units.
Annexure VI.-Tonnage Build Up (Ammunition).
*Annexure VII.-Phasing of Reserve Vehicles after D + 18.
(Wheeled and S.P.) (P. 3.)).
Annexure VIII.—Stores Phasing Programme (Artillery Equipments
Annexure IX.—Stores Phasing Programme.
Searchlights, etc. (Vehicles)."
Radar Flamethrowers,
appendix.
(Note.—The foregoing Annexures have been
336
APPENDIX 6
SECOND ARMY ORDNANCE APPRECIATION
(See Chapter XIV, p. 224)
The following is a copy of the Appreciation prepared in May, 1944, by
Brigadier T. M. Clarke, D.D.O.S., Second Army: —
" OBJECT
1. To maintain Second Army, consisting of four Corps and attached Army
Troops, L. of C., and G.H.Q. Troops, from D Day to D +17 with Ordnance
Stores and Ammunition.
2. To handle unaccompanied A.F.G. 1098 belonging to units and forma-
tions of Second Army.
3. To handle C.S.O?'s reserves, Medical reserves of Ordnance origin.
and certain Civil Affairs stores.
CONSIDERATIONS
4. Landing Reserves have been packed for all Brigades and attached
troops, Corps Troops, and attached Army Troops, A.V.R.E., Flail, and A.A. ;
also Reserve Landing Reserves for Assault Formations.
5. Beach Maintenance Packs have been packed for all Divisions, Corps
Troops, Army Troops, A.V.R.E., Flail, and A.A. There are also Reserve
6. Advanced Ordnance Depot Packs are being assembled at Central Ord-
nance Depots for subsequent maintenance (after D + 17).
7. Spare A.F.G. 1098 for units, or sub-units, can be packed within 5 days
at Central Ordnance Depots.
8. Corps Field Parks will be complete with Nos. 1, 2 and 3 Sections.
9. Packs and Spare Kits for survivors have been
packed—1,500 for 1
Corps, and 1,000 for 30 Corps.
10. Forward Maintenance Area Packs of fast-moving stores are being
provided for each Corps.
COURSES
11. Owing to the diversity of equipment and vehicles, and the lack of
homogenity between one formation and another, there are not many courses
open other than providing a Landing Reserve and Beach Maintenance Pack
for each formation and sub-formation as it lands.
With more homogenity it
would have been possible for each formation to live on the " fat" provided
for other formations.
PLAN
12. On D and D + 1 the Assault formations will live on Landing Reserves
ammunition phased in under their own arrangements.
These will be
handed by Violance Beach Detachments and additional Ammunition Coy.
now under command of Assault Corps.
15. Divisions are responsible for phasing in Divisional Ordnance Fiel
waks and Mobile Laundry and Bath Unit allotted to Divisions.
67612
337
101797/14
WO 277/21
M* 2
