The whole of the vehicles and spares (except R.A.S.C. vehicles) to meet
the needs of the Army at home and overseas were at that time issued from
Chilwell and the three vehicle depots.
The vehicle reception store (V.R.S.) which was part of the Chilwell
organization, was responsible for the receipt, storage, maintenance, battery
charging and subsequent issue of vehicles complete with equipment, from
Chilwell and the three vehicle depots.
The vehicles held were mainly "B"
vehicles, although a certain number of "A" vehicles were also held.
The organization included a vehicle census branch, whose functions were
to maintain a record of each vehicle in the Service (other than R.A.S.C.
vehicles) including its location.
• In September, 1939, it was fully realized that in war the existing organiza-
tion would be totally inadequate and that re-organization and rapid expansion
would be essential.
It was decided therefore to appropriate practically all
the covered storage accommodation at Chilwell for the storage of M.T.
stores, as distinct from vehicles, to open a new C.O.D. at Derby, also confined
to the storage of M.T. stores, and to create special vehicle depots under
Chilwell control for the receipt and issue of complete vehicles.
Plans were made also to establish eight new M.T. sub-depots as a first
step in the war programme of expanding the storage organization for M.T.
stores.
The objects were not only to meet the physical storage problem,
but to provide reasonable dispersion from air attack and to conform to the
important policy of giving an "over the counter" service of M.T. assemblies
and spare parts to workshops.
The original eight new sub-depots provided only 100,000 sq. ft. of covered
storage space.
By the requisitioning of suitable premises and by war-time
construction of Nissen hutting, the M.T. stores sub-depot organization pro-
gressively expanded to 600,000 sq. ft. by August, 1941, to 1,500,000 by the
end of 1942 and to 4,000,000 sq. ft. by October, 1944, when the organization
comprised 37 sub-depots. The staffing and organizing of all these sub-depots
was a formidable task.
In February, 1941, a special branch, under the direction of Deputy Chief
Ordnance Officer (D.C.O.O.) Sub-depots, had been formed to administer
these M.T. sub-depots and to acquire storage and personnel accommodation
for vehicle depots as well as sub-depots.
Later the responsibility for vehicle
depots was transferred to O. i/c Tanks and Vehicles. In 1942 it became
necessary to decentralize control and the M.T. sub-depots were accordingly
divided on an area basis into M.T. groups each under a Group Commander
responsible through O. i/c Tanks and Vehicles to the Commandant, Chilwell.
D.C.O.O. Sub-depots was re-designated O. i/c M.T. Sub-Depots and con-
tinued to control technical policy and to direct activities.
By August, 1945, the sub-depot organization consisted of 34 sub-depots
comprising 190 premises on sites covered and open.
The stocks included
nearly 250,000 major assemblies, 750,000 covers and tubes and approximately
150,000 tons of tank tracks.
During 1944 the sub-depots handled over
500,000 tons of stores. At first the stocks stored at sub-depots were held
on charge centrally at Chilwell, but in March, 1942, it was decided that
the sub-depots should become self-accounting.
In addition to normal storage
functions, certain sub-depots were allotted special jobs, such as the building-
up of complete wheel assemblies.
wespet/I4
WO 277/21:
The majority of issues were made on an exchange basis, i.e. a service-
able assembly was issued only in exchange for a repairable or unserviceable
The same applied to covers and tubes.
presented a problem different from that of almost any other item, were also
M.T. stores sections were established at or near to the various command
workshops R.E.M.E. throughout the country.
an over the counter service of spares in constant demand and enabled the
workshops to complete their repair programme. In August, 1945, there were
14 M.T. stores sections.
Although the whole organization for the supply of both vehicles and
M.T. stores was under the general control of the parent C.O.D. at Chilwell
there were virtually two distinct organizations, and it is necessary to describe
the growth of each separately.
The M.T. Vehicle Supply Organization
The vehicle organization expanded with great rapidity during the war
In September, 1939, the V.R.S. and its three sub-depots held approxi-
mately 700 "A" vehicles and 7,300 "B"
August, 1945, the vehicle holding was approximately 47,000 " A " vehicles
and 193,000 "B" vehicles, the number of vehicle depots having increased
to 58 " B" vehicle reserve depots (V.R.Ds.) and 28 armoured fighting vehicle
depots (A.F.V. depots).
The world-wide holding of vehicles recorded by Control Census in Septem-
ber, 1939, was just under 44,000 compared with over 1,403,000 in August,
1945.
During the opening months of 1940, all the Chilwell buildings allotted
to the storage of vehicles had, with one exception, to be given up in order
to provide storage accommodation for M.T. spares and living accommodation
1940, new vehicle reception store sheds were opened at Old
Dalby, but this additional space afforded only temporary relief as by Novem-
ber these sheds also had to be given up for the storage of spares.
It was towards the end of 1940 that increasing British production and
increased receipts from America made it apparent that open storage "B"
Tanks and carriers were not yet a big
storage problem, but British "B"
vehicles were coming off production in
swiftly increasing numbers and by December, 1940, receipts from America
were 1,350 vehicles a month.
In January, 1941, the first open vehicle depot site was acquired at Castle
Donnington Race Track, and this depot became the pattern for the numerous
proximity to factories and Ministry of Supply workshops, in order to speed
clearance and to economize in drivers. Other vehicle depots were sited near
vehicle shipment ports in order to facilitate efficient compliance with
programmes for loading and shipment to war theatres.
The shipment of British tanks to our Russian ally began towards the end
of 1941. Experience soon proved that tanks for shipment to Russia needed
special waterproof sealing to protect them from damage by exposure to sea
