amit was designed, equipped with light-weight laundry and bathing
nent which was air-portable and capable of being towed on a 10-cwt.
behind a jeep.
is new unit, therefore, took the place of the existing mobile laundry
ath unit type "B" provided for divisions, and the mobile laundry and
nit type "A" was retained for operation in the corps troops and army
dy of the organization and war equipment of the remaining types of
.C. units in the standard field force organization revealed that little
was necessary to make them suitable for operation in the Far East.
ly change of any importance was the re-designation of the ordnance
detachment to beach ordnance company which became an integral
the beach brigade.
Post War Review
Tuly, 1945, the C.O.S., War Office, instructed the Ds.O.S. in the two
an war theatres to obtain the opinions and recommendations of all
C. unit commanders and selected senior R.A.O.C.
officers on the
ation of ordnance services in the field, in the light of their actual
ice during operations 1944-45.
object was to collate and study these first-hand opinions and recom-
ons in order to determine what changes were still needed to attain
1 field organization and methods and to ensure that future training
gin on a sound basis.
scorded earlier in this chapter, there were important differences in
field organization as between Italy and North-West Europe.
Each
tion operated successfully and it was therefore not unexpected that
ctive Ds.O.S., although in agreement on all main essentials, made
recommendations on a number of material points.
esolve these divergences the C.O.S. designate (Major-General
called together at the War Office a conference of representatives
heatres and other selected officers with recent operational experience.
pect of ordnance services in the field was carefully considered and
ving conclusions were reached.
R.A.O.C. units in formations had grown in numbers to such an
extent that the introduction of a Commander Royal Army Ordnance
Corps (C.R.A.O.C.) in divisions, corps and armies, with the necessary
staff to control all such units, was agreed to be essential.
In the
case of the division, the C.R.A.O.C.
should also act as A.D.O.S.,
out in the corps and army he should be additional to the R.A.O.C.
epresentatives at formation headquarters.
hat the future standard organization of ordnance field parks should
e that employed in the Italian theatre with the addition of a
ontrolled stores section to the corps troops ordnance field park.
at the control and administration of the many small sub-units
f the ordnance maintenance company became too difficult when the
istance between the army railhead and corps forward maintenance
entres (F.M.C.) got extensive, and that the unit required splitting
to two separate units namely:-
The corps ordnance maintenance company, consisting of :—
Headquarters
WO 277/27
Ammunition Platoon
Stores Platoon
The Army ordnance maintenance company consisting of: —
Headquarters
Section Section Section
Section Section stores section
(d) That the designations " Type A" and "Type B" applied to mobile
laundry and bath units were not satisfactory, and should be replaced
by the titles " mobile laundry and bath unit"
and " divisional
laundry and bath unit" respectively.
Some small increases in the
size of these units were also recommended.
(e) That the L. of C. stores convoy unit R.A.O.C. should in future be
replaced by an equivalent R.A.S.C. unit with the same role and
equivalent war establishment.
(*) That the corps stores convoy unit R.A.O.C., found essential in every
active war theatre to effect rapid delivery to ordnance field parks,
R.A.O.C.
stores sections attached R.E.M.E. workshops, etc.,
operationally urgent spare parts and ordnance stores, should be
abolished, and its role allotted to new delivery sections to be added
to the war establishment of all divisional and corps troops ordnance
field parks, the delivery sections to operate under control of the
commander R.A.O.C. corps troops.
(8) That the
R.A.O.C.
vehicle company
organization
was
quite
inadequate to deal efficiently with the vast, moving reserves of M.T.
vehicles required in modern warfare; that it required to operate as
a separate entity completely divorced from the B.O.D. organization;
and that it required a thorough reorganization entailing the introduc-
tion of an ordnance vehicle group, each group consisting of a
71
