This elaborate task of preservation and packing, applied to great quan-
tities of M.T. stores ranging over many tens of thousands of different items.
necessitated skilled organization and carefully planned layout of dipping
tanks, cartoning tables and necessary equipment.
The resulting consignments
were in the pipe line to South East Asia when Japan capitulated.
This was the culminating war activity of the M.T. stores organization,
which had expanded from one C.O.D. in 1939 staffed by some 2,000 per-
sonnel, to an immense network of depots employing a man-power force of
no fewer than 60,000 when hostilities ceased.
Evolution of C.O.D. Organization for all *Warlike Stores except M.T.
The original parent C.O.D. for armament, engineer, signals, wireless,
searchlight, generator, bridging, folding boat equipments and stores was at
Woolwich, but during the war a new parent depot was constructed and opened
at Donnington, and eventually Woolwich became one of its sub-depots.
The Woolwich depot, comprising buildings in both the Royal Arsenal and
the Royal Dockyard, provided covered accommodation of just over 24 million
sq. ft., but unlike modern ordnance depots, consisted largely of storehouses
with two or three floors, served with slow moving lifts and hoists unsuitable
for the rapid receipt and issue of stores.
The buildings were spread over
a wide area, in and between factory, Naval Ordnance, and Ministry of
Supply buildings, making effective supervision and administration almost
impossible.
Apart from officers, the personnel of the depot was entirely civilian.
In addition to the parent depot at Woolwich, there were sub-depots at
Tilbury Fort, Perivale, Greenford (later to become a central depot), Erith,
Purfleet, Coalhouse Fort Tilbury, Millwall, Bridgwater, Weybridge, Peter-
borough and Greenwich.
The Army's pre-war reserves and maintenance stocks of these vital and
valuable technical stores were thus, in the main, stored in congested localities
particularly vulnerable to enemy air attack, and the outbreak of war made
it a matter of urgent national importance to proceed with the project of a
new C.O.D. in the west of England.
Plans had been approved in April, 1939, to construct the new depot at
Donnington in Shropshire with modern layout and design of storehouses,
and to develop it in replacement of the obsolete Woolwich installations.
When
war was declared only a small beginning had been made: by the end of
1940 some 800,000 sq. ft. of covered storage accommodation had been com-
pleted, increasing to nearly 2,000,000 sq. ft. by the end of 1941 and to
approximately 3,000,000 by the end of the war.
As soon as possible,
in
1940, Donnington began to operate, in a small way, as a C.O.D. and the
Woolwich provision branches were transferred there.
In 1939, the parent C.O.D. for small arms, machine guns and infantry
weapons was at Weedon.
Towards the end of the war, Weedom became a
sub-depot of the new and modern C.O.D. built at Bicester.
The provision
and machine tools.
* Artillery, small arms, engineer, optical, survey, searchlight, signal, wireless, radar stores
32
branch was retained at Weedon, however, because it was impracticable to
transfer the civilian staff to Bicester.
Like Woolwich,
Weedon consisted of
old, storied buildings, quite unsuitable for the speed of transactions réquired
by modern operational maintenance.
The remaining main category of warlike stores, consisting of workshop
machinery,
machine tools,
and test equipment,
was dealt with from the
outbreak of war until 1942 at Didcot and Woolwich.
This class, of equip-
ment increased greatly in range as the war progressed and created a par-
ticularly complicated storekeeping problem owing to the extraordinary lack
of standardization in design and make and the diverse range of non-inter-
changeable accessories.
In order to handle the greatly increased stocks and
volume of receipts and issues and to secure more efficient control it became
necessary in 1942 to establish at Old Dalby a new parent C.O.D. for this
class of army equipment.
War having begun before the new C.O.D. at Donnington was much more
than a blue print, the task of transferring the bulk of the warlike stores
commitment from Woolwich proved a long and complex problem fraught
with overwhelming difficulty and risk of breakdown.
It was realized that
Woolwich, with all its disadvantages, would still have to continue to operate
for many months, and, early in 1940, energetic re-organization measures were
applied.
R.A.O.C. personnel were drafted into the establishment, new and
more up-to-date storekeeping processes were introduced, and an extensive
re-arrangement of stocks was effected in order to expedite the handling of
receipts and issues.
After the evacuation from Dunkirk of the B.E.F.,
urgent arrangements
were made to establish a Central Repair Depot at Woolwich to repair the
large accumulation of repairable equipments there, in order to make good
some of the severe losses of war equipment suffered by the B.E.F.
With
much help from trade resources, this activity was successfully accomplished.
Although every endeavour had been made to remove from Woolwich
specially important stocks of warlike stores and to restrict to a minimum
the intake of new stores from manufacture, the situation in September, 1940,
when enemy air attacks began, was that Woolwich still held very large
quantities of army equipment reserves.
In face of the air attacks, which
resulted in considerable loss of life and damage to stocks in the depot, it
was imperative to remove stocks from Woolwich immediately, notwithstand-
ing the unavoidable unreadiness at Donnington.
therefore ordered.
Immediate evacuation was
and within a very
Donnington and Greenford was effected.
short period the
evacuation
The effects of this hurried evacuation from Woolwich were severely felt
at Donnington, which at that time comprised only two store buildings, one
laid out for armament, engineer and signals stores, the other for complete
gun equipments.
The sudden influx from Woolwich of a colossal mass of
hastily packed stores one thousand loaded rail wagons arrived within the
space of a few days completely disrupted Donnington's carefully laid plans
for orderly development.
Instead of being faced with a controlled storekeeping commitment related
to the available facilities, the depot, with its telephone systems, railway
marshalling yards, heating, lighting,
personnel accommodation all under
33
wO 277/21
18
