headquarters and up to three vehicle companies on the basis of one
group a corps of three divisions. Each vehicle company should
comprise: -
One "A" vehicle park—1,500 " A " vehicles.
Two "B" vehicle parks-3,000 "B" vehicles and 2,000 motor-
cycles (each).
One "A" returned vehicle park—3,000 unfit " A " vehicles.
One "B" returned vehicle park—5,000 unfit " B " vehicles.
One transit servicing park-"B" vehicles.
One convoy platoon.
) That there should in future be one type of A.O.D. on a new war
establishment designed to embody the experience gained in both
Italy and North-West Europe, and that this new A.O.D. should
supersede the A.O.D. (short sea voyage) and the advanced com-
ponent B.O.D., neither of which had proved entirely satisfactory.
It was agreed that the new A.O.D. should include a forward trailer
section and a stores transit sub-depot, the latter for short sea voyage
theatres only.
That, instead of the B.O.D. organization of advanced and main
components (which had proved a failure), there should be two types
of B.O.D., one for a large force, one for a small force never likely
to exceed five divisions, the two types to be designated and defined
as follows: —
(i) Base ordnance depot-designed to maintain six to twelve.
divisions, with increments for every additional four divisions.
(ii) Base ordnance depot (small force) designed to serve one to
Apart from minor changes in the organization of the unit, it was
agreed that the new war establishments should incorporate two new
features, namely: a R.A.S.C. element to control and supervise the
maintenance of all M.T. transport on the establishment of, or
allocated to, the depot; and the inclusion in the war establishment
of a R.A.S.C. transport platoon for each sub-depot in order to
provide a permanent transport element for internal use in the depot.
"hat certain R.A.O.C. field units should be redesignated: —
Old Designation
New Designation.
Officers' shop.
Officers' kit store.
Army industrial gas unit.
Mobile industrial gas unit.
Ordnance beach detach-
Beach ordnance company.
ment.
lat an army vehicle park and an army returned vehicle park should
e introduced which would be quite separate from the ordnance
hicle group and that mobile stores repair units and mobile ammu-
tion repair units should be provided on the basis of one a corps
id one an army.
ix 4 illustrates, in diagram form, the complete R.A.O.C. field
1 which is the eventual outcome of the foregoing recommendations.
R.A.O.C. War Regulations and Publications
Before 1939, the only publication describing R.A.O.C.
procedure in the field was the "Ordnance Manual (War oF
Training manual. During 1938, this publication was under revision consequent
on changes in ordnance depot procedure which were under trial at the Coen
Chilwell. The object of the trial was to evolve a procedure for the supply of
ordnance stores which could apply in peace and war.
had not been completed by September, 1939. In order to give R.A.O.C. per-
sonnel, particularly those employed in the B.O.D.s, a text book on the new
procedure, the "Ordnance Manual (War) 1939" had to be published in an
Field experience showed that the complexities of ordnance supply, staffed
by inexperienced personnel, called for a publication in the form of a regula-
tion which would detail the function and method of working in all R.A.O.C.
Consequently, in March, 1942, it was agreed that the "Ordnance Manual
(War)" should be replaced by Regulations for Army Ordnance Services
(R.A.O.S.), Part 4-" Organization, and Administration of Ordnance Services
in the Field"; Part 5-" Supply of Ordnance Stores other than Ammunition
in the Field"; Part Part " Supply of Ammunition in the Field".
of R.A.O.S. would deal with R.A.O.C. organization at home and in peace.
R.A.O.S. Parts 4 and 5, were sent for first printing in September, 1942,
but owing to the formation of R.E.M.E. and changes in organization of the
R.A.O.C., they were subjected to extensive alteration and not sent for final
printing until June, 1943. In the meantime,
" Maintenance in the Field-
M.T. Pamphlet No. 9 Part IV R.A.O.C." had been prepared, giving a précis
of the new organization of the R.A.O.C. and the function of R.A.O.C. field
In October, 1943, the further re-organization of the R.A.O.C. and forma-
tion of 21 Army Group for the invasion of Europe rendered R.A.O.S. Parts 4
and 5 out of date. A provisional publication entitled " Army Ordnance Ser-
vices, 1943," was, therefore prepared to notify impending changes and to give
guidance to units until revised R.A.O.S. pamphlets could be published.
publication gave full details of the re-organization (then in progress
templated), provisional war establishments and the methods of working for
When the organization became firm in early 1944, a series of provisional
pamphlets based on " Army Ordnance Services, 1943"
were prepared under
the general title of " Army Ordnance
Services in the Field"
pamphlet was prepared for each of the following
General Organization.
Advanced Ordnance Depots.
Vehicle Company.
Ordnance Field Parks.
Ordnance Maintenance Companies.
R.A.O.C. Store Sections attached to R.E.M.E. Workshops.
Ammunition Supply in the Field.
Supply of Industrial Gases
Notes for Ordnance Officers on Planning for Combined Operations.
WO 277/21
