(c) That railways in the war threatre would be subject to extensive
demolition and that forward maintenance, initially from beach
maintenance areas, and later from ports, would consequently depend
mainly on road transport.
(a) That a special allocation of shipping would be made to the R.A.O.C.
for the conveyance of ordnance stores despatched from the main
base as part of the daily maintenance of the force.
(e) That transit depots would have to be established in the overseas
theatre to receive and distribute to formations the stores despatched
in detail from the main base installations.
() That an advanced B.O.D could not be expected to operate in less
than 90 days from the time when it was first established.
was one of the outstanding lessons from North Africa.)
(This
(g) That repairs overseas would be effected to the maximum possible
extent by the exchange of assemblies, unserviceable assemblies
being returned to the United Kingdom for repair.
(h) That Ist, 2nd and 3rd echelon repairs only would be carried out
in the overseas theatre, 4th echelon repairs being undertaken in the
main base.
n the light of the foregoing principles, the existing standard field force
nization had to be examined and modified to meet the peculiarities of
peration.
lany exercises were held to test the theoretical doctrine which was being
it, the chief of which were exercise "Jantzen"
and a " study period
• R.A.O.C. Training Establishment.
Tantzen" was held in South Wales and was staged in order to test the
enance system for a large force making an opposed beach landing, and
ethods of administration which would be required to develop a rear
nance area from which the force could be maintained for a period
he capture of a port.
ully representative selection of R.A.O.C. units took part in the exer-
Although it was not altogether realistic from an ordnance point of
s no actual stores were received or issued (dummy cases being used
n the case of ammunition), it did produce some valuable lessons, the
That the system of "tactical loading" applied at that time for the
shipment in standard packs comprising a given tonnage of mixed
classes of commodities (e.g. rations, ammunition, medical, ordnance
stores, etc.) should, as early as possible in the landing operation,
give place to separate loading by single classes of commodities,
i.e. " commodity loading".
That the best available site giving adequate traffic circuit must be
allotted to ammunition, and that R.A.O.C.
representation on the
leadquarters of the beach group was essential in order that ordnance
leeds and requirements could be authoritatively defined and con-
idered.
(c) That a beach transit area should be established, near each beach
through which stores and ammunition were being landed, in order
that coasters could discharge with maximum speed into lorries and
lighters and that mixed loads could be properly sorted into the
main classes and ammunition into types before being delivered to the
(d) That personnel from port ordnance detachments and port ammuni-
tion detachments should be provided in the beach transit areas to
assist in the identification of ordnance stores and ammunition.
These and other minor lessons from the exercises were taken into con-
sideration when the final organization was implemented.
- The study period held at the R.A.O.C. Training Establishment enabled
unit commanders of all the R.A.O.C. units taking part in the operation to
discuss aspects of the organization which had been developed, and to air
their troubles and difficulties.
As regards ordnance maintenance, perhaps the most important of the
basic principles laid down was the decision that the C.O.Ds. in the United
Kingdom would constitute the main base installations for the force and in
order to carry out that decision it was necessary to design a special organiza-
tion which could:-
(a) Receive detailed unit indents despatched from the force (21 Army
Group) dally by air.
(b) Distribute these indents quickly and accurately to the depots con-
(c) Assemble the stores issued by the depots in response to these detailed
unit indents.
(d) Ship the stores in formation packs by the special ships allotted to
ordnance for this purpose.
(e) Provide a transit point at which all returning repairable assemblies
evacuated from the theatre could be received, sorted and distributed
to repair contractors in accordance with a given programme.
To achieve these results, an indent clearing centre (I.C.C.) and a main base
stores transit depot were formed.
These two units are described in the
following paragraphs.
The indent clearing centre consisted of one officer and 42 other ranks
who were mainly clerks for indent sorting and despatch riders for delivery
of indents to the appropriate central depots.
The indent clearing centre was
located at C.O.D.
Arrangements were made with the R.A.F.
for the indents to be flown twice daily from France (later from Belgium and
Germany) to Northolt airfield where they would be collected by I.C.C.
despatch riders and delivered immediately to the I.C.C.
Here they were to
be sorted into batches and delivered by despatch riders to the appropriate
In this way, a total of 1,104,411 indents were handled by the I.C.C. during
the 11 months which elapsed between "D"-day and the defeat of Germany.
WO 217/22
