In order to regulate the daily flow of issue transactions, to maintain a
proper speed of work and to eliminate bottlenecks ans congestion, the
system of "batch and time control" was introduced.
This consisted briefly
in the regulated release, at recurring time periods, to sections of office and
storehouse personnel, of a calculated batch of issue documents on which the
processes,
such as voucher preparation and selection of stores,
should be completed within the time period set.
By this means the distribu-
tion of personnel was made flexible, and there resulted both increase in
efficiency and economy in man-power.
It is probable that more man-power was expended on the packing of
stores than on any other storekeeping activity, and ordnance depots con-
stantly sought new methods to perfect this work.
Efficient packing was considered of such importance that a special com-
mittee was set up with the object of studying the methods of each depot, and
of evolving the " optimum" standard of method and layout.
As a result, a system termed "flow packing" was introduced, stan-
lardizing the packing processes and the layout of packing bays."
Flow
acking aimed at achieving the greatest output of efficient packaging with
he minimum of personnel. In this system stores and packing materials
vere brought together on an assembly line.
Empty cases and packing
laterials were fed by a gravity runway from an overhead storage area,
nd cases passed through the processes of packing, nailing,
stencilling,
eighing and banding without leaving the runway, thus ensuring a minimum
handling-fatigue on the part of the operatives.
Copies of the vouchers
ere packed with the stores.
Apart from the saving in man-power which was achieved, an immense
aprovement in packing resulted because the system made it possible to
incentrate the more skilled personnel on the actual packing of the stores.
Many new types of storehouse appliances and mechanical aids were intro-
iced with the objects of saving man-power, improving methods of handling
d stacking stores, and speeding movement.
Fork lift trucks were used to carry, stack and unstack stores loaded
her on small platforms, called pallets, or on dunnage.
Indoor fork lift
cks ranged in size from 2,000 to 6,000 lb. lifting capacity, with lifts from
to 14 feet above ground.
000 1b. in capacity with lifts from 5 to 17} feet.
Outdoor fork lift trucks ranged in size up to
The saving of man-
ver effected by the use of this appliance was immense; handling time.
s reduced in certain instances by 80 per cent.
Considerable use was made of industrial tractors and trailers as it was
nd that they were more economical than fork lift trucks for hauls of
r 250 feet, especially when carrying stores between buildings.
All types.
cranes were used, ranging from locomotive types operating on railway
k, and overhead cranes for large heavy loads, over a fixed route within a
ehouse, to the small lightweight mobile types.
Gravity rollers (or runways) had been in use in ordnance depots for
y years before the war for the more detailed movement of stores and
cages, such as the unloading of lorries
and rail wagons,
movement.
ugh the packing areas, and transit through receipt bays before stacking.
iently arranged this simple device saved labour and fatigue,
lerated movement and facilitated sorting and checking.
greatly
CHAPTER IV
THE EVOLUTION OF THE R.A.O.C. FIELD FORCE
ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE
In the introd in on to the vOlume a brief reference was made to the
unprepared storie hide pheR is.C. had to take the field after 21 years
In order to explain this state of unreadiness it is essential to
give the reader a short review of the period between the two World Wars.
At the end of the 1914-18 War, the ordnance services in the various
active theatres had, by means of the experience gained, been brought to a very
high state of efficiency.
Very many of the senior officers had risen from
lowly ranks to the more responsible appointments, gaining on the way a
varied and comprehensive experience of ordnance activities in the widest
sense. In spite of this, however, no real effort was made to capitalize this
experience by obtaining from these officers their considered opinion as to the
ideal organization for the R.A.O.C. in the field, nor was any record made
of their experience for guidance in post-war training.
This omission was
particularly serious in the case of temporary officers, whose knowledge was
completely lost to the Army once they had returned to their civilian
occupations.
It might be thought that the more senior regular officers remaining in
the Service could supply sufficient data on which to plan for the future and
on which training for war could be based, but, owing to the factors given
below, again the opportunity was missed, and these officers also in the course
of time retired from the Army without having contributed materially to the
training of the Corps for war.
It is a well recognized fact that financial restrictions introduced by succes-
sive governments had by 1936 brought the three fighting services to a
regrettably low state of efficiency.
This policy was instrumental in reducing
the peace-time ordnance services to what was in effect a large civilian store-
holding organization controlled and administered by a small military minority.
Every opportunity was taken to make cuts in the authorized establishments
of headquarter staffs and of depots.
Under these circumstances it was not
surprising that R.A.O.C: officers found themselves so fully occupied with their
normal peace-time duties that they had little or no time to devote towards
a study of active service problems or training themselves and their men
for war.
Not only did no field force units of the R.A.O.C. exist even in cadre
form during the pre-war period, but the military element of the
ordnance
services was far too small to allow full advantage to be taken of the oppor-
tunity for training offered by manoeuvres.
Except in Egypt, on no occasion
between 1918 and 1939 was any complete R.Á.O.C. unit included in the
forces employed on annual manoeuvres, and on the rante incasions in ten
the ordnance services were represented on the headquarters of a formation,
it was never found possible to provide the one adquarters of a formation,
staff to which he was entitled.
Another factor which should be noted is that, before 1939, there was
no R.A.O.C. training establishment controlled hat, he Director ot Meiwas
WO 277/21
18
