maintain ordnance services for the armies in Italy while simultaneously dis-
charging its commitments to the formations and garrisons still in Middle East
Command.
An account of ordnance services in the Sicilian and Italian Theatres is
given separately in Chapter XIII.
Development of Base Installations
At this point in the narrative it is instructive to look back and trace how
the ordnance base installations in the Middle East were initially planned and
progressively developed into the vast, flexible organizations needed for war.
The relevant local factors and peculiarities of the theatre which required
consideration in planning these installations are given earlier in this Chapter.
It was decided in 1940 that three B.O.Ds. and three B.A.Ds. would be
needed, that immediate requirements should be met by the reorganization of
the existing command ordnance depot and the long term requirement by the
establishment of new depots.
As regards locations it was decided that no
base ordnance installation should be sited west of the River Nile a decision
which appeared to be justified when the enemy advanced as far as
Alamein in 1942.
Base Ordnance Depots
From the existing command depot No. 4 B.O.D. was formed.
It comprised
three storeholding sub-depots and a R.S.D., thus conforming to the normal
Its accommodation was augmented
by the erection of new storehouses until ultimately it had nearly a million
1,100 were military.
Initially No. 4 B.O.D. was stocked with a full range of the ordnance
stores applicable to the theatre.
Vehicles were held in the No. 1 sub-depot
of the B.O.D.
Later, when American types of vehicles came into the country
and No. 5 B.O.D. was opened a division of vehicle stocks
was
made,
No. 4 B.O.D. stocking British vehicles and their associate stores,
while No. 5
B.O.D. held the American types.
No. 5 B.O.D. was constructed at Tel-el-Kebir.
A nucleus of the depot
personnel began work in October, 1940 but the main body did not arrive
from the United Kingdom until March, 1941.
At this time only a few
This depot
eventually covered 14 square miles with 11 million
ft. of covered
accommodation.
The
B.O.D., except that it included an additional store group to deal with
American types of armoured vehicles and their associate stores.
labour to keep pace with their rapidly increasing work loads.
By 1941, the
man-power situation had become so critical that authority was obtained from
the War Office for the enrolment of Palestinian Jewesses and Arab women
into the A.T.S.
The worment of Palest nice Sell as clerks, storewomen
and drivers in the B.O.Ds.
184
Civilian labour for clerical and storehouse duties was recruited locally
from Greeks and Egyptians, or the the Greeks being refugees.
Kebir separate camps existed for the Greeks and Egyptians.
were self-contained,
These camps
self-administered and excellently organized by their
occupants.
To overcome the language problem and to give instruction in ordnance
duties,
a small school
was
started in which
personnel
of the
various
nationalities were taught English characters and figures and a form of basic
them to perform ordnance duties.
separate wings for different nationalities, which proved of immense value
in eliminating many of the difficulties resulting from the employment of a
staff of mixed nationalities.
The large area covered by 5 B.O.D. made it extremely vulnerable to
theft of stores by
organized gangs were operating, mobile patrols, equipped with Bren guns
and searchlights mounted on 15-cwt. trucks, were organized and supplemented
by hidden watchers, armed with tommy guns and rifles, to deal with them.
These measures were effective and the organized gangs gave place to thieving
by individuals operating singly, especially at night.
This activity was countered by detailing four armed men to each store
shed for night guard duty and by armed patrols with trained dogs.
general these measures were successful, the extensive pilferage which at
first took place being very largely eliminated.
The third base depot to be formed was No.
This depot was originally established at Rafah.
A.O.D., which was sited at Sarafand and Haifa was sent to the Persian
Gulf and its functions were taken over by No. 2 B.O.D.
conformed to the normal organization of three sub-depots and a R.S.D.
Its peculiarity was the wide dispersion of sub-depots.
Haifa were the H.Q. B.O.D. and Nos. 1 and 3 sub-depots, a part of No. 2
sub-depot was sited at Rafah about 130 miles to the south and the
remainder at Sarafand about half-way between Haifa and Rafah.
The total area of the various sub-depots covered approximately 10 square
miles, the covered accommodation being about two million sq.
The depot employed a man-power force
of about 7,000 of which less than 20 per cent. was military.
In October, 1944 the depot held about 52,000 tons
approximate percentage of the tonnage compared with the number
different items in each class of store being :—
Warlike Stores
30,200
58
General Stores
9.100
As a measure of the efficiency of provision and of the improvement
in the general supply position of army equipment, it is worthy of record
that of the 1, supply position ded during that month, over
90 per cent
were immediately available from stock.
185
va2947
117
wO 277/2k
