raining at the War Office.
Training of R.A.O.C. personnel was undertaken
y a School of Instruction in accordance with the policy laid down by the
Director of Ordnance Services.
Instruction at this sono was almost entirely
onfined to peace-time procedure and the absence of war training can be
eadily
understood
when it is mentioned that the training
document,
Ordnance Manual (War)", was not published until 1931; it was declared
o be out of date within the next two years and was not republished until
eptember, 1939.
Thus, except for a brief period during 1931-32, there
ras no authorized document upon which training for war could be based.
Finally it has to be admitted that owing to the absence of training
octrines and the lack of proper R.A.O.C. representation on manoeuvres,
ttle or nothing was known by the average commander or staff officer about
ne ordnance services, the activities of which remained a complete mystery
xcept for certain courses at the Senior Officers School during which R.A.O.C
andidates gave lectures.
That this was so is not in the least surprising
onsidering that there was no means by which they could gain the necessary
nowledge even if there had been any settled policy.
It was not until 1938
nat any vacancies at the Staff College were allotted to the R.A.O.C. and
en only one candidate was accepted.
This was a step in the right direction
ut it came too late to have any marked effect when war was declared 18
lonths later.
It was in those circumstances that on mobilization in September, 1939,
e R.A.O.C. field units allotted to the Expeditionery Force were formed.
ley consisted of regulars, regular and supplementary reservists, and militia
en with only a few weeks' training.
They were in no sense trained units:
ey were an improvisation.
Excluding the workshop repair organization (later separated from the
A.O.C. to become R.E.M.E.) the R.A.O.C. in the B.E.F. consisted of the
llowing formation representatives and field units.
At headquarters, brigade
One warrant officer.
At headquarters, division ...
Deputy
Assistant
Director
of
Ordnance Services (D.A.D.O.S.)
(Major).
One warrant officer.
Ten other ranks.
At headquarters, corps
Deputy Director of Ordnance Ser-
vices (D.D.O.S.) (Colonel).
One captain.
At general headquarters ...
Director
of
Ordnance Services
(D.O.S.) (Brigadier).
D.D.O.S. (L. of C.) (Colonel).
Four
Assistant
Directors
of
Ordnance
Services (A.Ds.O.S.)
(Lieut.-Cols.).
At headquarters base sub-areas
D.A.Ds.O.S.
D.A.D.O.S. (Major).
50
Units
Corps ordnance field parks ...
One for each corps, consisting of
a headquarters, a reserve section,
a corps
section and divisional
Base
Ordnance
(B.O.Ds.).
depots
section for each division.
Which included in the War Estab-
lishment one regulating
station
detachment and two supply rail-
head detachments.
Base
ammunition
depots
Which included in the War Estab-
(B.A.Ds.).
lishment two ammunition railhead
detachments.
Base hospital laundry.
This simple 14-18 organization differed from that which operated at the
close of the 1914-18 war only in two main features, the introduction of
ordnance field parks and the division into sub-depots of the B.O.Ds. and
B.A.Ds., partly in order to give dispersion against air attack.
Its inadequacy for modern campaigns can best be gauged by a com-
parison
with the elaborate
organization shown
diagrammatically
in
Appendix 4 which was evolved from lessons learnt during the war.
The
problems of ordnance maintenance in the field multiplied rapidly with the
swift developments in weapons and equipment, the immense extension in
the diverse range of ordnance stores and the operational need to ensure a
flexible system which could keep pace with the latest methods of maintaining
mobile forces in battle.
The war-time evolution of the field organization began, in late 1939,
with two main measures, expansion of the Ordnance Directorate-at the
War Office and the formation under the D.M.T. of the R.A.O.C. Training
Establishment to supersede the R.A.O.C. School of Instruction.
A new, adequately staffed ordnance branch, O.S.1, was instituted at the
War Office and allotted the responsibilities of co-ordinating the supply of
ordnance stores to war theatres, preparing war equipment tables, revising
the field organization and amending
light of current experience, and mobilizing R.A.O.C. field units.
The new Training Establishment,
directed by the D.M.T.,
brought
R.A.O.C. basic military training
into line with that of other
arms
provided instruction in up-to-date war duties.
By close liaison with the War
Office, the Training Establishment was apprised of the latest developments
in field organization and methods, and disseminated this information to all
ranks R.A.O.C. through the medium of a series of various war courses which
continued throughout the war.
Very early experience in France in 1939-40 revealed clearly the main
weaknesses in
the field organization.
The base depots, both stores and
ammunition depots, were called upon, immediately formations landed in
France, to attempt the impossible task of setting up shop and simultaneously
serving customers.
Any such base installation, for stores or ammunition,
needed a clear period to get its personnel höused and its stocks received,
methodically
arranged and taken on charge before efficient issues could
67612
51
WO 277/21
18
