SERVICE
OUS
CHAPTER XVIII
THE INDIA BASE, 1942-1945
The Decision to form the India Base
Although more than a year earlier the C.-in-C. India had begun the planning
of new Base installations and airfields for the war against Japan, the actual
decision to form the India Base, as such, was not made until September,
943.
The decision was then reached by the British Chiefs of Staff who
directed that India should be prepared by October of the following year
as a Base for a force of 20 divisions.
Such a Base,
existing as it would at the end of long and dangerous
supply lines, would require to be far more self-contained and stocked on a
much heavier scale, than one in a less remote area.
Moreover, the Base
itself could not be localized to one part of the continent, because no single
area in India had sufficient port capacity or potential airfield sites-nor even
a suitable climate and terrain-for a large scale mobilization, training and
acclimatization programme.
When reviewing the influence which this decision had on the detailed
Ordnance organization in India, it is necessary to appreciate the several
changes that had occurred in the base areas upon which operations pivoted.
In 1939 the military
services in the country were organized for the
main task of defending the North-West Frontier. It had been decided
to introduce the central depot system, but the outbreak of the war with
Germany and its extension to the Middle East required a further expansion
of installations to serve training and mobilizing areas
in addition to the
North-West defences.
Ordnance in India was unprepared for the catastrophic turn of events
in 1942, and in particular for the retreat of the Allied forces through the
north-west frontier of Burma after the fall of Rangoon, but immediate action
was taken to organize O.F.Ds., A.O.Ds. and A.A.Ds. as far forward as
possible to maintain the forces defending India's north-east frontier.
Some
of these depots were literally cut out of virgin jungles, and it is to the great
credit of all ranks that the depots operated as well as they did, and that the
forces were maintained and were able to form an effective barrier to the
onslaught of the Japanese.
Apart from the enormous difficulties of supplying
accommodation and staff for the depots, work on the L. of C. installations
was very seriously hindered by the limitations of narrow gauge railways
(designed to serve tea plantations), frequent river trans-shipments, an excep-
tionally heavy monsoon and the dislocation of large parts of the rail com-
munication by subversive elements of the population.
Most of the depots established at this time, remained in operation until
the end of the war and, although conditions improved, the maintenance of
the forces in these areas remained a most difficult problem owing to the
length of time required for transit between the base installations in India
and the eastern areas.
The intervention of Japan and the early domination of the Bay of Bengal
by the enemy rendered east coast sites unsuitable for base installations, so
that both projects already in hand and further immediate expansion, had to
be sited well back in the centre of India.
298
was 947/17
WO 277/21
