Stocks of ammunition, eventually built up to 20,000 tons, were maintained
near the railhead in front of which dumps were established as necessary.
These dumps were under First Army control.
Divisional dumps of ordnance
stores
were formed under control of the formation A.Ds.O.S.
Stocks 1n
these dumps consisted mostly of clothing, it being essential to hold large
quantities of clothing in the forward areas because of the extremely bad
weather conditions which prevailed.
Vehicles were held in a vehicle park which
formed
part of No. 1
B.O.D.
This arrangement proved advantageous in that replacement vehicles
going forward could be utilized for the transportation of stores from B.O.D.
to forward areas and to No. 3 B.O.D.
The whole arrangements for the disposition of stocks and the maintenance
of forward troops were governed by the fact that the L. of C. from Algiers
to railhead consisted of 400 miles of single track railway and a like distance
of road passing through mountain ranges and over numerous bridges, the
whole L. of C. being extremely vulnerable to enemy attack.
Second Phase-December, 1942 to March, 1943
Operationally
this period consisted of attack and counter-attack.
For
the R.A.O.C. it was a period of building up stocks and preparing for the
spring offensive.
Bone was now safe to receive convoys and arrangements
were made for all shipments of warlike stores to be sent there.
Shipments
of clothing and accommodation stores were equally divided between Algiers
and Bone.
During February and March the whole of the Armoured Brigade was
re-equipped with Sherman tanks, 240 of which arrived towards the end of
January.
The Valentine tanks thus released, together with all available
spares, were handed over to the French.
R.A.O.C. personnel assisted the
French with the identification of the stores and compilation of catalogues.
special M.T. group was established at No. 1 B.O.D. Algiers to deal with
spares for Sherman tanks.
When the time came for the final battle, adequate stocks of all ordnance
stores and ammunition had been built up.
It was even possible to supply
stores to a limited extent to Eighth Army units which had crossed into
Tunisia from the east during February.
The Final Phase—22nd April to 13th May, 1943
By the end of March the First Army had been heavily re-inforced and now
comprised 5th Corps, with three divisions and a tank brigade,
and 9th
Corps with two armoured divisions, an infantry division and a tank regiment.
On the 22nd April the First Army advanced on Tunis, fierce fighting
developed, with heavy losses on both sides, and continued until the end
of the month.
First Army was then strengthened by the transfer of the
Eighth Army troops and a regrouping of First Army took place.
was completed by the 5th May,
1943 by which time large dumps
wam unition and stores had been established in the forward area for
the
final offensive.
German C.-in-C. surrendered.
On the 12th May enemy resistance collapsed and the
Maintenance of the forward troods during the three weeks of the final
offensive continued in a manner similar to that adopted carlier in
192
campaign, except that in the later stages ordnance field parks had arrived.
The tield park stocks were however grounded, the vehicles being used for
the transportation of stores.
Non-divisional field parks which were intended
to serve units on the L. of C. were in fact used as workshop store sections.
Despite the
initial difficulties, the shortage of personnel,
and the long
L. of C., the R.A.O.C. maintained a good service to the troops and in the
words of the G.O.C.-in-C.,
" never failed to deliver the goods".
First Army in his despatch on the
campaign
Preparations for Attack on Italy
Before hostilities ended in N. Africa plans had been made for an attack
on Sicily to be followed by the invasion of Italy.
In anticipation of this
move arrangements were made for the reorganization of ordnance services
to meet the new commitment
nese arancements
included the
expansion
of No. 1 B.O.D. Algiers
and the reorganization of No. 3 B.O.D.
into No.
32 B.O.D.
The former
was to relieve
No.
3 B.O.D. of the bulk of its load to enable it to build
up stocks for the maintenance of troops in Italy.
Eight hundred thousand sq.
of covered accommodation was con-
structed in the vineyards near Barrell, a small town near Bone in which
the M.T.
and warlike stores sub-depots of No. 1 B.O.D. were established.
In addition 400,000 sq. ft. of
accommodation was constructed at Rouiba
outside Algiers for the expansion of the general stores, and clothing sub-
depot at Algiers.
Both places were rail served.
With the capture of Tunis these arrangements were rapidly completed
and the maintenance of supplies to First and Eighth Army in Sicily and
Italy became, until the end of the war, the main task of the R.A.O.C. in
N. Africa.
Automatic Maintenance
Stocks in N. Africa were built up
Iby automatic
maintenance; con-
sequently token staffs only were provided in the establishment of B.O.Ds.
for provision functions.
No arrangements could be made for co-ordinating
the provision activities of the two B.O.Ds. until personnel became available
for the establishment of a central provision office when
the camnaign was
over
In the early days it was found that stores despatched under the automatic
maintenance system had been inadequately scaled and not sufficiently well
packed to withstand the voyage and handling during off-loading.
This
was reported to the War Office and consignments received in the later stages
of the campaign were well packed and adequate in quantity.
Laundries
The laundry service worked under the greatest difficulties.
A great deal
of laundry equipment was lost at sea.
The trailers on which the equipment
was mounted were large and
difficult to handle• conseauenty they were
often shut out of shipments.
Some laundry units arrived in the theatre
without any of their technical equipment.
One unit (No. 12 Field Laundry)
not only lost all its equipment but also a large proportion of its personnel
owing to enemy action at sea
Although the operation of the laundries was greatly hampered by scarcity
of water, they nevertheless performind sies e excellent work.
WAste 17
WO 277/21
