ST
RVICES
The fine work of all depot personnel cannot be over-emphasized.
Climatic conditions were extremely trying and the hours of work were long :
yet all demands were dealt with on time.
The standard of storage and
accounting suffered, but in the circumstances this was unavoidable.
Before the relief of Imphal, stocks at Manipur Road were built up ready
The depot at Imphal was re-stocked immediately the road
After some weeks of bitter fighting around Bishenpur and Ukhrul, the
enemy withdrew, fighting long delaying actions almost all the way to the
was particularly
for this type of
fighting, and nearly all types of ammunition and demolition charges were
used against "bunkers.' (deep fortified dug-outs) to find out the types best
suited to destroy these obstacles.
Supply to our formations advancing down the roads south of Imphal
was reasonably clear, but a division in the Kabaw Valley to the east had
to be supplied by air-dropping.
As this division advanced, and cleared new
dropping zones, fresh ammunition was called for.
Stocks at the rear drop-
ping zones, were left behind owing to the transport shortage. Much time
and labour had to be used later in clearing these dumps.
O.F.Ds. and dumps were moved forward to keep up with the troops
until eventually a link was effected at the Chindwin River in the region
of Kalewa and an O.F.D. was moved forward to Indianggyi for the crossing
of the Chindwin.
The question of supply in Burma proper was under careful consideration,
the chief difficulty being the poorness of the roads between Tamu and Kalewa,
along which all supplies had to travel.
It was considered likely that this
stretch would become impassable in the monsoon and it was therefore
decided to move ammunition over the Chindwin before the rains,
spread these stocks between an A.A.D. near Shwebo and three O.F.Ds.
Part of the ammunition to stock the A.A.D. and O.F.Ds.
was moved forward to Palel in readiness for this move.
Difficulty was now being experienced in supplying the troops across the
Chindwin, owing to lack of suitable ferrying craft and to the consequent
strain on the only road and on transport.
Demands for air supply increased
rapidly and the decision to set up an A.A.D. in Burma and stock up via
Dimapur-Imphal-Kalewa road L. of C. was reversed in favour of air supply.
From the ammunition viewpoint, this was extremely difficult. Ammuni-
tion for all troops in Burma had been placed on the North Line and
quantities had already been ferried forward under great difficulty to Palel,
Indianggyi and Kalewa in readiness for the Chindwin crossing.
on the other hand, meant that supply must be based on the Chittagong
This was necessary, owing to the difficulty of moving large quantities
over the long single road via Imphal, and also to the fact that Imphal
airstrips could not take the full load, and were, in any case, likely to be
unusable in monsoon weather.
of the air-lift was, however,
carried out from the North Line throughout the operation.
The whole of the Fourteenth Army and a portion of 15 Corps were
now based on 443 A.A.D., Chittagong, and an immediate expansion of
the depot to cope with the increased holdings and additional load became
An R.E. construction company moved in, and within six weeks
roads and "plinths" (platforms 1 ft. high, made of dried mud and bricks)
had been made and a number of sheds erected.
weather " but workable.
The project was never completed because Rangoon
was taken before the rainy season and Chittagong ceased to act as a base.
15 Corps offensive in Arakan kept in step with those in Assam and
Akyab Island was first taken by amphibious attack, then Ramree
and so on by steps down the coast to Taungup, the entire effort culminating
with the amphibious operation at Rangoon.
Depots were established at Akyab and Ramree to shorten the fly-in
to the Fourteenth Army when they had reached Mandalay and Meiktila,
these being the first two depots to be laid out from the beginning in
accordance with R.A.O.C. standards.
Akyab was road-served and a success.
The railway was on low ground and was washed
away as soon as the monsoon started; derailments took place with such
frequency that the depot was unworkable.
plinths, material was not avallable locally and could not be imported owing
Consequently, nearly all stocks became unservice-
After the crossing of the Chindwin, the area between the Chindwin and
An O.F.D. was established at Alon, and stocked
partly by air and partly by river from Kalewa.
Later an airstrip was opened
at Shwebo and a dump formed there to supply the bridgehead now being
thrown across the Irrawaddy by 33 Corps at Singu.
put up by the Japanese at Singu, and the expansion of the bridgehead was
It was during this period that the first major ammunition explosion
The whole of the stock at Imphal was lost; out
of approximately 4,000 tons not a single round of serviceable ammunition
remained.
The trouble started with a roof fire which could not be brought
under control.
The resulting explosion set alight the surrounding sheds
and the jungle.
As it was apparent from the first explosion that little
could be done, owing to the extent and rapidity with which the fire spread,
ammunition was rushed from the forward base throughout the night and
supply to the troops was maintained.
Ammunition was flown direct to Shwebo.
Another bridgehead was
thrown across the Irrawaddy west of Mandalay, and a strip eventually
opened at Sagaing.
Ammunition was flown direct from Chittagong for the
assault on Mandalay.
During this period, 4 Corps were concentrating in the Gangaw Valley
for a third crossing at Pakokku, west of Meiktila.
This took place at the
height of the fighting for Mandalay.
The forward troops raced direct to
Meitila where heavy opposition was encountered. Ammunition was flown
to the airfields here as soon as they were taken.
The Japanese, however,
counter-attacked, and for about a week all ammunition had to be air-
dropped. The accumulated effect of " dropping" in so many areas threw
an enormous strain on the depot at Chittagong, where all issues of mortar-
bombs had to be repacked and certain types of packages stuffed with pro-
lective material to prevent damage on impact with the ground.
67612
K* 2:
WO 277/23
