water and rough weather. This specialized work and the stowage of tank
kits in the vehicles was centralized at the A.F.V. Depot, Chilwell:
From
late 1941 onwards, Chilwell became responsible for the preparation for
shipment, and for the actual loading and stowage on board ship, of all « A »
vehicles despatched overseas. Mobile embarkation sections were formed to
carry out these duties at the various ports.
In 1942 the R.A.O.C. vehicle organization assumed responsibility for the
movement to ports of all reserve "B" vehicles for overseas shipments.
the same year when the home command pools of motor cycles were disbanded,
the Chilwell vehicle organization established seven motor-cycle reserve depots.
At the same time it had been decided to absorb into the R.A.O.C. M.T.
organization the supply of R.A.S.C. M.T. vehicles which hitherto was the
separate responsibility of the R.A.S.C. A detailed survey was made of the
R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. systems of M.T. supply and maintenance, and a new,
single system was drawn up embodying the best features of the two systems.
The new organization and methods so evolved, successfully withstood the
heavy strains imposed by the ever increasing M.T. supply load for the
remainder of the war.
Concurrently with this reorganization the Chilwell Vehicle Reserve Store
was renamed "Tanks and Vehicles" and new branches, designated Central
Vehicle Control (A.F.V.) and Central Vehicle Control (B) respectively were
established at Chilwell.
The fusion of the R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. M.T. responsibilities involved
the merging of the R.A.S.C census records of nearly 200,000 vehicles into that
of the R.A.O.C. records; and the resultant increase in the total number of
R.A.O.C. vehicle depots throughout the country rendered impracticable con-
tinued central control direct from Chilwell. In order to decentralize this
control, five Chilwell M.T. Groups were formed, each group commander
becoming responsible for the administration of all vehicle depots in his group
area, to the Commandant, Chilwell, through O. i/c Tanks and Vehicles.
It was in 1942 that the imperative need to effect utmost economy in
shipping space caused the introduction of the system of "knocking down"
"B" vehicles, i.e., removing wheels, axles, bodies, and packing each vehicle •
in one case or crate far less in volume than the assembled vehicle.
This work
was carried out by selected packing firms and the cased vehicles were then
stored, pending shipment, in cased vehicle depots, two of which, at Finningley
and Queensferry, were opened in November, 1942.
The same month witnessed the opening, at Slough, of the first open storage
depot in the United Kingdom for "A" vehicles, the production of which had
so increased as to render continued storage under cover impracticable.
Later, in order to economize in personnel, an effort was made to allot
specialized roles to the various V.R.Ds., whereby certain depots held only
new vehicles of types in great demand, others held only part-worn vehicles
not likely to be needed, and a third category held a broad selection of all
types of vehicles.
the three types of vehicle reserve depots.
A plan was worked out so that each group would contain
The stock holdings of "A" vehicles rapidly increased as large shipments
arrived from the United States and as units, equipped with the newer types of
26
tanks, returned obsolescent types for storage pending disposal. It became
necessary to open 13 new A.F.V. depots during 1943, and for the groups to
assume technical control of the A.F.V. depots as well as the V.R.Ds.
The closing months of 1943 brought preparations for the invasion of
North-West Europe, and the decision for the siting in the concentration areas
of South and South-East England of "A" vehicle depots to hold stocks of
waterproofed vehicles as replacements for unit casualties, and as a general
reserve. Suitable sites for the first " Operational ' A ' Vehicle Depots»
were
found at Winchester and Crawley.
Another depot was opened, at Prestatyn,
holding
large
stocks of specially prepared vehicles
covered
accommodation.
The year 1943 brought many changes.
The experience gained in the
winters of 1941 and 1942 showed that hard ground for storing vehicles in
the open was indispensable and that sites with hard standings must be
Consequently, selected sections of recently built dual-carriage way
roads were requisitioned. During the year, out of eight new V.R.Ds. opened,
five were sited on these roads.
Additional accommodation for the storage
of motor-cycles became necessary and four new depots for this purpose were
opened during the first three months of 1943 and three others later in the
The programme for the casing of vehicles was increased.
To cope with
this a new cased vehicle depot was opened in January, 1943, and another in
April.
Subsequent events proved this to be the peak period and in later
months these depots were closed as stocks were cleared from them.
The opening of all these new depots upset the balance of the groups, each
of which originally administered an almost equal number of depots.
August, 1943, it was decided to sub-divide two of the existing groups and
to create a new group in Southern Command, thereby increasing the number
of groups from five to eight.
Simultaneously with these changes a big mobilization programme was in
progress. During June and July five divisions were mobilized, so far as
Stocks of vehicles continued to increase not only in quantity but also in
It was clear that still more storage space would be required in 1944.
The process of acquiring new sites and transforming them into depots was too
slow to meet all the operational commitments.
opening 11 new A.F.V. depots and four new V.R.Ds., increments were added
to seven existing A.F.V. depots and nine V.R.Ds. were upgraded.
Once again, in May, 1944, the greatly enlarged numbers of units within
the groups necessitated modification to the boundaries of two of the groups,
and the sub-division of a third group, making nine groups in all.
The preparation of vehicles for the assault on Europe was an immense
task necessitating the employment of 2,000 additional personnel.
control of the V.R.Ds. from Chilwell became impracticable.
were decentralized on a group basis and group headquarters became respon-
sible for nominating the depot from which vehicles should be issued.
Throughout the months of June to September, vehicles poured down to
the embarkation ports.
First went 10,000 waterproofed vehicles, followed
27
67612
WO 277/22
