OUS
On 18th June, 15 B.A.D. took over the ammunition dump in 104 Beach
Sub-Area, thus forming the ammunition dump for No. 2 L. of C. Terminal
(No. 2 Army Roadhead) leaving 17 B.A.D. free to take over the two ammuni-
tion dumps in 101 and 102 Beach Sub-Areas, thereby forming the ammuni-
tion dump for No. 1 L. of C. Terminal (No. 1 Army Roadhead).
No.
B.A.D. landed on 24th June and was sited adjacent to 15 B.A.D., but because
operational troops were located within the B.A.D. area was not able to open
for issues for some days.
No. 2 B.A.D. arrived on 21st July.
When the O.B.Ds. were disbanded (at a later date) their personnel were
used for other duties such as tank kitting sections for corps and staffs for
officers' shops; all stocks of their controlled stores were transferred to No. 1
Ordnance Maintenance Company to form an
initial army holding of two
days' consumption of stores for Second Army.
On 12th July No. 1 Army Roadhead, including the stocks in installations,
passed to 2 Canadian Corps.
In anticipation of this, the majority of landing
reserves sent to this sector contained items peculiar to Canadian forces.
To handle and hold Second Army reserve of light "A" vehicles,
"B"
vehicles and guns, a G.H.Q. Vehicle Park was placed under direct command
of D.D.O.S., Second Army on 16th July.
Thus, by 25th July, 1944 the R.M.A. had been established, maintenance
of ordnance stores and vehicles being effected by 17
A.O.D.
and
OI
ammunition by 17 and 15 B.A.Ds.
A system was designed during the planning of the campaign by which
indents could be graded according to urgency and priority
given in vital
cases.
Categories were "White Hot", "Red Hot":
and normal.
For
example, if fifty sparking plugs
were required to maintain ordnance field
park stock the demand would be
normal but if because of unexpected
trouble the wastage rate of a particular type of plug turned out to be higher
than
that expected, the demand for extra stocks would be graded "Red
Hot"; if vehicles such as tanks were off the road for lack of sparking plugs,
and no stocks remained in ordnance field parks or workshop stores sections,
their replacement demands
would be graded
" White Hot".
All such
urgent demands were " vetted" by D.D.O.S. Office at Army H.Q. and the
scheme worked admirably.
The Second Stage (26th July to 26th September, 1944)
This stage included the break-out from the Normandy bridgehead, the
pursuit of the enemy across the Seine and up to the line of the Meuse-Escaut
canal, the capture of Antwerp and finally the airborne operation (" Market
Garden") to force river crossings over the Maas and the
Rhine, and thus
turn the right flank of the German defence line.
The map facing page 228
illustrates this advance.
The administrative developments can conveniently be described by con-
sidering them in three stages:
a The breath-oe stages the Normandy bridgehead to the line of the
(b) The crossings of the Seine up to the capture of Brussels and Antwerp
on 3rd and 4th September respectively.
(e) The operations to exploit as act North terminating in operation
" Market Garden"
230
THE BREAK-OUT FROM THE BRIDGEHEAD
The policy of drawing the bulk of the German forces towards the British
sector, thus paving the way for the American advance round the right flank,
was proving successful, but as a result our progress had not kept pace with
the planning estimates.
At the end of July there seemed little hope of an
early capture of the Seine ports and it appeared that the British forces would
probably have to rely on maintenance through the R.M.A. for some time to
come.
At this period, German resistance was stubborn, and the possibility
of having to spend the whole winter south of the Seine had to be faced.
Stocking of the R.M.A. continued, therefore, in
order to cater for this
eventuality and for the breaks in day-to-day maintenance that winter con-
ditions would impose on the unloading programmes, and with the knowledge
that the stores would be required to support the advance if a break-through
was achieved.
The narrow confines of the bridgehead limited the number of administra-
tive units that could be accepted in the area and so only those units urgently
required at the time were moved over to the continent at this stage.
On 16th August, 14 Forward Trailer Section opened for issue at St.
Martins in the R.M.A.
This unit had been specially stocked to supply M.T.
spares to L. of C. units not served by the ordnance field parks of formations;
17 A.O.D., relieved of this load, was now able to concentrate on supplying
the fighting formations.
14 Forward Trailer Section consisted of 41 four-ton trailers fitted with
bins to carry small M.T. spare parts and 69 bulk trailers for larger com-
ponents, viz., engines, axles, etc.
Although it was potentially a mobile
unit, it was not necessary to move it from the original site until a major
move was
A.O.D.
September to the area of Brussels.
Meanwhile,
14
was being rapidly developed and took over the issue load when
17 A.O.D. closed down.
The remaining stock of B.M.Ps., L.Rs. and other
stores belonging to 17 A.O.D.
placed under the control of C.O.O.,
14 A.O.D.
The personnel of 16 A.O.D. who were operating with 17 A.O.D.
were transferred to 14 A.O.D. and the new depot became known as 14/16
A.O.D.
During this period one base laundry, three base hospital laundries, one
base industrial
unit,
four army industrial gas units,
seventeen port
ordnance detachments and fourteen port ammunition
detachments arrived
in the theatre ready to operate in the Advanced Base and the channel ports
as soon as they
were liberated.
There were no major problems concerning the maintenance of forma-
tions during the period in the bridgehead, as distances were short and it was
possible for units to obtain urgent requirements within a few hours.
Certain
difficulties, however, were experienced in the supply of particular equip-
ments, notably artillery, because mechanical defects appeared after sustained
action and prematures of ammunition, but these were overcome by obtain-
ing urgent replacements and spares by air from the United Kingdom.
programme for the re-organization of field artillery in the assault comps
was arranged during August.
Seven regiments equipped with S.P. 105-mm.
guns were converted into 25-pounder regiments.
All stores
and equip-
ment required for this conversion were brought over from
the
United
231
WO 277/21
18
