VICRS
Ous
trailers and weapon carriers, these light sections were not tried out long
enough to prove their usefulness but the indications were that they would
have been extremely valuable.
Base establishments suffered from four principal handicaps:—
(a) Most depots' staffs had literally to build their own depot, owing to
shortage of R.E. labour.
(b) No modern racking or stores handling machinery of any description
All this had to be improvised.
(c) Faulty planning resulted in the construction of storehouses and roads
simultaneously with the receipt of initial stocks.
(d) Many stores supplied by India were
marked.
The programme for the despatch of intial stocks from
India was also badly controlled, non-essential items frequently pre-
ceding those of vital importance.
In April, 1944, it was decided that the A.O.Ds. at Mymensingh and Gauhati
should not hold any warlike stores and the stocks and personnel were accord-
ingly transferred to the A.O.Ds. at Manipur Road and Chittagong.
It was also
decided not to raise a vehicle company for the A.O.D. Mymensingh.
THE JAPANESE ATTACKS AT IMPHAL AND KOHIMA
In May, 1944, the Japanese started their "all out" offensive on India.
They quickly cut in behind 17 Division at Tiddum, pushed back the division
at Tamu to Imphal, surrounded the Imphal plain and the garrison at Kohima,
and established themselves firmly on the road from Manipur Road to
Kohima.
Concurrently they advanced towards the Jorhat-Manipur Road
railway line and at one time it looked as though 226 A.O.D. at Manipur
Road might be surrounded.
It was,
therefore, decided to trap at Gauhati
all stores and ammunition destined for depots at Manipur Road forward
until road communications were re-opened.
At the same time, stores were
diverted from the Northern line to the depots at Chittagong.
Meanwhile, it
became obvious that the only means of maintaining the Imphal and Kohima
garrisons would be by air supply, and the O.F.D. at Comilla and the detach-
ment at Agartala were specially stocked to meet this commitment and an
Ordnance Air Supply Organization was improvised at Chittagong.
The brunt of the work for the supply of ordnance stores and ammunition,
therefore, fell upon these three establishments.
It may be said that the troops
on the Imphal Plain and at Kohima received by air everything essential for
the defence of their perimeters.
The evolution of the system for air supply
is described in some detail later in this chapter.
The battles for Kohima
and the Imphal Plain were being fought at the same time as those for the
opening of the road between Manipur Road and Imphal.
At first the depots
at Manipur Road were entirely responsible for manning their own defences
as there were no other troops available.
This placed a great strain on the
depot staffs who were working to supply incoming formations at the same
time as manning the depot perimeter by day and night.
The arrival of
fresh divisions in the Jorhat-Manipur Road area and their advance up the
road to Imphal relieved the strain but the Manipur Road depot had suffered
a good deal of dislocation from which it took some time to recover.
soon as the Manipur Road base was comparatively safe, the flow of stores
274
and ammunition to the depots was resumed and the A.O.D. load at Gauhati
decreased.
When the road from Manipur Road to Imphal was cleared of the enemy,
it was decided to re-establish 221 A.O.D. in Imphal itself.
The Japanese invasion routes and British retreat routes are shown on the
map facing page 271.
THE BRITISH ADVANCE
By October, 1944, 221 A.O.D. was ready to receive stores.
1944,
Fourteenth
Army H.Q.
In November,
moved forward to Imphal, leaving behind
approximately half of its strength to form a newly organized Headquarters
L. of C.; this L. of C. Headquarters included a D.D.O.S. responsible for
ordnance administration on the lines of communications, leaving the D.D.O.S.
at H.Q. Fourteenth Army free to deal with the
formations of Fourteenth Army only.
ordnance services in the
By November, the offensive against
the Japanese was in full swing and early in December an O.F.D. was estab-
lished as far south as Indianggyi.
The 15th Corps fought its way down the coast while the 4th and 33rd
Corps advanced in the centre.
Months of fierce and confused fighting
followed which eventually resulted in the capture of Rangoon on 2nd May.
1945, and the total defeat of the Japanese in Burma.
The map facing page
273 illustrates this advance.
Ordnance activities during this period are
described in the sections relating to
air supply and ammunition supply.
The provision of trained staff in
Lack of typists was a big problem. Coolie labour was also insufficient.
Less than one-third of the labour required was available and even this was
Local contract labour was most unsatisfactory, and
on occasions less than 10 per cent. of the labour arranged was received.
shortage of flat railway wagons for back-loading, and therefore both closed
The transit of major assemblies in
high sided wagons without mechanical aid for loading and unloading pre-
sented an almost impossible task and seriously hampered the speedy turn-
round of ships and rolling stock.
Sub-depots and vehicle parks were scattered over a very wide area,
extending south from H.Q. at Chittagong to approximately 100 miles along
the Arakan Road.
Lines of communication
were probably more difficult
than in any other theatre of operations.
During the fair weather season, important and urgent stores for opera-
tional units were sent forward by road convoy to various collecting centres
67612
275
WO 277/21
18
