Throughout the campaign, army vehicle parks moved up in sup-
port of their formations and other vehicle parks were located at points along
the L. of C. to control consignments of vehicles being sent up to the front.
Vehicles from the United Kingdom were diverted to the Channel ports
as soon as they were opened, and 15 and 17 Transit Vehicle Parks were
established at Ostend and Boulogne respectively.
With the setting up of
the Advanced Base in Belgium, approximately 8,000 light "A" and "B"
vehicles had to be brought up from the R.M.A. and to assist in this heavy
commitment No. 1 Canadian Vehicle Company was brought over from
the United Kingdom in September.
It was found necessary to establish intermediate
along the line of advance in addition to maintaining dumps already in the
All these dumps were initially replenished from the
R.M.A. but as soon as Dieppe was operative 3 B.A.D. moved forward to
receive ammunition through that port for First Canadian Army. Neverthe-
less, ammunition still had to be obtained from the R.M.A. and any sur-
pluses that First Canadian Army had were handed over to Second Army.
Although the expenditure of artillery ammunition during the advance was
comparatively low, heavy demands were made on arrival in the Brussels
area for replenishment of armoured fighting vehicle and small arms
Artillery ammunition was in short supply in the forward areas and for-
mations were restricted to drawing at half 21 Army Group rates for each
day. It was necessary at one stage to despatch 112,000 rounds of 25-pounder
by air from the United Kingdom but the situation was improved by the
discovery of 80,000 25-pounder H.E. shell (without cartridges) at Louvain
which had been excellently maintained by the Germans since 1940.
"MARKET GARDEN"
Operation "Market Garden", which was really a combination of two
separate operations, merits special mention for three reasons; firstly, it
was undertaken at a time when the administrative resources of Second Army
were strained to the utmost, but the administrative risk involved was con-
sidered to be worth the tactical advantage that might be gained; secondly,
it was the first large-scale operation by airborne troops in front of forces
already established on the ground in an attempt, to secure a large slice
of enemy-held territory to which the advancing ground troops could come
up to re-organize; thirdly, two U.S. airborne
divisions were involved as
well as Ist British Airborne Division.
The airborne part of the operation
was entitled operation "Market" while that of the ground forces was opera-
tion "Garden" ; for the latter 30 Corps was made responsible.
In the ground operation, arrangements were made for maximum loads
to be forwarded to divisional, army and infantry ordnance sub-parks. These
sub-parks were attached to their formations and supplemented the tank and
M.T. spares position. Arrangements
for delivery by air of
urgent demands such as M.T. spares and wireless valves.
approximately one hundred tons of ordnance stores were landed at Bayeux
in three equal consignments each of about thirty-four tons.
transport situation delayed the arrival of these "bricks" in the operational
area, but at least one was expected by the D Day of this operation.
The airborne operation was mounted from the United Kingdom.
R.A.O.C. contribution to the force consisted of H.Q. personnel and an air-
borne ordnance field park, nearly 30 all ranks.
On 17th September the first paratroopers including the R.A.O.C. recon-
naissance party dropped at Arnhem.
On the 18th the main R.A.O.C. party
and the ordnance field park landed by glider. By 26th September the opera-
tion ended by the withdrawal of the remnants of the force.
The A.D.O.S.
(Lt.-Colonel G. A. Mobbs) and all but one of the R.A.O.C. were taken
prisoner, most of them being wounded.
Very few stores reached the field
park and the R.A.O.C. personnel were
employed almost
wholly on
combatant duties.
The Third Stage (26th September, 1944 to 14th January, 1945)
The third stage covers the establishment and stocking of the Advanced
Base in Belgium, including the opening of the great port of Antwerp and
the measures necessary to oppose the German winter offensive.
FORMATION OF THE ADVANCED BASE
To implement the decision
made early in September that the new
Advanced Base for the British forces would be established in the area of
Antwerp and Brussels, reconnaissances were carried out and plans initiated
long before the port of Antwerp was opened.
The area was selected because
it had good port facilities and was well served by road, rail and canal
communications. It contained much suitable accommodation and had readily
available a good supply of labour.
The depots, however, could not be fully
stocked until the port of Antwerp was open.
delivered to the depots by road and rail through the Channel ports and from
The development and exploitation of the system of canals
provided a means of transport additional to road and rail, which were the
principle means, particularly in the forward areas.
these canals was of great assistance in the subsequent build-up. In addition
necessity for constant intake of all commodities to meet daily
maintenance requirements, it was estimated that (before launching any
major advance, 40,000 tons of ammunition and large quantities of ordnance
stores would be required in the Advanced Base. The policy was that the
Advanced Base should remain outside Germany even when operations pro-
gressed into that country and that if Hamburg or a similar port were
captured, it would be used solely as a transit port to supplement the existing
Until the establishment of the Advanced Base in Belgium, 14 A.O.D.
in the R.M.A. continued as the main depot for the force, with the exception
stores shipped from the United Kingdom to Ostend for issue direct
to armies and forward L. of C. troops.
Such stores were handled by 17
Stores Transit Depot which moved for this purpose from Dieppe to Ostend
during October.
Special consignments of bulk clothing, soap and other
expendable stores were also sent there for issue to formations.
In September,
14 Forward Trailer Section moved from the R.M.A. to Brussels to handle
the supply of M.T. spare parts to L. of C. troops in that area.
235
WO 277/21
