STRICT
own installations and personnel.
During 1939 their activities and commit-
ments began to increase very rapidly,
necessitating the urgent recruitment
Many of these were obtained from the Royal
of additional ordnance officers.
Artillery, who were able to provide selected personnel with valuable technical
knowledge of gun stores, searchlight equipment, etc., peculiar to A.A. units.
During 1939-40, D.A.Ds.O.S. of A.A. divisions administered the
A.A.
ordnance depots (A.A.O.Ds.) and A.A. ammunition depots in their divisional
areas.
The ammunition depots consisted of intermediate ammunition depots
(I.A.Ds.), stocked from central depots, and equipment ammunition magazines
(E.A.Ms.) which issued direct to gun sites and were replenished by the
I.A.Ds.
By the end of 1940 an immense expansion of the A.D.G.B. had taken
place.
A.A. units of the B.E.F. France had returned devoid of practically
all their war equipment, and the overall commitment on ordnance services
of completing all A.A. formations and units with war equipment was a
formidable and urgent one, complicated by the acute shortage in supply which
existed at that period.
It was realized that D.A.Ds.O.S. of A.A. divisions could no longer
efficiently administer their ordnance depots, as well as carry out their primary
and essential duties of liaison with units and advice on A.A. ordnance services
to their commanders.
R.A.O.C. staffs at A.A. corps headquarters, formed
in January, 1941, were accordingly made strong enough to relieve divisional
D.A.Ds.O.S. of that duty and D.Ds.O.S. of A.A. corps assumed the respon-
sibility for administering all A.A.O.Ds. and I.A.Ds. in their areas.
The
installations in each A.A. corps area were suitably
sub-divided into
geographical areas, with an area ordnance officer responsible direct to the
D.D.O.S., A.A. corps.
The supply of ammunition from E.A.Ms. to gunsites
remained under divisional D.A.Ds.O.S.
The administration of A.A.O.Ds. by areas provided an efficient organiza-
tion, increased flexibility in distributing the work load and conserving man-
power, and improved the availability of stores to A.A. units.
At the end of
1941, A.A.O.D. were relieved of the responsibility for supplying units with
clothing and general stores, command ordnance depots taking it over.
In November, 1941, the increased responsibility devolving on the R.A.O.C.,
representative at A.A. divisional headquarters had been recognized by the
upgrading from D.A.D.O.S. to A.D.O.S. (Lt.-Colonel).
From the outset of the war the problem of man-power in ordnance
services, A.A. Command, had been aided by the employment of A.T.S. ; and,
by the end of 1941, appreciable numbers of A.T.S. were serving with efficiency
as clerks and storewomen in A.A.O.Ds.
The special arrangements made for the defence of the Orkney and Shet-
land Islands in 1941, imposed on A.A.
Command the responsibility for
all ordnance services in the islands for Field Force troops in addition to
A.A. units. This responsibility, the split up of the defences and the difficulty
of sea communications during the winter months, created a
number
problems for the R.A.Q.C. not encountered by them in the rest of A.A.
Command.
by the R.A.O.C..
Boot repair and laundry services on the island were provided
stances for the R.A.F. and R.N.
not only for the army units, but also in certain circum-
18
The re-organization of A.A. Command into A.A. groups in place of
A.A. corps and divisions caused some re-organization of ordnance services
in September,
1942,
and the technical control of A.A.O.Ds. passed to
D.D.O.S., A.A.
Command.
The ordnance A.A. area organization, however, continued as such for
another year.
In September, 1943, the areas within each A.A. group were
merged into one group area and control of the ordnance installations in
the group area was vested in D.D.O.S.,
A.A. Group, except that certain
A.A.O.Ds., which were nominated as bulk holding depots, were placed under
control of a specially formed H.Q.
At this time arrangements were made
for A.A. units to be supplied with M.T. stores direct from C.O.Ds.
and
not through A.A.O.Ds.
Á.A. units in the vicinity of the C.O.Ds. at Donning-
ton, Greenford and Old Dalby were based on those depots for the supply
of warlike stores also.
In December, E.A.Ms, were placed under A.A. group control, but the
I.A.Ds. remained under control of D.D.O.S., A.A. Command.
The continual change in A.A. equipment and ammunition furnished many
problems of custody, supply and disposal for the ordnance services.
problems increased with the introduction of complex gun, radar, signalling
Expenditure of ammunition in repelling enemy
air attack was extremely heavy and the refuzing of enormous quantities
of ammunition, caused by the introduction of new types of mechanical fuzes
imposed a heavy task.
In 1944 the deployment of anti-aircraft defences to protect the embarka-
Anglo-American armies created an ammunition supply
problem that strained to the uttermost the much reduced man-power in
With the operational deployment in A.A. Command of
brigades of 21 Army Group, the ammunition supply responsibility was greatly
Within a period of a few weeks, more than a million rounds
of heavy A.A. ammunition had to be moved, conditioned, and re-deployed,
and, as a measure of the transport problem involved, it may be mentioned
that no less than 12,000 3-ton lorries, or their equivalent in railway trucks,
The physical lift was enormous.
R.A.O.C. were helped by units of the Pioneer Corps.
From 1944 to the end of the war the use by the enemy of self-
propelled weapons (flying bombs and rockets) in place of raids by piloted
aircraft, and the necessity for an even stricter economy in the use of man-
power, resulted in the transfer of a great number of the troops in A.A.
Command (including R.A.O.C.) to field force units.
Ordnance activities declined except for the deployment of ammunition
and the receipt of large quantities of redundant A.Á. equipment, particularly
searchlight projectors.
Apart from the reduction in military man-power, which was to some
extent offset by the employment of A.T.S. and civilians, no further change
in the ordnance services for A.A. Command was made until after the end
wO 277/21
18
