through the stress of war transactions and changes in storehouse stafts, store-
house tallies and bin cards were very largely not in agreement with either
the actual stock or the store account, and that the use of man-powér in
maintaining them was no longer justified.
After discussion with the Financial and Audit branches of the War Office
it was agreed that only one account should be maintained and that it should
be in Visidex form.
At this time also the system of "pre-posting" was
first introduced.
"Pre-posting" entails posting the account card as soon
as the indent or demand is approved and the issue voucher has been prepared,
r.e., before the actual issue is physically effected.
The system of " pre-
posting " gives more efficient stock control.
Although the control and Visidex system had been adopted by all depots
the varying needs of each organization led to many divergencies.
With the rapid growth of the organization, it was realized that some
instrument of management would have to be evolved to facilitate the task
of controlling large organizations spread over wide areas and to ensure the
best utilization of available man-power.
For this purpose it was decided
to measure and control the workload, involved by each function in each
depot, using man-hours as the measurement factor: this was known as " cost
control", the cost of functions carried out being determined in terms of man-
hours and not in terms of pounds, shillings and pence.
The various branches and sections within the central depot organization
were investigated and measurement factors agreed.
Time tests were taken
of the operations and standards laid down for each function.
The time
taken to complete a certain amount of work compared with the man-hours
allowed (calculated from the standards) gave the percentage achievement.
The difference between the hours allowed and the man-hours divided by 50
approximately weekly hours of work) gave the number of staff surplus or
leficient.
The routine operation of cost control required weekly returns of the man-
power used, output by various types of work and particulars of the amount
of work outstanding.
From these data the percentage efficiency of the
ranch and the approximate number of staff surplus or deficient were
alculated.
The weekly statistics were examined branch by branch for a whole depot,
nd staff surplus to branches transferred to make up deficiencies elsewhere.
"hus bottlenecks were avoided or cleared, a high efficiency was maintained,
nd the depot enabled to carry out its functions with the best effect.
Cost control standards were also an invaluable aid in the planning and
viewing of establishments since, with the standards available for most depot
inctions, it was possible, given details of the type and load of work, to
ilculate the personnel required for a new installation.
The procedure instructions on which the depots were operated were con-
qually reviewed to meet new requirements brought about by changed
inditions, new ideas and methods, and man-power difficulties. In the latter
irt of the war, procedures were pruned to an austerity scale, only essential
ork being retained. General instructions on basic procedure and methods
ere issued to the depots, but the detailed method of implementation was
Il left largely to the depots themselves.
A most noteworthy innovation was the introduction at Chilwell of the
Adrema printing process for the preparation of vouchers covering issues in
accordance with standard scales.
Such scales were determined by the scales
branch and previously it had been the practice to type the voucher on normal
machines— a lengthy process-or to hold sets of vouchers printed in advance.
The latter method was extravagant in paper and vouchers, which had been
printed previously, required a deal of amending by hand as alterations in
nomenclature were published.
The basis of the new system was the main-
tenance of a library of embossed metal plates, kept in sets for a given vehicle,
each representing a voucher for a single item of stores.
The metal plates
could be set up to show the consignee, the details of the scale, and any
special instructions relating to the issue.
The necessary vouchers could be
printed by the machine from these plates at the shortest notice.
As there was a separate metal plate for each store item, it was a simple
matter to keep up-to-date with amendments to scales, part changes, etc., as
they occurred, by picking out the plate concerned and amending it.
An
additional advantage was that any number of extra copies of each voucher
could be printed at the same time to cover additional requirements such
as case contents lists, repayment copies, etc.
It was found necessary in each depot to introduce a " dues out " control
system to ensure prompt issue action when stores, not available at the time
of demand, later became available, and to make certain that such delayed
issues were not overlooked.
This control system consisted essentially of
restricting outstanding issue vouchers to single items, i.e., a separate voucher
was prepared for each item demanded but not available, and all vouchers
for a particular item were filed together and watched by the " dues out
control" clerk.
The latter was notified as soon as new receipts of a " dues
out" item came in and he then released the relevant issue vouchers.
Although the "dues out control" system dealt effectively with the
efficient issue of stocks from each individual depot, it will be remembered
that to cope with the overall storage problem and to comply with the policy
of safety dispersal, the total stocks of any one item were physically stored
in several depots.
This dispersed storage necessitated a sytem of central
stock control in order to achieve systematic distribution and replenishment
of stocks between the various depots, and to ensure that operational require-
ments could be met in the correct order of priority.
This central control of stocks was operated by the various provision
branches at the parent C.O.Ds., each branch forming a Dispersal Section
for the purpose.
Central stock control cards were maintained by this Section
in Visidex cabinets, a separate card for every item of equipment in stock
(or due in from manufacture).
Class I comprising items in extremely
Items were classified as
Class I, II or III,
scarce, but still needing strict control, Class III all
short supply, Class Il items less
other items stocked.
The Dispersal Section maintained its
reports, from
records by means of periodic
issues made.
all depots concerned,
notifying
stock
positions and total
The frequency of these notifications was governed by the class
supply situation.
of item and was varied throughout the war to conform to changes in the
7
WO 277/21
