Despatch of British Force to Greece
Retreat of Western Desert Force March-May, 1941
The flow of stores and vehicles into Egypt increased during January and
February, 1941.
A B.O.W. was opened at Alexandria and soon afterwards
No. 6 A.O.D. was established there principally to meet the needs of the
During March and April the withdrawal of units from the Western Desert
and the despatch of a force to Greece were effected.
To equip this force many,
units in the Middle East had to be stripped of their weapons, equipment and
transport.
On 31st March, 1941, the Germans and Italians assumed the offensive
against our depleted troops in Cyrenaica and by 11th April had forced our
withdrawal to the Egyptian frontier except for the garrison at Tobruk which
remained in a state of siege.
This retirement involved the loss of considerable quantities of stores and
ammunition which had been held in forward dumps.
The bulk of these stores
and ammumuon howevel, were recaptured mlael aurs me subsequent
advance and automatically provided a valuable advanced holding, incidentally
demonstrating that it is not always a good thing to destroy stores, and
especially ammunition, liable to capture by the enemy, if there is any hope of
their subsequent recapture.
British Force Withdrawn from Greece-Heavy Equipment Losses
The operations in, and eventual evacuation of Greece and Crete during
25-pounder and 132
and May, caused further heavy losses of material, including 148
Casualties in personnel were heavy, the R.A.O.C. losing 38 officers and 750
other ranks of whom many were taken prisoner.
In June, 1941, our troops again attacked in the Western Desert but,
although progress at first was satisfactory, they were repulsed and a large
number of tanks were lost in the action.
Re-equipment of Formations-Expansion of R.A.O.C. Organization
June-October, 1941
During the summer months large quantities of material were received in
Egypt and a considerable expansion of ordnance services took place.
heavy load fell on the R.A.O.C. during this period in completely re-equipping
units which had been evacuated from Greece and Crete, in completing other
units to scale and in dealing with the increasing flow of stores from overseas.
These increasing responsibilities resulted in the upgrading of the senior
appointments at H.Q., Western Desert and Palestine to D.Ds.O.S. An A.D.O.S.
was appointed
to the Sudan and D.A.Ds.O.S. to Cyprus and Aden.
Later
(January, 1942) approval was given to upgrade the rank of D.O.S., Middle
East Force (M.E.F.) to Major-General.
An ammunition repair and filling factory was establishéd in Cairo.
Base
installations were under construction at Rafa in Palestine, and advanced
installations were established in Syria for the maintenance
Force (later the Ninth Army) sent to occupy Syria in June.
of the British
170
British Offensive Resumed-Advance to
Benghazi November, 1941-—-January, 1942
The second battle for Cyrenaica began on 18th November, 1941 by
which date the Western Desert Force had been reorganized into the Eighth
Army, comprising 13th Corps and 30th Corps.
Ordnance Field Parks
At this time 7th Armoured Division had a divisional ordnance field park
including brigade sections for its two brigades and support group.
independent armoured and army tank brigades also had brigade ordnance
field parks.
As 4th and 5th Indian Divisions had no field parks of their own,
improvised ordnance field parks were formed from elements of Nos. 1 and 3
ordnance field parks.
The New Zealand Division had a divisional ordnance field park but
no brigade sections.
1st and 2nd South African Divisions also had small divisional ordnance
field parks.
The personnel of No. 2 Armoured Divisional Ordnance Field Park (less
that portion which was lost in the May-April operations) were utilized to
form the tank railhead portion of a tank delivery squadron, reception detach-
ments at airfields, and a forward holding park for stores in short supply.
During the operations, the forward holding park of this unit became
burdened with an enormous quantity of heavy stores, such as vehicle engines,
sometimes to such an extent that grounded stores were eight times greater
than the capacity of the unit vehicles, the result being that each time the
unit moved a shuttle service had to be formed for the movement of the
stores.
Personnel from No. 1 Corps Ordnance Field Park were used to form
four "B"
vehicle holding sections in the corps areas. The mobility of
these sections was maintained by limiting the vehicles in each to the number
i drivers available. The deployment of the sections varied according to
operational needs.
sometimes all four sections operated together and a
other times they were allotted to different corps or districts in the army area.
An army vehicle holding unit was formed from personnel of 3 Corps
Ordnance Field Park.
With this unit it was always necessary for more
vehicles to be held in stock than there were drivers available.
The strength
of the unit averaged 200 to 250 but the number of vehicles rose to well
over 1,000.
It was soon found necessary to provide a channel for delivery of replace-
ment guns on the same line as "B" vehicles, and the load on Nos. 1 and 3
Corps Ordnance Field Parks was accordingly very much increased. A few
trained limber gunners were attached to assist in servicing the guns after
their forward journey of 300 to 500 miles.
Air Delivery of Urgent Fighting Stores
Earlier experience in the Western Desert had shown that when R. A.O.C.
resources in the held were limited and spares were in short supply, some
means of express denvery was essential for items on operational urgene
171
w02q97/17
WO 277/21
