Ous
base direct through army railheads.
Because of this, it was possible for the
H.S. and 2 section to move forward with the Division in the way referred to
in the preceding sub-paragraph.
ORDNANCE MAINTENANCE COMpaNIES
Forward maintenance stores sections (F.M.S.S.) and forward maintenance
ammunition sections (F.M.A.S.) were sub-units of the ordnance maintenance
company and were allotted on the basis of two of each to each corps.
seneral method of employment was for both F.M.A.Ss. to man the corps
ammunition dump and for one F.M.S.S. to be located in the rear of corps
area and moved as little as possible; it held the corps reserve and stores
allotted to corps in bulk, while the other was employed in a mobile role
sited in the F.M.C. and acted as a forward delivery point in the corps area.
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN BRIGADES
Brigade ordnance services comprised an ordnance stores section, having
a captain in charge, with the brigade workshops and an ordnance warrant
officer for general ordnance duties.
The latter was usually much overworked.
• It was considered that ordnance services in a brigade would have been better
balanced if there had been a brigade ordnance officer in addition to the
warrant officer for general duties.
THE ARMOURED REPLACEMENT GROUP
At the beginning of the campaign in North-West Europe the organization
of 2 Armoured Replacement Group was based upon the assumption that
armoured fighting vehicles would be handed over by R.A.O.C. in satis-
factory mechanical condition and complete
Numerous well-
grounded complaints were received from units to the effect that vehicles
were being delivered deficient of kit.
A number of changes were therefore
made in the organization of 2 Armoured Replacement Group.
changes included the addition of an Ordnance Kitting Element.
This Element
supplied all armoured fighting vehicle kit and equipment required either for
replacement armoured fighting vehicles or for armoured fighting vehicles
ir units.
It did not supply spare parts.
Accordingly in September 1944 the group was augmented by an ordnance
field park (later known as 2 Armoured Stores Company R.A.O.C.) and the
appointment of D.A.D.O.S. was up-graded to A.D.O.S.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE A.O.DS. IN THE R.M.A. AND ADVANCED BASE
The D.O.S., 21 Army Group had at his disposal four A.O.Ds., mobilized
and specially trained for operation in the European theatre.
From the
outset he realized that even in the initial stages one A.O.D. would be
inadequate to handle the commitment of 21
Army
Group.
The plan,
therefore, was that two of the A.O.Ds. would be used for the maintenance
of the force for the first 90 days and that their stocks should consist of
B.M.Ps. In the meantime a third A.O.D. would be established in the R.M.A.
with a more comprehensive range of stores and take on the issue load
'on D + 90, thus freeing the first two A.O.Ds.
for a forward move at
a propitious moment. The fourth A.O.D. was to be held in reserve.
246
In pursuance of the plan Nos. 16 and 17 A.O.Ds. landed in Normandy in
the wake of the assault troops and set up a depot at Vaux-Sur-Arne in
open fields.
sIne
personnel of the two units were merged, the depot being
known as 17 A.O.D.
It was essentially a beach-head organization and was
responsible for the maintenance of the Second Army, the Ist Canadian
Army and the L.
of C. from its opening on 2nd July, 1944 a few days
later than was originally planned-
-until the middle of September.
It was intended to site the third A.O.D. at Caen because of the advantage
of existing buildings and roads, but by the end of July it had become obvious
that the establishment
of 14 A.O.D. in the
Caen area was out of the
question.
There were three alternatives.
The first, to prolong the period of
maintenance from B.M.Ps. until 14 A.O.D. could be properly established in
a suitable site, was considered impracticable because, even if available from
the United Kingdom, an increase in B.M.Ps. would unbalance stocks in that
fast moving items would remain in short supply while items not in frequent
demand would accumulate.
In fact, sufficient B.M.Ps. were not available
packed and ready for shipment whereas 14 A.O.D. stocks were scaled, packed
and partly stowed in ships.
The second alternative, to impose on depots
in the main base the responsibility of maintaining the force until 14 A.O.D.
could be established in a suitable site was also considered impracticable as.
apart
from the shipping problem,
the
an ain
lhase
depots in the United
Kingdom would have been unable to cope with the enormous amount of
detailed work which would have had to be carried out in addition to their
normal
functions.
The
only
alternative
which
remained
was to seleci
another site even though it was not up to the required standard.
Of the
sites immediately available Audrieu was considered the best.
It was mainly on clay, but R.E., Transportation and Movements were in
agreement that with the hard core that was available in the R.M.A., it
could be turned into a workable site within a few weeks.
With full
knowledge, therefore, of the fact that the sub-soil was not really suitable,
the decision was taken on 24th July to go ahead with the Audrieu project.
The work was started on this site in gun position areas which were at
that time less than 5,000 yards from the front line.
Work proceeded rapidly
with admirable co-operation, and shortly afterwards 14 A.O.D. itself was
erecting huts at the rate of, at one time,
• 20 a day.
The first huts were
delivered on 2nd August and between that date and 14th September, the
date of the opening of the depot, 178 huts were erected, roads and railways
were constructed, 1,500 tons of racking were assembled and 28,000 tons of
stores were stacked or binned.
By mid-winter the heavy and continuous
rainfall caused the hard core, which had been used for the roads, to crumble
and the depot became a morass.
The shocking conditions under which
personnel then had to work inevitably led to delays in issues and to errors.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the depot served a most useful purpose
in supplying the force with its needs until the Advanced Base was opened ;
it handled from 12 to 14 thousand tons of stores each week.
It was decided in August that a new A.O.D., considerably larger than
its two predecessors, should be established in
Antwerp.
France was
beginning to drop out of the picture, the Belgian frontier had been crossed,
and the over-riding advantages of Antwerp as the new Advanced Base were
247
west 17
WO 277/21
18
