ROUS 'O' SERVICES
to prepare special packages of stores rea
ading opera-
tions, e.g.,
landing reserve sets and benu,
aintenance packs.
The
various packs of stores were then despatched from the packing depots
to the collecting depot at Shakurbasti, near Delhi, where they
Were
assembled into complete sets and despatched to the various ports from
which the particular forces requiring them were mounted.
Although
this work was entirely new to the Indian Ordnance organization, it was
well done.
The physical construction of the ordnance and ammunition depots in the
recerve
bases was of little higher standard than that of other temporary
depots throughout the sub-continent.
Floors and roads were of indifferent
quality and often gave way under pressure; the design and lay-out
of
storehouses limited the use of such industrial handling gear as was available.
However, the depots in the reserve bases were provided with 100 per cent.
railway
service to the storehouses, a feature not permitted in inland depots.
Although it had been hoped that there would be a full-scale supply of store-
house and office equipment, this never materialized.
Nevertheless, as com-
pared with the other Indian ordnance depots, those sited on the east coast
were well equipped.
Profiting from bitter experience in the opening of other large depots,
every effort was made to ensure that trained staffs were available before
the depots began working.
This was achieved in the case of No. 206 B.O.D.
In the case of No. 205 B.O.D., the siting of the whole reserve base was
in a sparsely populated area—a factor outside Ordnance control-and extreme
difficulty was found in obtaining civilian labour, particularly of the clerical
and supervisory types.
Stocks of clothing and general stores in No. 205 B.O.D. were automatically
replenished from the central and holding depots in India.
The central
depots were responsible for making provision of these items for the whole
of S.E.A.C.
In the case of warlike stores No. 206 B.O.D. calculated its
requirements which were then included by the central depots in their calcula-
tion of the requirements of India Command, except that for certain M.T.
sections No. 206 B.O.D. stated their requirements to the War Office through
G.H.Q. India.
The sections concerned were those relating to particular types
of vehicles of which the majority were held in S.E.A.C.
A feature closely related to the expansion of the India Base was the estab-
lishment of special operational ordnance depots.
The first of these was known
as " Special Force Depot" and was located at Agra.
This depot supplied the
pecialized equipment required for the
Long
Range Penetration Groups
L.R.P.Gs.) which were originally organized under Major-General Wingate
The second depot was known as "g" Depot and was sited at Dehu.
It
held the secret weapons and other special stores required by
"g" Division,
S.E.A.C. It had a completely British staff.
Meanwhile, the development of the central and holding depots went on
steadily.
"It be the developmen of vie on the dificulty of clearing imports
quickly and of bringing exports to the dockside at the required time, 1o
establish ordnance transit depots at practically every usable port in India, e,g.
Karachi, Bhavnagar, Bombay, Cochin,
Madras, Vizagapatam and Calcutta.
302
Further, additional commend ordnance depots had to be established in each
command to serve the ever increasing number of troops in occupation Un-
fortunately, the quality of the buildings erected
was often so inferior that
whole portions of depots collapsed a few months after being completed. They
were generally ill-served with roads and rail and some were never provided
with electric power.
Throughout the war, attempts to provide storehouse accommodation in
step with the flood of military supplies proved unsuccessful. At the end of
the war some three to four million square feet of storage accommodation
were still required to house the vast quantities of ordnance stores which were
stacked in the open.
During 1944, the peak year of construction, 8,640,000
square feet of covered accommodation was completed. At the end of the
war, the covered storage accommodation constructed, under construction, or
sanctioned for construction, totalled approximately 32 million square feet.
It might be thought that in a country with 400 million inhabitants, there
would be no difficulty in finding sufficient labour to staff the many ordnance
and other installations which grew up during the war. In actual experience,
however, reliable supervisory grades were always difficult to find, while even
the lowest classes of industrial labour were frequently in short supply, owing
to the difficulty of providing living accommodation for temporary workers. By
1945 the temporary labour employed in static ordnance depots, in India
numbered more than the total pre-war Indian Army.
Developments in the Vehicle Organization
Brief mention has been made of the vehicle parks and of the formation of
separate vehicle depots at Calcutta and Madras.
Many difficulties had to be
met in expanding the vehicle organization.
It must be remembered that dis-
•
tances in India are hardly less than in the United States; but distance alone
does not tell the whole story.
Roads in India are scarce, badly made and
frequently only wide enough for one-way traffic.
Few can be used throughout
the year.
The country is intersected by many rivers, some of which, when in
spate after the annual Himalayan thaw
and the summer monsoon rains,
become miles wide.
Despite the great number of rivers, there are few bridges.
When, therefore, it became impossible to move vehicles about India by train,
the alternative of moving them by road was an unwelcome necessity.
The
main traffic consisted of transport from Bombay to Eastern India-a distance
approximately equal to that between London and Leningrad.
Vehicles had
to be driven in full sun when shade temperatures were as high as 120° F.
Yet
by 1945, despite the appalling conditions, some 10,000 vehicles were being
moved every month between depots in India.
A further complication which had its impact on the vehicle organization
was that before the intervention of Japan, it had been decided that vehicle
holding would be limited to North American types.
This remained the
policy until the arrival of British units equipped with British vehicles.
Demands for vehicles had previously been placed direct on the Indian
branches of General Motors and Ford Corporations.
This system was, of
course, superseded. and by the middle of 1943 the intake e dismantle
to be set up.
.By the time these units were handed over to the R.L.E.M.E.
on the formation of the corns they ware each turning nut shout 150 vehicles
303
