SERVICES
OUS
The War Establishment in December, 1941, allowed 65 officers and 392
duties throughout the
British other ranks for all store and
as late as April, 1942, although officers were up to
strength, only 84 British other ranks were available to ordnance services in
There were also available about 250 Indian other ranks.
Just before the outbreak of war, stores and ammunition began to arrive
in appreciable quantities and storage accommodation soon became an exceed.
To ease the situation another sub-depot was established at Mahlwagon
and the British other ranks' quarters adjacent to the Arsenal were utilized as
storehouses.
Simultaneously,
in accordance with
the defence plan, the
building of a large depot at Meiktila was begun and an ammunition depot
was established some miles outside Rangoon
on the Prome Road.
The
latter suffered from the handicap of being only road-served.
At the outbreak of war, the force dependent on Rangoon Arsenal con-
gisted of roughly the following: -
(a) Two Burma divisions, plus one Indian brigade group.
(b) Garrison battalions of the Burma Rifles for defence of vulnerable
points.
(c) The Burma Military Police, the Frontier Force and certain naval
units.
Provision was a complicated matter.
Warlike items and
available locally were supplied from India and the United Kingdom, other
stores were obtained by local purchase.
The build-up of maintenance stocks
for the expansion of the Burma Army was rendered difficult by financial
restrictions imposed by the Burma Government in matters of purchase
Much of the armament and equipment of the Garrison was old-fashioned
including Italian rifles 60 years old, Lewis guns and 18-pounder guns.
were also Vickers machine guns and 3-inch Mortars, four heavy A.A. guns
and two 6-inch coast defence guns.
Of ammunition received from captured Italian equipment 25 per cent.
had been at once condemned as unserviceable.
The fighting vehicles consisted of four very old Rolls Royce armoured
cars and sixteen new Bren carriers.
Signal and fire control instrument stores were in general short supply
and clothing was difficult to obtain because the United Kingdom and India
were unable to supply to requirements in view of their own expansion and
Such was the position when Japan began hostilities.
EXPANSION OF ORDNANCE SERVICES
After the outbreak of war with Japan on 7th December, 1941, stores
and ammunition arrived in increasing quantities from the United Kingdom
and India; these consignments included large quantities of anti-gas clothing.
M.T. and rolling stock were inadequate for conveying outgoing stores and
266
therefore when British Ordnance reinforcements arrived they were employed
to open up sub-depots at appreciable distances from the Arsenal.
The transfer of ammunition from the Arsenal to the ammunition depor
on the Prome Road was completed by 15th 'December, and this establishment
became a separate installation, though still under the administration of
C.O.O., B.O.D., Burma.
Towards the end of December, the 17th Indian Division began to arrive,
thus considerably increasing the ordnance commitment and producing a drain
on the meagre resources of the Depot.
These troops deployed towards
Moulmein, and difficulties were experienced in locating units for the routing
and delivery of their stores.
Heavy receipts congested the available accom-
modation at the Depot, and a vehicle group was, therefore, opened some
four miles from the Arsenal, and an M.T. stores group established in Rangoon
itself.
A dispersal depot was opened at Mandalay (in addition to the O.F.D.
there) to receive one-third of all stores intended for the stocking of the new
depot at Meiktila.
The remaining two-thirds of the Meiktila stocks were to
be divided between the Arsenal and Mahlwagon.
Arrangements were made to open two ammunition dispersal depots, the
intention being to divide all receipts of ammunition between these and the
Rangoon depot.
On 18th January, 1942, the Japanese captured the port of Tarvoy in
Southern Burma and within a fortnight had forced a British withdrawal
north of Moulmein.
EVACUATION OF RANGOON
During December and January, Rangoon and its aerodrome were heavily
As a result communications were completely dislocated; the flow
of refugees from Rangoon almost closed roads to motor transport; and the
activities of the Arsenal came almost to a standstill, the attendance of civilian
employees there having dropped from 1,300 to 160.
In order to set the Arsenal working again D.O.S. Burma arranged for
200 troops to report for duty with the B.O.D., and although lacking know-
ledge of ordnance duties, they did useful work.
In addition, transport was
arranged to bring in employees who had fled just beyond the local danger
area; and this increased the
civilian attendance to five hundred a day
and enabled work to proceed.
As the situation deteriorated orders were given for a second line holding
of ammunition to be despatched to Pegu and Prome, and for the Arsenal
to stand by to backload stores to Meiktila and ammunition to Tombo.
In February after the Bilin River retirement the Arsenal re-equipped four
battalions out of the already depleted stocks; and after this issue there was
not one complete set of web equipment left.
Commitments were then
increased by the addition of another British brigade, though fortunately it
arrived almost complete in equipment.
At this juncture orders were received to begin backloading to Meiktila.
Owing to the shortage of stafi and the difficulties of backloading and making
issues simultaneously, the normal procedure broke down, and accurate
accounting became impracticable.
267
WO 277/21.
