In addition to handling Beach Maintenance Packs 17 Advanced Ordnan.
Depot will have to handle other items shown at Appendix " B".
The M.T., General and Technical Stores Coys. and Stores Transit Sub-
Depot of 16 Advanced Ordnance Depot have been placed under command
of 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot to assist in the handling of these stores.
There will be no issues from 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot before D + 17
at the earliest, and if possible not before D+21 to enable the Advanced
Ordnance Depot to be systematically laid out and stocked.
Simultaneously with the opening of the Advanced Ordnance Depot for
issue, 17 Stores Transit Sub-Depot will set up to receive from formations
demands for stores not held in the Advanced Ordnance Depot.
Immediate
arrangements will be made for the despatch of indents by air to the Indent
Clearing Centre in the U.K.
7. 17 BASE AMMUNITION DEPOT
By D+17 the Ordnance Ammunition Coys. of 17 Base Ammunition
Depot which have been reinforcing the Ordnance Beach Detachments will
have been collected and re-organized, and the Base Ammunition Depot
will be starting to establish itself as a Base Ammunition Depot in the area
of 1 L. of C. Terminal.
8. 15 BASE AMMUNITION DEPOT
15 Base Ammunition Depot will have been established either in 2 L. of C.
Terminal or Rear Maintenance Area.
SITUATION D+ 17
2 L. of C. Terminal
1 Ord. Maint. Coy. + O.B.Ds. — L.RS.
Amn.
17 A.O.D. - B.M.Ps. and some L.Rs.*
16 & 17 Veh. Coys. - Res. Vehs.
15 B.A.D. - Amn.
1 L. of C. Terminal
Det. 1 Cdn. Ord. Maint. Coy. +
O.B.Ds. - Amn. possible
L.Rs.
17 B.A.D. - Amn.
if Progress has been rapid
R.M.A.
17 A.O.D. - B.M.Ps. and some L.Rs.
16 & 17 Veh. Coys. - Res. Vehs.
15 B.A.D. - Amn.
330
PART II. PLAN FROM D + 18 ONWARDS
9. UNITS AND THEIR ROLES
Detailed phasing of 21 Army Group Ordnance units into the theatre
is shown at Annexure III.
Units shown as arriving up to about D + 50
will come in generally speaking in the order of priority in which they appear
on the table.
as the situation demands.
Units arriving after this time may have their priorities altered
Briefly the particular roles of the major units
10. ADVANCED ORDNANCE DEPOTS
17 Advanced Ordnance Depot.—17 Advanced Ordnance Depot with the
attached Stores Coys. and Stores Transit Sub-Depot of 16 Advanced Ordnance
Depot reverts from command of Second Army to L. of C. on the establish-
ment of a Rear Army Boundary.
It will be responsible for the maintenance
of the forces ashore up to approximately D + 90.
This will be done by
Beach Maintenance Packs, which come ashore over the beaches or through
It will handle large tonnages of stores
probably of the order
of 1,800 tons a day, from D + 18 onwards.
The detailed breakdown of the
tonnages to be handled is shown at Annexure II.
17 Vehicle Coy. drivers will take over reserve vehicles starting D+4.
17 Vehicle Coy. will establish parks near the 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot
area to hold reserve vehicles.
17 Forward Trailer Section is due to land on D +26, but in view of the
difficulty of landing the Trailers it may be necessary to spread the move-
ment over a number of days. 17 Forward Trailer Section is initially scaled
to cover 8 Corps.
On completion of its Rear Maintenance Area role, 17 Advanced Ordnance
Depot will be withdrawn and reformed, probably about D + 120, to be ready
to move forward and re-esablish in a new location on a semi-permanent
16 Advanced Ordnance Depot.-The balance of 16 Advanced Ordnance
Depot not under the command of 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot will be
held in reserve until the Stores Coys. and Stores Transit Sub-Depot can be
released from 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot. Its future role will be similar
to that of 17 Advanced Ordnance Depot, i.e., it will be reorganised and be
prepared to establish an Advanced Ordnance Depot in 8 Base Sub-Area.
16 Forward Trailer Section is initially scaled to cover 2 Canadian Corps.
16 Vehicle Coy. drivers start taking over reserve vehicles when 17 Vehicle
Coy. drivers finish.
16 Vehicle Coy. will establish parks near 17 Vehicle Coy.
14 Advanced Ordnance Depot.—The main body of 14 Advanced Ord-
nance Depot arrives in the theatre about D + 40.
14 Advanced Ordnance
Depot will be the first Advanced Ordnance Depot to operate on Advanced
Ordnance Depot Packs (see Annexure IV), and it is proposed to establish
it in the Croxdale area on a semi-permanent basis with racking and semi-
Romney hutting, or existing accommodation if suitable.
will start building up stocks with the object of being in operation as a fully
fledged Advanced Ordnance Depot by D + 90.
For some considerable time
after D+ 90 the onus of maintaining the force may fall on 14 Advanced
179717
10 277/21
