nute
On 20th February, 1942, the Government of Rangoon gave orders for
the general civilian evacuation
of the city.
was to be completed
The loading of the last stores train for Meiktila was completed
on 22nd February.
ESTABLISHMENT OF B.O.D. AT MEIKTILA
It Meiktila the main body arrived from Rangoon on 28th February.
1942, when the new depot at Meiktila, comprising ten sheds each of 9,00c
became known as "B.O.D. Burma'
The enforced use of
buildings built to a symmetrical plan made the depot and adjacent tented
camps a perfect target for any attacking aircraft.
The depot was road-rail served, but the roads were unsurfaced.
available local labour consisted mainly of women, but the general labour
position improved with the arrival of civilian employees from Rangoon.
Stationery was exceedingly short and to complicate matters further the
Rangoon accounts had been lost on the move.
However, stores were
rapidly sorted, checked and binned, and temporary accounts were opened
One armoury and one station workshop were also set up.
Communications were very difficult. The depot had no telephone.
between Meiktila-Maymo-Prome
Jeep couriers which were partly drawn from depot resources.
port, maintained largely by
" cannibalisation", was strained to the limit.
The only efficient drivers available were officers and British other ranks of
the depot, so that the constant use of mechanical transport imposed a heavy
strain on the depot staff.
On 21st February the 7th Armoured Brigade arrived in Burma.
On 6th March, 1942, the Japanese cut the road from Rangoon to Prome,
and two days later entered Rangoon.
In the meantime an Assistant Director of Ordnance Services (Provision)
(A.D.O.S. (P.)) arrived at Meiktila.
His task presented unusual difficulties
in that he had no knowledge of depot stocks or of future commitments.
immediately arranged to cancel all demands on the United Kingdom and to
Before these demands reached India,
had fallen and there was no hope of receiving stores from India in any
quantity after the loss of this port.
A.D.O.S. (P.) was notified that the total amount of ordnance stores to
be flown into Burma (other than ammunition) would be 100 tons monthly,
and on this the equivalent of two and a half divisions had to be maintained.
WITHDRAWAL
OF
O.F.Ds.
Every effort was made to withdraw the O.F.Ds. from Kengtung,
Namm-
wagon and Taunggyi.
Taunggyi, since this depot was near a railhead.
A few wagons of stores were received
back from
of Taunggyi later moved to Toungoo to supply 1 Burma
The majority
of the staff
Division, leaving
a small rear party to backload stores.
backloading from
Very little could
be done about
journey and lack of transport.
Ko back ad stores Very litle co to the long road
268
EVACUATION OF MEIKTILA
When Meiktila became directly threatened, and the last R.A.F. squadron
in Burma had been bombed out of Mague, leaving no air cover at all, it
apparent that the B.O.D. would have to move.
A plan was
produced for "mounting" the B.O.D. in four trains to be sited at dispersed
railvay stations, but the idea was send oned even before completely for-
mulated.
Eventually, Katha was chosen for the new Headquarters and it
was decided to send the B.O.D. there.
The month of April opened with the depot still sorting and checking
stores backloaded from Rangoon, and, at the same time, preparing to move
back to Katha.
On the 4th April, Meiktila was almost totally destroyed
by air raids, and the railway station and track damaged.
All local labour
fed, and numerous casualties occurred among families of the ordnance civil
employees.
Food become exceedingly short.
During the confused period
while the B.O.D, yet remained at Meiktila, many efforts were made to obtain
stores from various sources.
The working of the depot during the entire period was prejudiced by
the tremendous shortage of transport, and by the uncertainty of attendance
of civilian personnel,
who disappeared at the first sign of aerial attack.
Both moves (Rangoon-Meiktila and Meiktila-Katha) were also heavily handi-
capped by the fact that backloading of stores had to proceed simultaneously
with heavy issues to forward fighting units.
Provision, moreover, was reduced
to a series of guesses because of the lack of knowledge of commitments
and because the continual movement made it impossible to state exactly
what stocks were held, and where.
Perhaps, however, the greatest single
difficulty encountered by the B.O.D. was the chronically bad system of com-
The problem of delivering stores, in this most difficult terrain,
to units always on the move, when no adequate means were available for
checking their most recent movements, can well be imagined.
ESTABLISHMENT OF B.O.D. AT KATHA
The B.O.D. at Katha was established in a well-concealed site in the
jungle some 17 miles from the railway station.
Local labour was hard to
find, and the only transport at first available consisted of two aged lorries,
supplemented by bullock carts.
A Headquarters had now set up
Shwebo, its only direct communication with Katha being by means of a
48-hour jeep courier service: Katha had no telephone system.
Eventually, as a result of the lack of transport, there was wholesale
congestion at
Katha station and Naba junction,
wagons from Mandalay
and other O.F.Ds. piling in to add to the bottleneck.
The B.O.D. received
its greatest setback, when the entire M.T. train was wrecked in a ravine
up the line and only three vehicles were salvaged.
About the third week
in April, the congestion was accentuated by the arrival of the supply and
engineer services.
to jettison a tul. in lieve entase by running it into a ravine.
To relieve matters the railway authorities were permitted
The congestion of the railways produced chaos. Plans for the evacua
tion of workshop personnel through Myitykina consequently broke down
and the movement of stores became impossible; issues were restricted almost
entirely to local units.
269
17
WO 277/21.
18
