reserves consolidated, plus spares for second line repair and they were landed
as soon as facilities for such repairs were available.
Issues of B.M.P.s were
repeated at intervals until the A.O.D. was established and functioning.
In the case of clothing and general stores, contents varied according to
the make-up of the formation whether British or Indian, and the geographic
and climatic conditions; packs of warlike stores were based on a specific
number of identical equipments.
As all issues were required to be made without depot facilities or equip-
ment, packing was such that issues could be made direct from cases, which
were used as bins.
Although this system of making up L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. was used for the
North African campaign, in planning for the invasion of Normandy it was
not considered likely to be sufficiently flexible.
The volume of stores required for the larger forces employed in this latter
operation was such that packing of L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. had to be begun some
ten months before the date of the operation, i.., some months before any-
thing more than the barest skeleton of an Order of Battle was available.
It was, therefore, decided to assess roughly the number of equipments
and vehicles likely to be involved, and to pack L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. for the
total number in such multiples as could easily be applied to any formation
or large unit.
When packing had been completed it would then be possible
to group packages as required by formations, etc., in the final plan.
In the late stages of the planning, however, it was found that owing to
the great calls on shipping and the impossibility of allocating all the space
required for ordnance stores, it was not possible to weld the L.Rs. and
B.M.Ps. into the full requirements of formation groups; it became necessary
for the D.D.O.S. of the Army to lay down a detailed loading programme of
L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. on an equipment priority basis.
The lesson learned was that absolute flexibility must be maintained up
to the last possible minute, in order to be able to match last minute decision
and changes in plans and Order of Battle, and unforeseen shipping difficulties.
STOCK CONTROL
Soon after the beginning of the war the increasing shortage of raw
materials and equipments necessitated the economic distribution of every
asset in accordance with the requirements of the General Staff. Stocks were
held not only in the respective C.O.Ds. but also in many command ordnance
depots at home and in depots in overseas theatres, and stock figures were
required by the War Office to enable the planning of both military opera-
tions and of commercial production.
Central stock control was therefore
introduced into C.O.D. provision branches to cover contral and command
ordnance depots stocks at home and was followed in 1944 by Global Stock
Control:
The global section supplied information required by the War Office pro-
vision branches which were handling demands for Eastern Group
items.,*
dealt with demands received from War Ofice, for cast era sters of stores
in hapst ims of clothing and general stores; the Eastern Group organization is described
747/17
WO 277/21
18
between reporting centres according to instructions received from War Office
and retained demands for items not available.
Returns coinciding with
those of central stock control were submitted by Chief Ordnance Provision
Officer (Middle East) consolidated for the theatres under War Office control
and by Chief Provision Officer (Eastern Group) for India.
PROVISION OF M.T.
At the outbreak of war, maintenance for vehicles in the Service was kept
up to 12 months' stock plus specific war reserves, calculated on past user
experience.
Reviews were initiated when stock fell to provision action figure
and further provision was made by contract demand or by local purchase
according to the value.
It had been realized that mobilization and rapid expansion of the forces
would throw a heavy strain on existing stocks, and arrangements were made
to increase these by making an emergency " buy" immediately the war started
without detailed calculations or the lengthy procedure of contract demand
and tender.
Repeat orders were placed direct on the manufacturer with
instructions to proceed immediately, any increase in price to be negotiated
subsequently.
The basis of this "buy" was three-quarters of the quantity
held as war reserve, equal to six months' war usage.
Early contracts for vehicles did not clearly specify that spares were to
be delivered concurrently, and as these vehicles immediately became unit
equipment, there was a marked shortage of spares for maintenance which
increased, as the tendency was to supply vehicles rather than spares.
Early
in 1940, however new contracts specified a percentage of major assemblies
to be delivered pari passu with vehicles and spares " to a scale to be provided
within 14 days of the placing of the contract.".
This time limit enabled
manufacturers to plan the production of the spares in conjunction with
production of the relevant vehicles and major assemblies.
These scales
were equivalent to 15 months' war usage.
Current items were also reviewed
and up to 12 months' requirements were calculated but there was great delay
in the placing of contracts.
Although in the case of " A" vehicles, new types
were in production, training had to be carried out on every type in existence,
and manufacturers were most reluctant to make spares for older types.
ease the situation, increased powers of local purchase were authorized, for
"A" vehicles up to £1,000 an item, and " B" vehicles €500 an item, and per-
mission granted to seek capacity among the general engineering shops of
the country.
Up to early 1940, attempt was made to maintain provision calculations
on the pre-war basis of unit equipment vehicles only, but owing to the rapid
expansion, nearly all vehicles
went straight to unit equipment and few to
reserve. This practice was abandoned and calculations made on total number
of vehicles in the Service.
In 1941 there was little alteration in the basis of provision but the num-
bers of vehicles in service increased fourfold and there was an even greater
increase in the numbers of makes and types.
The rate of spares supply still
unter deteriorated specially to yehn sch sing a n
progressing organizations within the M. of S.
67612
D 2
