VIC
Ous
The brigade making the original landing had its own ordnance officer
and small staff whose duty it was to maintain liaison on ordnance matters
between units and the O.B.D. and workshops.
The quick success of the landing operations meant that the Ordnance
organization was not seriously extended until after the landing.
The O.B.D.
became the nucleus of an
ordnance depot at Diego Suarez, and
was
augmented by a draft from the United Kingdom which arrived at the end
of May, 1942.
An ammunition depot had also been opened up.
The next phase was the simultaneous landings at Majunga and Tamatave.
An A.O.D. was set up at Majunga and another was formed at Tamatave.
On the occupation of the capital, Tananarive, the A.O.Ds. at Majunga and
Tamatave were closed and an A.O.D. was opened at Tananarive.
The
original landing force was then withdrawn from the island for service else-
where, the pursuit of the French to the south being completed by the East
African and South African troops.
the central and southern portions of the island and the A.O.D. in Tananarive
i August, 1943, orders were given for the British AroD. in Tana trove
was closed, stores and personnel being removed to Diego Suarez.
By this
time, the depot in Diego Suarez was firmly
established as an A.O.D.
supplied by the East Africa base.
A difficult situation now arose; the
influx of troops from the rest of the island caused a corresponding increased
load on the A.O.D. and, at the same time, there came a serious wave of
sickness, and 90 per cent. of the A.O.D. personnel were removed to hospital.
It was necessary to close down for a few days until personnel from the
closing A.O.D. at Tananarive could be flown to Diego Suarez to take over.
A system of relief from the mainland was introduced and this resulted in
a low rate of sickness. The A.O.D. was finally closed in October, 1945.
A major problem during the occupation was the lack of experienced
ammunition personnel.
It was not until 1943 that a really efficient ammuni-
tion depot was organized by an inspecting ordnance officer sent from the
mainland.
Another complication was that the original force had vehicles of British
make, and spares for these continued to arrive after the departure of this
force with its vehicles.
The East African vehicles, on the other hand, were
•of mixed varieties and maintenance was not automatic.
The time necessary
to collect provision data, demand on East Africa and receive stores caused
extreme shortage of M.T. spares on the island for a time.
A similar problem arose in connection with the items peculiar to East
African troops.
Provision action had to be taken to obtain these items as
there was no automatic maintenance.
310
CHAPTER XX
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN WEST AFRICA, 1939-1945
The West African Command embraced four colonies.
Three of these were
surrounded on three sides by French territory and there was no land com-
munication between any of them. Their size and principal features were as
follows: -
(a) Gambia (Area 4,100 square miles).
roads and no railway.
The smallest colony, with few
It was dangerously near Dakar.
(b) Sierra Leone (Area 27,900 square miles). Four hundred and eighty-
two miles south of Gambia.
A colony with few good roads, one
railway to the interior and a defended port at Freetown.
A few
Royal Navy ships were stationed here.
(c) Gold Coast (Area 91,800 square miles).
Eight hundred and sixteen
miles east of Sierra Leone.
A large colony with some roads, one:
railway which did not penetrate very far inland and no harbour.
(d) Nigeria (Area 372,000 square miles).
Two hundred and twenty-
three miles east of Gold Coast.
The largest colony (roughly four
times the size of the United Kingdom) with roads. railways and a
good harbour.
Africa Command, apart from a handful of other ranks.
The only Imperial
The West
equipment through the Colonial Office.
The R.A.O.C. responsibility was, therefore, limited to the maintenance
of the Imperial troops.
Re-organization and Evolution of the Ordnance Services
The outbreak of war immediately emphasized the importance of the
West African Command, both as a source of supply and as a vital link in
the chain of the Empire.
Exports from the four colonies included manganese, tin, bauxite, cocoa,'
palm oil, ground nuts and timber-all of which were of the utmost importance
to our war potential, and deserved every protection.
Moreover, with the closure of the Mediterranean, West Africa became
important to ships sailing to the Mediterranean and the Far East.
It also
formed a link for transatlantic aircraft, being the nearest point to Central
America.
In this capacity, it was to play a leading role in the equipment
of the Middle Bast especially in the transport of urgent fighting stores.
There were important developments in the early stages of the war but
the theatre continued to be maintained for some months on the basis on
which it had operated in peace.
G.H.Q. West African Command was formed on 2nd December, 1940.
The senior ordnance appointment was then A.D.O.S.
With the formation
of the Ordnance Branch. the RAOf assumed resnonsihility for the suppl
67612
311
L3
2790714
WO 277/21
18
