As stated above the aim of all provision action is to bring stores required
military use into military possession and to so distribute them that when
uired for use they are immediately available to the user.
To achieve this aim it is first necessary to calculate requirements for
future, i.e. to ascertain the liabilities for a specific period termed the
ility period.
In calculating liabilities the following factors must be taken into
sideration: —
(a) New commitments i.e, the quantities required for the initial equip-
ping of new units, increases in scales of equipment for existing
units, and the introduction of new types of equipment.
(b) Maintenance i.e. quantities required to replace stores which would
become worn out or used up during the period under review.
(c) Earmarks i.e. quantities ordered to be set aside for a specific purpose
such as a war reserve.
(d) Dues out i.e. quantities already due to users whose demands had
not been met because of shortage of stock or other reason.
e) Interim period i.e. the time likely to elapse between the placing of an
order and the receipt of stores.
) Store margin i.e. the quantity required to be held in store to meet
unexpected contingencies or delays in replenishment of stocks.
ter the liabilities have been calculated they are compared with the
Assets comprise the stock already in possession plus the quantities
on order but not received i.e. dues in.
If the liabilities exceed the
action is necessary to increase stocks.
e process by which liabilities and assets are compared is termed a
vision reviews should be carried out at regular intervals, the period
n reviews being termed the " maintenance period".
le of the factors taken into consideration when making a provision
are factual and others need to be assessed. The factual ones are
nable from records maintained in ordnance depots e.g. stocks, dues in,
intities required for maintenance, for the interim period and for the
argin must be estimated.
n making the estimate the first factor to be considered is the
rate. This is found from ordnance depot records in which all
Broadly speaking normal issues
e of a recurring nature i.e. for normal upkeep, but those which are
ormal upkeep such as the first issue of equipment to a newly formed
special issues. Maintenance is based on the normal issues.
normal monthly issues for a reasonable period preceding the date of
w must be calculated, due regard being paid to any distinct upward
The resultant figure is called the
ince Figure. Adjustments to the maintenance figure are made in
of known factors such as alterations in strength, types of equip-
rate of consumption for seasonal reasons.
The maintenance figure
esents the estimated requirements of the troops for one month.
W927e7/14
WO 277/21
1 8
The liability period in each theatre must vary according to its distance
rom its supply base and the necessity for holding a large or small store
The War Office lays down in terms of months (i.e., multiples of the
maintenance figure) the quantities to be held in each theatre for the main-
tenance period, interim period and store margin; for example, a theatre
would be ordered to hold stocks for a liability period of 12 months com-
prising six months maintenance, three months interim period and three
months store margin.
In order to ensure that a provision review of an item is carried out in
suficient time to allow replenishment before stocks
are exhausted, each
item of stock is given a provision action figure (P.A.F.) which is inserted
on the stock record so that attention may be directed to the item when
stock falls to a predetermined level-usually the quantity required for
the interim period plus the store margin.
Provision reviews are also carried out on a time basis, i.e., at fixed intervals.
When circumstances justify such a course special provision reviews may
On 31st March each year before the war, every ordnance depot
submitted to the C.O.D. provision branches a "balance sheet"
only the quantities of stores in possession on 31st March but also giving a
complete provision review of each item held or required by the depot.
consolidation of these balance sheets therefore gave the global position of
assets and liabilities calculated on local data.
At the C.O.D. provision branches an estimate was then made of the
quantities of stores required, in addition to those already held or due in,
to meet one year's requirement for the Army, due regard being paid to
information given by the War Office General Staff and other
regarding the future composition and equipment of the Army.
estimates were then priced and converted into a cash estimate for inclusion
Until the M. of S. was fully established, contracts for the supply of
ordnance stores were placed by the Director of Army Contracts (D.Ä.C.) or
by ordnance officers to whom limited powers of purchase were delegated;
for example, the Principal Ordnance Officer (P.O.O.), whose functions are
described in Chapter I, was empowered to place orders for stores up to the
The amount of money which the D.A.C. was authorized to spend in any
one financial year was limited to the amount sanctioned by Parliament when
approving the Army Estimates.
After the estimates had been approved the supply of the stores was arranged.
Actual requirements were notified to the D.A.C. by C.O.D. provision branches
in the form of lists showing requirements of specific items; these lists were
The D.A.C. then arranged supply, normally
by placing contracts with civilian firms but certain items were obtained from
Ordnance Factories, The Admiralty, Air Ministry and Postmaster-General.
Deliveries of stores were usually arranged in bulk to C.O.Ds., but they
could be (and often were) diverted to command depots or other consignees
