TRICTED
The D.S.T. provided all load and passenger carrying M.T. vehicles driven
by R.A.S.C. drivers, and R.A.S.C. M.T. depots held stocks of spare parts,
notwithstanding that the majority were identical with those stocked by
R.A.O.C. for the rest of the Army.
M.G.O.7 was responsible, in conjunction with Staff Duties (S.D.) branches,
for the organization of R.A.O.C. units for war, for R.A.O.C. annual exercises
and winter training schemes, and for the preparation of the "Ordnance
Manual (War)".
M.G.O.7 was sub-divided into two branches, M.G.O.7(a) and M.G.O.7(b).
M.G.O.7(a) was responsible for the preparation, revision and publication
of War Equipment Tables for all units; the assembly, transfer and mainten-
ance of all mobilization equipments, and war reserves; reservists outfits;
local defence scheme reserves (abroad); and the revision of field service
manuals as regards equipment.
M.G.O.7(b) was responsible for " Dress Regulations", and all questions
in connection with officers' dress and uniform, and orders of dress; the wear-
ing of orders, decorations and medals; the design of badges and devices for
Regular, Territorial Army, and Officers' Training Corps (O.T.C.) ; it was also
responsible for standards, guidons and colours and for anti-gas clothing.
M.G.O.8 was responsible for the administration of the R.A.O.C. School
of Instruction, including courses and training in R.A.O.C. duties; the adminis-
tration of all civilian personnel employed on ordnance services; liaison with
A.G.9 on questions regarding the organization and administration of R.A.O.C.
personnel; and the preparation of estimates for wages of civilians employed
at ordnance establishments and for issues on repayment.
M.G.O.9 was entirely concerned with stores and equipments.
It was sub-
divided into three sub-branches with detailed duties as described below.
M.G.O.9(a) was responsible for: —
(a) estimates for, and the provision of, general stores ;
(b) issue of stores for emergency schemes, Royal Tournament, military
tattoos and similar displays ;
(c) issue of stores on loan, hire or payment to exhibitions, private
individuals, etc. ;
(d) the disposal of stores at home and abroad;
(e) the accommodation of ordnance stores, including the accommodation
of ammunition and explosives in consultation with D. of A. ;
(f) questions relating to army ordnance buildings ;
(8) laundry accounts and returns;
(h) preparation of peace equipment scales except for artillery, engineer
and signal units ;
) preparation of the " Vocabulary of Army Ordnance Stores" and
'Equipment Regulations Parts I, II and III" except artillery.
engineer and signal details ;
(k) editing of " Regulations for Army Ordnance Services, Part I", Notes
on R.A.O.C. Duties and Procedure " and all parts of " Equipment
Regulations for the Army
M.G.O.9(b) was responsible for: —
(a) boards and courts of inquiry on losses, deficiencies and discrepancies
of all ordnance stores, including clothing and ammunition;
(b) research, specifications, lists of changes, patterns and trials of general
stores,
and the "Technical Co-ordinating Committee on
General
Stores " ;
(c) barrack and hospital schedules and equipment for officers' messes
and quarters.
M.G.0.9 (c) was responsible for: —
(a) provision and supply of other ranks' uniform, clothing and necessaries
(except anti-gas clothing) and of uniforms for civilian employees and
A.T.S. ;
(b) clothing specifications and the preparation and editing of "Clothing
Regulations " and the " Vocabulary of Clothing and Necessaries" ;
(c) investigation and trials of new patterns of clothing;
(d) "Technical Co-ordinating Committee on Textiles and Clothing".
M.G.O.10 was responsible to the D.O.S. for the inspections, repair and
test of artillery equipments, instruments, wireless, signalling and search-
light stores, M.T. (vehicles and stores), small arms and machine guns, and
workshop accounts and returns.
Its detailed duties included: —
(a) estimates for, and provision of, machinery
and appliances for
R.A.O.C. and armament workshops, and W.D. laundries in peace
and war;
(b) military and civilian establishments for R.A.O.C. workshops and
W.D. laundries in peace-in collaboration with A.G.9 and M.G.O.8 ;
(c) mobilization questions affecting the engineering activities of the
(d) preparation and revision of War Equipment Tables for R.A.O.C.
field workshop units in collaboration with M.G.O.7 ;
(e) equipment and layout of R.A.O.C. field workshop units ;
(t) procedure for the inspection, repair and test of ordnance equipment
and stores in the field ;
(8) amendments to the "Ordnance Manual (War) " affecting ordnance
engineering, in collaboration with M.G.O.7 ;
(h) technical matters affecting the layout, equipment, procedure and
processes of R.A.O.C. instruments repair shops.
In June, 1939, the imminence of war and the clear necessity for an expan-
sion of the R.A.O.C. necessitated a re-organization at the War Office
whereby the D.O.S. became responsible to the Q.M.G. for the design and
provision of clothing and general stores, and the distribution and storage
of all ordnance stores, including M.T. and ammunition.
The P.O.O., how-
ever, remained responsible to the M.G.O. for supplying provision figures, and
carrying out issues of warlike stores, including M.T. and ammunition, as
instructed by the D. of A. and D. of M.
The Ministry of Supply (M. of S.) was formed in August, 1939, and
gradually took over all design, production and inspection responsibility from
the War Office, with the result that the appointment of M.G.O. disappeared,
WO 277/27
