as much as possible for their own particular country.
When this misconcep-
tion had been dispelled the officer staff of the Ordnance branch of C.P.O.
welded itself together into a keen team, as one office staffed by representa-
tives from the whole Group.
D.D.O.S. decided to adopt a policy of mixed representation, junior and
senior, as far as possible in each sub-section.
Thus an ordnance officer in
charge of a sub-section hailing from Australia was assisted by an officer from
South Africa, and an officer from New Zealand commanding a sub-section
was assisted by an officer from India. This scheme was found to work
excellently.
With the agreement of D.D.O.S. and D.D.O.S.(P) India, it was decided
that, in view of the large part India had played before the inception of the
new office and the peculiarities of the situation, the new sub-sections of the
Ordnance branch should initially be established within the India Provision
Office.
This had the dual advantages of educating the Dominion officers in
the Indian procedures with which they would later have to deal, and also
enabled them to create their own basic records from those already existing
in the India Provision Office.
Following this decision, all the officers who had arrived in Delhi up to
date were, during the early summer of 1941, attached to D.D.O.S.(P) India
and worked under instruction in his office in New Delhi for five or six weeks.
Subordinate clerical staff had obviously to be obtained from India and
consisted almost entirely of native personnel.
It was impossible to transfer
sufficient trained staff for the needs of C.P.O. from the already overworked
establishment of D.D.O.S.(P) India, but an agreement was reached by which
a number of key personnel were transferred.
At the end of June 1941, the
strength of the Ordnance branch was:
Officers (representing all participating Members of the Group)
British Other Ranks (ex India)
Senior Clerks (ex D.D.O.S.(P)) India ...
Junior Clerical Staff
From this beginning, the Ordnance branch grew by recruiting partly from
D.D.O.S.(P) India, and partly by local recruitment of
native clerks; by the
middle of 1942 the clerical establishment had been doubled.
Early in 1942, the officer establishment was reviewed and War Office
approval was given for periodic increases to be made as necessary, up to a
fixed establishment to be reached by the end of the year.
With few excep-
tions, these reinforcements came either from the United Kingdom or Middle
East.
Evolution of Procedure
A considerable amount of thought and discussion regarding documenta-
tion was necessary between all the various participants in the scheme.
example, the Supply Council itself had at the outset no idea as to the method
of contact between itself and the Provision Office.
A basis had to be
established for the submission of requirements from the office to the Council,
and procedures evolved which would result in the smooth flow of demand
and supply through all its channels.
110
17/17
WO 277/21
The adoption of stereotyped British forms was largely ruled out on account
of the differences between the existing Indian, Dominion and British pro-
cedures.
It was the aim of the Ordnance branch, while maintaining the basic
principles of British provision, to create, a documentary machine adaptable
to all the varying procedures with which it came in contact.
acceptable to all had to be designed and printed.
New forms
Broadly speaking, the series of forms evolved included demand forms to
be used as between participating countries and the C.P.O., supply orders by
which the C.P.O. submitted its requirements to the Eastern Group Supply
Council, issue orders or transfer orders to govern the movement of stores to
a consignee, dues in and dues out records, forecast requirement forms to be
used by participating countries as a guide for advance provision by the office,
provision review forms, monthly shipping forecast forms and the Eastern
Group deficiency report.
Scope of Eastern Group Provision
As has been previously indicated in broad terms, the responsibility of the
C.P.O. Ordnance branch was to co-ordinate both the demand and supply of
ordnance stores throughout the Eastern Group, with particular emphasis upon
the operational requirements of the forces in Middle East and Iraq.
Dealing first with the operational forces, the situation in 1941 was briefly
as follows: —Initially, War Office and M. of S. at home had endeavoured to
maintain these forces in Middle East from United Kingdom resources entirely.
With the closing of the Mediterranean and the great increase in time of
transit via the Cape, it was found that the United Kingdom was unable to
meet with sufficient speed the full requirements of the whole range of stores
Instructions were given D.D.O.S.(P) Middle East to collaborate
with India regarding the supply of any stores which India could produce and
ship quickly to Egypt via the Red Sea.
D.D.O.S. (P) India and D.D.O.S. (P) Middle East prepared a list of
stores upon which the former
made provision based upon estimated con-
sumption by the forces engaged up to April, 1942.
He also made provision
for certain initial reserves for these forces.
With the changing situation in
the Mediterranean area the composition of the forces in the Western Desert
was constantly altering and it became extremely difficult to obtain firm figures
upon which to base expenditure and war wastage even for clothing and
One of the first tasks of the Ordnance branch, therefore, was to review
the requirements of the Middle East forces in the light of the latest obtainable
order of battle, and to calculate from this, the clothing and general store
requirements at the latest known wastage rates and to compare them with
the dues in from orders already placed by D.D.O.S. (P). In June, 1941,
Indian stocks were comparatively low and large requirements from Middle
East had been outstanding for a considerable time. It was clear that no
re-ordering of indigenous Indian material by C.P.O. would improve the
situation until April, 1942.
C.P.O., therefore, concentrated on the revision
of provision already made; on placing orders to cover additional require-
ments up to April, 1942, thus disclosed, and on making full provision for
the further period April to December, 1942.
