SERVICRS
Ous
covered space, and 627,000 square feet of open storage space; in April,
there were just short of 3,500,000 square feet of covered accommodation,
and nearly 30 million square feet of open storage space.
In November,
13,000 tons of stores were handled; in April, the figure was 140,000 tons.
The foregoing figures show the progress achieved over a period of a few
months, and it will be appreciated that the administrative problems involved
increased correspondingly, and questions of major policy required imme-
diate decision day by day.
tion of the A.O.D. had to be kept flexible.
In the face of such rapid expansion, the organiza-
In addition to the three main stores sub-depots, two stores transit sub-
depots were set up.
One was located at Bruges to tehe StD. 5 sent from
the United Kingdom in response to demands which the A.O.D. had passed
home for satisfaction, and to arrange for the forward transmission of the
stores to units in the field.
The other stores transit sub-depot was set up
in Antwerp to become what was virtually the traffic centre for Nos. 1, 2
and 3 Sub-Depots—a policy which proved its wisdom in view of the vast
tonnage which had to be handled.
Two returned stores depots were opened: one in Antwerp to handle
Vote 9 stores and the other in Brussels to handle Votes 7 and 8.
Together
these depots were handling more than 25,000 tons a month.
Statistics
indicative of the size and the activities of 15/17 A.O.D. are given in
Appendix 7.
The system in the British Liberation Army for the supply of army
equipment was unique in so far as a theatre of active operations existed
for the first time without a full-scale B.O.D. on the spot.
The Q.M.G.'s
policy to utilize selected C.O.Ds. in Great Britain as B.O.Ds. meant that
the depots in the theatre were designed to hold no more than a limited
range of fast-moving and operationally important stores.
Initially both 17 A.O.D. and 14 A.O.D. were stocked and maintained by
automatic maintenance, i.e., initial A.O.D. stocks and initial replenishment
stocks were despatched, without demand, from the Main Base, on estimated
scales.
Although the life of these two depots was brief, it became clear
that indefinite continuance of automatic maintenance would result in the
accumulation of large masses of unwanted stores.
Although the scales for
automatic maintenance were basically sound, the inevitable variations in
requirements caused by local conditions resulted in acute
shortages of
certain stores and the accumulation
of great surpluses of others.
It had been considered, during the planning of 15/17 A.O.D., that,
although it would be desirable to stop automatic maintenance at the earliest
opportunity, and maintain stocks by demands framed in the light of usage
in the theatre, reliable demands could not be formulated until real ex-
perience of theatre requirements had been gained.
It was therefore decided
that automatic maintenance to 15/17 A.O.D. should be made for the first
four months after it opened. In fact, although the depot did not begin
issues till Ist January, 1945, demands for stock were being prepared from
the end of January, and such demands reached their peak by the end of
February and early March.
arise in
In order to minimise the errors which would
basing demands upon the issue experience over such a short
time, full use was made of the useful records compiled by 14 A.O.D., with
250
the result that over 99 per cent. of the items demanded were justified by
suosco ucut issues.
These demands were confined to a comparatively narrow
range or last-moving stores
Normally a period of eight weeks elapsed between the preparation of a
demand in the theatre and the receipt of the stores.
Consequently, as the
initial stocks became depleted, the availability in the depot showed a slight
but steady decline until the time
(mid-April) when the demanded items
began to
be received in volume.
From
this point, availability
steadily
improved.
At the same time as provision action in scaled items was being taken,
statistics were being compiled on items demanded regularly by dependent
units, but which were not in the original A.O.D. scale.
When it became
evident that an item was in really frequent demand a bulk stock of the
item was demanded from the United Kingdom.
As a result, the proportion
of items for which the depot was not scaled began to decline, thus improving
the service given
to formations and decreasing the detailed load of work
in the Main Base.
DEVELOPMENT OF
VEHICLE ORGANIZATION
Four vehicle companies, each an integral part of an A.O.D., were allotted
to 21 Army Group.
"At first it was intended that only one company (that of 17 A.O.D.)
should be sent into the theatre in the initial stages of the campaign.
As
the plan developed and a more accurate estimate of the load
became
possible it was realized that one company would not suffice and 16 Vehicle
Company was placed under the technical control of 17 Vehicle Company.
The first vehicle company was planned to arrive in the theatre between
D + 2 and D + 17, and the second from D + 18 onwards.
The recon-
naissance party of this company was destroyed by enemy action during the
night of the 8/9th June and the reserve reconnaissance party was called
forward.
Apart from this incident, parties of the first vehicle company
arrived according to plan up to
13th June, but later parties were all
delayed by about seven days as a result of bad weather in the Channel.
Each party brought in the maximum number of reserve vehicles.
The
primary task of the first company-to establish an organization for the
receipt, storage and issue of replacement vehicles-was seriously handicapped
by these delays, since essential personnel and equipment were not available
as planned.
However, the first replacement
vehicles were issued on 12th
June, while the first vehicles unaccompanied by vehicle company personnel
arrived on 28th June.
Up to about 4th September, 1944, the conservation
of shipping space was the first consideration and all load carriers arrived
loaded with stores (generally unaccompanied G.1098 equipment).
They
had, therefore,
to
proceed to the vehicle parks via the S.T.S.D. of the
A.O.D. so that the G.1098 stores could be unloaded and despatched to units.
This circumstance, combined with the restrictions on movement imposed by
Movement Control, caused unavoidable delays.
During the "build-up" phase of the campaign, personnel of one of the
two vehicle companies remaining in
the United Kingdom assisted in the
loading of vehicles at ports, accompanied vehicles over the channel, assisted
251
67612
west 17
WO 277/21
18
