VICES
along the Arakan Road. During the monsoon period, bridges and portions
of the Arakan Road were washed away, with the result that road convoys
could not operate and issues had to be carried forward by shipping trom
Chittagong Port via Cox's Bazaar and other suitable ports.
The climate
as alvays humid but during the monsoon period conditions were at their
worst.
Storesheds which leaked despite continual repairs were dank and
oppressive.
Care and preservation of important stores particularly optical
and scientific instruments- presented a major problem.
Many essential items, e.g.,
handling gear and machinery, could not be
obtained from the United Kingdom or America, owing to priority commit-
ments on the European front.
REORGANIZATION OF OFFICERS' SHOPS
In December, 1944, the seven static officers' shops which served Fourteenth
Army and 15 Corps, were reorganized to form a pool.
The advantages of the "pool" system were: —
(a) Flexibility in personnel allocation between shops to cover fluctuations
in the pressure of work.
(b) Central control of stocking and distribution of stores by a D.A.D.O.S.
at Headquarters A.L.F.S.E.A.
ORDNANCE FIELD DEPOTS
The depots, which were allotted on a basis of one for each Corps, were
designed to handle all classes of stores and ammunition; they grew to such
a size that they became immobile. By February, 1945, it was found that
ordnance field depots were lagging behind the corps they were serving to
such an extent that issues could not be made with sufficient speed.
The railhead groups of the O.F.Ds. were therefore disbanded to form
ordnance field maintenance sections, handling clothing, general stores and
ammunition.
The mechanical transport and technical stores platoons of the
O.F.Ds. were detached from the O.F.Ds. and attached to A.O.Ds.
warlike stores were concentrated in a unit capable of handling large quantities
of spares.
INDUSTRIAL GAS UNITS
Until February, 1945, all industrial gas requirements of forward troops
were provided by India—a most unsatisfactory system, because of the shortage
of cylinders and the length of the L. of C.
In February one base industrial gas unit (B.I.G.U.) and two army indus-
trial gas units (A.I.G.Us.) were formed ; India supplied the equipment and
War Office sent out part of the personnel.
In the war establishment,
number of Royal Indian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (R/I.E.M.E.)
personnel were provided, since the shortage of spares made necessary the
closest technical supervision and maintenance.
ORDNANCE VEHICLE COMPANIES
In April, 1945, it became clear that the Indian ordnance vehicle company
was unsuitable for Burma and it was decided to disband the existing
companies and to raise three units on a war establishment similar to that
then operating in the United Kingdom and other theatres.
276
The long L. of C. made necessary an organization comprising companies
controlling several parks each holding 500 vehicles and 150 motor cycles;
existing companies consisted of 2 parks only each holding 200 vehicles and
50 motor cycles.
vehicle parks.
Furthermore the old organization did not include returned
The proposed war establishment, based on the British organization, con-
sisted of: —
H.Q. Vehicle Company.
Transit Vehicle Park.
Vehicle Group.
Three Fit Vehicle Parks.
Two Returned Vehicle Parks.
Very few R.E.M.E. personnel and no workshop facilities were allowed by
the existing establishment:
this was corrected in the new establishment.
FORMATION OF MOBILE OFFICERS' SHOPS
In May, 1945, it was decided to form three mobile officers' shops each
consisting of three 3-ton vehicles specially converted.
These were invaluable
for serving troops in outlying parts of Burma where officers' shop service
would otherwise have been impossible.
REORGANIZATION OF BRITISH FORCES FOR THE INVASION OF MALAYA
When the fall of Rangoon became certain a reorganization of the British
One corps, and divisions from the other corps of the Army
in Burma, were withdrawn and regrouped into the new Fourteenth Army,
those left to continue the fight being formed into the Twelfth Army.
Plans were made by which Malaya would be invaded early in September,
1945, by landing an assault force in the vicinity of Port Swettenham, and
tion of ordnance units and stocks for the ordnance installations.
(9th September, 1945), but the operation was carried through more or less
as planned except that there was no opposition.
Ordnance arrangements for the assault apart from the enormous task
of re-equipping the units of Fourteenth Army, included the provision of
O.B.Ds. with landing reserve (L.R.) sets, opening at A.O.D. and an A.A.D.
stocked with L.R. sets and following up with a B.O.D. at Singapore.
Air Supply of Ordnance Stores
EVOLUTION OF AIR SUPPLY
Certainly the most important lessons regarding Ordnance services to be
learnt from this campaien are those connected with the maintenance of
isolated formations by air.
It is therefore desirable to describe this aspect
of the campaign in some detail.
To appreciate the problems involved in air supply to our forces in
Burma, it is necessary to visualize the theatre as a whole.
Our troops
67612
277
K 2
Wes7ert17
WO 277/25
