SERV
ICES
During the evacuation, ammunition dumps were formed by 3rd Indian
Corps all the way down the Peninsula, and often had to be picked up again
This was thoroughly unsatisfactory and would not have
been necessary had the ammunition echelons been correctly employed.
On the evacuation of Kuala Lumpur, an advanced depot for stores and
ammunition was opened at the new barracks in Johore and stores and
ammunition were backloaded there from the Kuala Lumpur depots and from
other dumps on the L. of C. which were subsequently evacuated.
and accommodation at this depot were admirably suited for the purpose
but, unfortunately, no sooner was it stocked and working than it, in turn,
Before the retirement of the troops to Singapore, three large dumps of
ammunition were formed in the Nee Soon Area and another on the Bukit
Subsequently, smaller dumps were formed
House by the McRitchie Reservoir, Ferd Haus College in Serangoon Road,
Paya Leba Crescent, the New World and finally in the Harbour
godowns. Arrangements were made for distribution of ammunition from
the main magazines at Alexandra, Krangi and Changi and from dumps
evacuated from the forward areas to the above-mentioned dumps in order
Supply of stores after retirement to the island was arranged through
the R.A.S.C. supply issue points to each of which a R.A.O.C. representative
Stores were drawn from the main depot at Alexandra in
lorries allotted to R.A.O.C. for that purpose, and delivered to the R.A.O.C.
representative at the supply points.
This arrangement proved entirely
Considerable difficulty was experienced in the movement of stores and
ammunition in Singapore, owing to labour shortage and failure of both land
As bombing intensified, Asiatic labour became more
and more difficult to obtain and as often as not, when it did materialize,
numbers were far short of those requisitioned and transport was lacking
to convey them to work. Often it eventually devolved on R.A.O.C. to arrange
Harbour transport failed altogether in the final stages, with the result
that much badly needed
ammunition could not be off-loaded from ships
and lighters in the harbour.
The ordnance field park allotted to 3rd Indian Corps never operated
because Corps H.Q. decided to break it up; they issued all the reserve
vehicles to augment units and evacuated the store vehicles to the Ordnance
Depot at Kuala Lumpur.
The long awaited R.A.O.C. reinforcements (comprising approximately
400 officers and men) landed in Singapore on 4th
February, really only
just in time for the closing stages and too late to be used for ordnance work.
On 10th February, the R.A.O.C. battalion was called on to take up its role
in the final defences of Singapore.
This role was the manning of the all-round defensive position (previously
prepared) of the depots area.
A skeleton staff
was retained to continue
issues from the depots. The area was subjected to heavy artillery and mortar
fire and attack from the air.
The position quickly deteriorated so that by
13th February the infantry battalions in front of the R.A.O.C.
to retire to the sector held by the R.A.O.C.
were ordered
sub-depots had been captured by the enemy.
By this time all dispersed stores
February, 1942,
On the evening of the 13th
Base Ordnance Workshop.
orders were given for the destruction of the B.O.D. and
previously for this.
A comprehensive detailed plan had been made
To complete this task all R.A.O.C.
gun crews were withdrawn from the line.
except machine-
The destruction of the installations
was successfully completed by midnight when once again the R.A.O.C.
battalion was deployed in its combatant role and at the time of the capitula-
tion on the evening of 15th February, two companies were in position on
the right flank and three companies were on the left flank.
The enormous stocks at the Krangi magazine and the dumps at Nee
Soon, Bukit Timah, Paya Lebar and Ferd Haus College had been captured
and Changi magazine had been blown up by the R.E.
R.A.O.C. personnel
were present and functioning until the front line retreated behind each dump
in turn, and the R.A.O.C. staff were still at the Krangi magazine and pre-
pared to issue when this magazine was actually five miles in advance of
At the time of the capitulation, Alexandra magazine was still in our hands
and capable of making issues, although with difficulty. It was in advance
of the H.Q. of the front line battalion in that sector and had also suffered
from a fire in one of the explosive storehouses.
The fact that this magazine
was not finally denied to the enemy by demolition was due to H.Q. orders
(owing to its close proximity to the hospital which could not be evacuated).
No demands for ammunition had been refused but reduced issues had
been made in certain natures such as sub-machine
gun and anti-tank rifle,
Further stocks of these latter types had recently arrived, by
ship and had been loaded into barges, which could not be cleared owing to
shortage of labour and transport.
A small percentage of the
R.A.O.C. in
Singapore, mostly workshop
personnel, were evacuated before the surrender of the fortress, the remainder
became prisoners of war.
was 947/17
WO 277/21
293
