The initial depot stocks were packed and despatched to Ancona by
557 B.O.D. and 500 A.O.D. The reconnaissance for suitable storage buildings
in Ancona area was carried out by the C.O.O. 35 A.O.D., literally on the
heels of the retreating Germans, the
A.O.D. advance party moving into
Ancona and selecting their storehouses there within 48 hours of the enemy's
departure.
Near by at Senegallia, one site included in the reconnaissance
was found to be still occupied by German troops.
Very suitable storage
accommodation was found in Ancona and at Jesi.
Once established, 35 A.O.D. met the Army's demands, for all items in
the A.O.D. stock range, within 48 hours of receiving the demands.
Demands
for stores not stocked by the A.O.D. were sent by air mail to 557 B.O.D.,
whence the stores were consigned to units through the A.D.O.S. of the
formation concerned, urgent fighting stores being despatched by R.A.O.C
stores convoy. units and the remainder by rail.
These arrangements succeeded in maintaining a very satisfactory supply
of ordnance stores to Eighth Army up till the end of the campaign.
By the autumn of 1944 the allied command planned further offensive
action with the objective of piercing the Pisa-Rimini line, capturing Bologna
by December and then following up with a general advance into N.E. Italy.
In support of these operational projects administrative plans provided
for another A.O.D. to follow the advance and operate from Trieste.
liminary arrangements had been made earlier in anticipation of such a
contingency, but again owing to the shortage of R.A.O.C. personnel, the
No reserve A.O.D. existed in the
Force and it was therefore decided to release 500 A.O.D. (Bari) from its
commitments and to replace it by an improvised unit staffed chiefly with
Italan co-operators and civilians under the control of a small nucleus of
The capture of Bologna and the onward advance planned for December,
1944, did not in fact take place until the spring of 1945, with the result that
500 A.O.D. did not move forward till after the end of the campaign
when it moved to Graz in Austria.
THE R.A.O.C. STORES ORGANIZATION IN ADVANCE OF THE A.O.DS.
The normal procedure for dealing with units' indents by A.Ds.O.S. of
formations and
by ordnance field parks respectively proved reasonably
effective
The indents for clothing and general stores went to the A.D.O.S. formation
who sent bulk demands to the base depot, at first fortnightly, later monthly.
The longer interval between bulk demands avoided overlapping.
The indents for warlike stores, including M.T. stores, went to the formation
ordnance field park which met them from stock or passed them back to the
B.O.D. to supply.
Great importance was attached to the constant review of
field park scalings in order to eliminate items not in frequent demand or not
likely to be urgently required, and, in time, field parks managed to adjust
their stocks to something approaching the ideal scaling.
ORDNANCE FIELD PARKS
Early in the campaign it had been decided to adopt the Middle East
ordnance field park organization.
The main differences from the standard
organization were the omission of the divisional sub-parks (with a correspond-
ing increase in the war establishment of the ordnance field park) and the in-
clusion of a separate army troops ordnance field park which had two separate
and distinct functions.
The first was the normal function of supplying army
troops with their urgent requirements of warlike stores and the second was to
hold the army reserves of controlled stores released by A.F.H.Q., and to
issue them to formations as authorised by G.(S.D.) Army.
It was found that the army troops field park was absolutely essential as
these two functions could not have been discharged by the corps troops
ordnance field park, which was already fully occupied.
ARMY RESERVES AT ROADHEAD
One new practice which grew up during the campaign was that of holding
reserves at roadhead under the hand of D.D.O.S., Eighth Army.
These
reserves consisted mainly of heavy lift items in constant demand, e.g. clothing,
boots, tentage, stretchers, engines, tyres, tank tracks, gas cylinders, etc. The
more static the Army became, the bigger these reserves tended to grow, with
the result that, after a static period, it was extremely difficult to obtain enough
transport to move the reserves forward in the wake of the advancing army.
In fact, the lack of R.A.S.C. transport often forced the D.D.O.S. to back-load
part of his reserves to the B.O.D.
ORDNANCE MAINTENANCE COMPANY
Shortly after the campaign began the standard war establishment of the
ordnance maintenance company was received from the War Office and the
R.A.O.C. field organization was adapted to include this very valuable unit.
In practice it was found that the various sub-units (including the ammunition
sections) were too scattered for efficient control by one headquarters but the
principle of unified command was undoubtedly right.
The forward mainten-
ance stores sections were employed in the F.M.As. to handle stores coming
forward and distribute them to the various A.Ds.O.S. and ordnance field parks
concerned.
The railhead sections were used partly to handle stores on
arrival at railhead and supervise their forward loading into the lorries going
up to F.M.A. and partly to hold the D.D.O.S. army's reserve at army railhead.
STORES CONVOY UNITS (S.C.Us.)
The R.A.O.C. stores convoy units brought over from M.E.F. provided the
essential link between base and ordnance field parks for the prompt forward
delivery of urgent fighting stores.
Without these convoy units it would have
been quite impossible to dispense with the divisional sub-parks, but their use
eifected considerable economy in personnel and transport as well as achieving
the main object of speedy delivery.
The L. of C. S.C.U. consisted of a small headquarters at the base, air stores
sections at base airfields and forward landing grounds and road sections, each
with its own lorries.
At the B.O.D. a small S.C.U. detachment worked in a
separate bay of the transit shed, to which the stores were handed over direct.
209
W92994/17
WO 277/21
