CES
CR
OUTS
forward the stock of vehicles from the R.M.A.
establish more static types of vehicle park. il the Advance Base and to bring
It had been found that the Chief Ordnance Oficers (C.O.Os.) of the
A.O.Ds. could not adequately control both the A.O.D. proper and the
nor could they
give adequate technical direction in the
many problems of M.T. vehicle supply.
Separation of vehicle companies
from their A.O.Ds. was recognized as a necessary
or vehicle companies operated independently of the A.O.Ds. and the complete
divorce of vehicle companies from the A.O.Ds.
approved, the companies coming direct under the Ordnance Directorate of
21 Army Group for technical administration.
decided to appoint
an
responsible under the Ordnance Directorate for the technical functioning of
He was called C.O.O., Vehicle Companies, and had
the following responsibilities:-
(a) Siting and development of vehicle parks.
(b) Organization for the receipt of vehicles into the theatre and their
distribution to holding parks in accordance with the policy laid
GOWL
(c) The disposition of personnel to meet fluctuating loads.
(d) Technical efficiency of all vehicle companies.
(e) Maintenance of vehicles.
(A) Backloading (e.g. return of vehicles to the United Kingdom).
Although it became the practice for company commanders to discuss with
the C.O.O. such regimental matters as had a direct bearing on the technical
efficiency of their units, responsibility for regimental administration was
left to the commander.
VEHICLE ORGANIZATION FOR THE ADVANCED BASE
The plans made for the formation of an Advanced Base in the Antwerp-
Brussels area included the establishment of a large vehicle organization
in the port area to cope with the anticipated intake, and elsewhere in the
Advanced Base to hold this intake as well as the vehicles being brought up
from the R.M.A.
There were, at this time, about 15,000 replacement vehicles of all types
in the theatre.
Ninety per cent. of these were in the R.M.A. or along
he L. of C. with about 75 per cent. of the total vehicle company personne
deployed in the rearward parks. The remaining personnel and vehicles were
in the Advanced Base area.
Further, the greater part of the theatre intake was still being brought
in over the Normandy beaches, although Boulogne,
Calais and Ostend were
being brought into use as rapidly as possible and " hards" for the reception
of landing craft had been or were being built.
It was intended to receive
into the Channel ports awkward types of vehicles which could not con-
veniently be loaded and off-loaded from the M.T. ships.
These ships would
put into Antwerp as soon as that port became available.
that receipt of vehicles over the Normandy be aches would cease as soon
The keynote of the port organization was flexibility.
It was evident
254
as Antwerp became available, but how
many
and what types of vehicles
would be shipped direct to
Antwerp, Calais, Boulogne and Ostend respec-
tively remained unknown.
It was found impossible to
establish
an adequate transit vehicle park
organization to deal simultaneously with the intake through the Normandy
beaches, four Channel ports and Antwerp as well, owing to lack of personnel
and technical equipment.
The large organization already in existence in the
R.M.A. was, therefore,
maintained until the intake there fell off.
At the
same time, the building up of a similar organization at Antwerp began.
To
cope with intake through the
Channel ports and vehicles in transit from the
R.M.A. a
organization was-set up at Lessines-25 miles west
of
Brussels.
This
site was unsatisfactory, being a straight road which
did
not permit an ordered flow of a large number of vehicles nor room for
expansion.
It was closed when the transfer of vehicles from the R.M.A.
neared
completion.
An
alternative organization
was
then set up near
Ostend to deal with vehicles received through the Channel ports.
For the
remainder of the campaign in North-West Europe, these two transit vehicle
parks, sited at Ostend and Antwerp respectively, serviced all light " A" and
vehicles arriving in the theatre.
It was found desirable to set up
separate organizations to deal with
"B" vehicles and light " A " vehicles,
the flow of the latter generally being slower than the former.
It was also
found desirable to keep tracked vehicles independent of wheeled.
In addition to servicing, many vehicles were found to need first echelon
repairs, in spite of the fact that most of them were new.
The faults were
minor
ones due to the
"shaking down" of a new vehicle or damage in
transit.
With a flow of 300 to 500 vehicles a day, a substantial workshop
was required but as no R.E.M.E. workshop was available one was improvised.
at each location.
For this, 225 civilian technicians and others were required
over and above the war establishment at Antwerp, and 130 at Ostend.
Considerable battery charging arrangements were also necessary since many
vehicles arrived with flat batteries.
In practice it was found desirable to
keep a reserve stock of batteries equivalent to the daily flow of vehicles.
Separate vehicle parks were established for "A" and "B" vehicles, as
it had been found that the movement of "A" vehicles rendered ground
conditions impracticable for
the
movement of "B" vehicles.
in come
instances where large sites were available it was found economical in over;
heads to merge the personnel of two
" B"
vehicle parks or two "A"
vehicle parks into one large park capable of holding as many as 5,000
vehicles.
In the selection of sites for returned vehicle parks, the question of
standings was of great importance, particularly as the bulk of the stock
were non-runners. Ample space for movement and expansion was essential.
In the early part of the second stage, the general state of returned
vehicle parks was unsatisfactory.
Vehicles of all types were being returned
at the rate of at least 150-200 a day and holdings at each returned vehicle
park varied between 3,000 and 6,000.
As the war establishment for a
returned vehicle park was only about 40 personnel, the load was excessive.
In addition to vehicles, unserviceable wheeled artillery had to be accepted.
Quite a high percentase of vehicles returned from army backloading points
WO 277/21
