CHAPTER X
NORWAY AND ICELAND 1940-1942
Norway, April-June, 1940
Early in 1940 a British force was prepared to go to the aid of Finland
in its struggle with Kussia
The projected expedition did not materialize
because the governments of Norway and Sweden would not give permission
for the transit of the British force through their countries.
The force which
had not been completely dispersed, was sent to Norway after that country
was invaded by the Germans on 9th April, 1940.
Ordnance services to the force consisted of an A.D.O.S. with a small
staff and a modified B.O.D.
The depot consisted of three sub-depots, one
for general stores and clothing, one for warlike stores, and one for ammuni-
tion.
Mechanical transport being unsuitable for the theatre, no M.T. stores
were taken.
The range of stores held by
the B.O.D. comprised about
30.000 items
The force which consisted of the 49th Division, somewhat augmented,
and ancillary troops was divided into three, the first landed north of Narvik
on 15th April and the other two at Namos and Aandalsnes on the 16th
and 18th April respectively.
The
latter two were withdrawn after a
fortnight's operation.
The B.O.D. went with the Narvik force and was located at Harstad ;
a preliminary reconnaissance had established that the population was friendly
and that no German troops were in occupation.
Arctic clothing, but not snow camouflage clothing, was provided for all
ranks and was issued on board ship before disembarkation.
Fish barns normally used for
storehouses.
salting fish were allotted as ordnance
These barns were alongside small wharves and were full of
salt, fish oil and rats. The clearance of the sheds in a temperature 30° below
zero and in thick snow was a heavy task which had to be carried out at
the utmost speed as ammunition and stores were off-loaded immediately
the force disembarked.
Maximum dispersal was the aim from the outset since the only A.A.
protection available was that provided by ships when in the vicinity.
clothing and general stores sub-depot was sited at the
Harstad, the warlike stores sub-depot in the middle of the town and the
ammunition sub-depot at the other end of the fiord at Mercur.
of this dispersal was proved later when six 500-lb. bombs fell in the area
without causing any serious loss of stores.
As in France, the domestic and technical depot equipment of the B.O.D.
arrived after its personnel; even cooking utensils had to be taken out of
depot stocks for use by the R.A.O.C. unit.
force had also become separated from their war equipments.
Some of the other units in the
company had to jettison some of its
One Guards
because it encumbered the cruiser on which they were travelling.
war equipment during the voyage
units had to be re-equipped from B.O.D. stocks.
'These
162
During a raging blizzard on the 23rd April the first store ships arrived
and were off-loaded while the harbour was being bombed.
The packages
were not marked to show their contents.
In many instances they were so
heavy or cumbersome that after off-loading by ships' derricks they could
not be moved further owing to lack of mobile cranes and transport and
the deep snow.
In the first few days only those stores which could be
identified by the shape or size of their packages, such as bales of blankets,
could be issued.
However, in spite of the difficult conditions and the lack
of vouchers for the stores the task of stocking up the depot was carried
out simultaneously with the issue of stores to units.
Conditions became worse on the 29th April when the thaw began and
every road and track was turned into a torrent of water up to 2 feet deep,
a great deal of which emptied itself into the sea by way of the
clothing
and general stores sub-depot.
During May two infantry battalions were
completely re-equipped with their war equipment owing to losses
at sea
For this purpose some items of web equipment, compasses, binoculars, etc.,
had to be withdrawn from base units, the B.O.D.
stock having
exhausted.
become
Until the arrival of A.A. regiments in the middle of May the depot area
was incessantly bombed by German planes.
It was at this time that the
B.O.D. received its first demand for snow camouflage clothing, none of which
had been provided.
White sheeting was purchased locally and a Norwegian
woman's voluntary service formed to make up the garments.
The ordnance staff at H.O.
was extremely small-the A.D.O.S. was
the only R.A.O.C. officer-and quite inadequate to deal with its work in
connection with the supply and expenditure of ammunition and demands on
the United Kingdom for replenishment.
Towards the end of May a corps
H.Q. staff arrived with a D.D.O.S. but within a few days of their arrival
the order for the evacuation of Norway was given.
Narvik was captured by the British on 27th May, 1940 but the situation
in France had by this time deteriorated to such an extent that it was no
longer possible to maintain the force in Norway.
Under cover of a plan
ostensibly to move the base farther south, stores were loaded into ships so far
as was practicable, the balance being destroyed or given to Norwegian patriots
to enable them to continue resistance.
The force was completely evacuated by the 19th June,
providential
protection being afforded by a heavy sea fog which persisted to the last day.
Iceland 1940-1942
On the 10th May, 1940, a month after the Germans invaded Denmark,
British troops occupied stratesic points on the self-governed Danish island
of Iceland.
The garrison originally consisted of the 147 Infantry Brigade, a detach-
ment of
Roval Marines
and ancillary troops.
Granance
services were
provided by a small intes anad ammunition detachment and a light aid
detachment.
Later the
49th Division which the garris withdra an from Norway and re-equipped in
garrison was augmented by other troops of the
the United Kingdom.
Canadian troops also formed part of the garrison
163
WO 277/21
28
