of stores dealt with had greatly increased.
In June of that year it there-
fore became necessary to form a separate store group for the co-ordinated
supply of packages and packing materials, including systematic distribution
to the stores manufacturing contractors.
Another change in organization and method, introduced in 1941,
was
the setting up
of a new branch, called the special issues branch which,
under direct D.C.O.O. control, arranged and progressed all special priority
issues and operational issues required by target dates, in fact all special
issues as distinct from the daily flow of normal maintenance issues.
In September, 1941, Didcot received a large proportion of the machinery
evacuated from depots in the London area to minimize the risk of loss from
enemy air attacks.
This included laundry machinery and trailers which
later became a recognized Didcot store.
Others items of power-driven
machinery were transferred to Old Dalby at a later date.
The photographic stores section, hitherto accommodated at Aldershot,
was transferred in March, 1942, to Didcot where special accommodation
was provided including laboratory, dark room and special apparatus for
developing, printing and manufacturing lantern slides.
In August, 1942, C.O.D. Didcot began work on L.Rs., B.M.Ps., and initial
and automatic maintenance to cover the North African Expedition.
This
entailed a complete review of stocks and the calling in of stores from com-
mand ordnance depots and trade sources.
Following the success of the operations in North Africa, maintenance
issues were made from time to time to both Sicily and Italy.
The special issues branch was abolished in September, 1942, its functions
being absorbed by the provision branch.
The arrival in the United Kingdom, towards the end of 1942, of large
contingents of the United States Army necessitated extensive re-arrangement
of both the central and command ordnance depots' overall storage plan in
order that suitable storage premises could be handed over to American
Army use.
This project placed a severe storage strain on C.O.D. Didcot
as it had been agreed that the large new sub-depot at Thatcham should
be transferred to the Americans.
The transfer was made in November,
1942. Shortly afterwards, to help make good the loss of Thatcham, a new
Didcot.
depot was established at Solway, near Carlisle, as a shadow
C.O.D. to
It had begun as a sub-depot, in three sheds comprising 350,000
sq. ft., of the central ammunition depot, Longtown, and rapidly expanded
and added sub-depots until it was able to relieve Didcot of the Vote 8 (general
stores) issue commitment to Scotland, Northern Ireland and the centre and
programmes.
north of England as well as a substantial portion of the overseas shipping
Ultimately, the shadow C.O.D. Solway comprised 2z million
sq. ft. of covered storage and employed a man-power force of some 3,500.
By this time, the overall Vote 8 C.O.D. storekeeping commitment had
increased so greatly, both with regard to the quantity and the range
stocks and in respect of issues and receipts, that it became necessary
separate all cookers and disinfectors and decontamination plants from ordin-
ary camp equipment stores and to establish a new sub-group.
the depot at Perivale, dealing with all anti-gas stores and equipment, was
made a sub-depot of C.O.D. Didcot.
In addition,
By January, 1943, an acute shortage of timber made it necessary to cut
down, by every possible means, the consumption of wooden packing cases.
A case recovery section was established for the repair of used and damaged
cases and a further section for the manufacture of special packages where
economy of timber could be effected.
In order to give new stimulus and drive to the study of economic pack.
ing, a Vote 8 package section was formed to make a complete review of
the packing problem and to devise the most suitable range in quality, material,
size, etc. of the packages required.
The main objects were, further economy
in material used for packages, more efficient protection in store and in
transit of the stores packed, efficient methods and means of marking pack-
ages with contents and consignment markings, and determination of the
most suitable standard pack for each article or set of items.
Particular
importance was attached to obtaining the most suitable standard packs, in
view of the resulting advantages of economy in storage space and of gaining
added speed and accuracy in stocktaking and in receipts and issues trans-
actions.
The sub-depot at Slaithwaite and all its outstations were transferred about
the middle of 1943 from Didcot's control to Solway.
In the latter half of 1943 it was found that the Vote 8 C.O.D. organization
was being hampered in meeting its still increasing storage and issue commit-
ments by the impossibility of getting various essential works services executed
when required.
This was undoubtedly owing to the acute difficulty of ade-
quate man-power distribution after four years of war. It was decided that
self help was required.
Suitable R.A.O.C. personnel were therefore selected,
formed into an R.A.O.C. Construction Company and applied to the task o
executing those works services most urgently needed.
This unit constructed
over 400,000 sq. ft. of covered storage accommodation in the form of Romney
hutting and 250,000 sq. ft. of hard standings, in addition to numerous miscel-
laneous jobs, including the repair and manufacture of packing cases.
During the latter part of 1943, in preparation for the Allied invasion of
N.W. Europe, the C.O.D. Didcot carried out a large programme of issues
of tentage and accommodation stores to concentration and marshalling areas
in the home counties and in the south and west of England and to special
"A.A. camps.
At this time further improvements in organization were made.
A new
C.O.D. was opened at Basing, stocked and organized to operate under the
maintenance project as the Vote 8 (general stores) main base depot to supply
the detailed requirements of 21 Army Group.
A new sub-depot of •Didcot
was opened at Crookham to handle mobile laundry equipment, and Didcot
took over the administration of the cinematograph stores depot at Harlesden.
The arrangements for the preservation of stores were energetically over-
hauled, new plants provided and new methods and standards of preservation
applied to ensure that valuable stores would not be wasted by deterioration
but would reach the troops in any war theatre in fully serviceable condition.
The assembly of L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. for the invasion of Europe was in
hand by January, 1944. Based on the experience gained in the North African
WO 277/21
18
