CES
SER
quie
(A) Records.
B.A.Ds.
rendered daily
ammunition
stalcucuts
econance H.O. which kept complete stock records by types and
depots, and confirmed issues by teleprint to both depot and con-
All other depots were under the control of armies and
corps to whom daily stock returns were rendered, the armies sub-
miting consolidated returns of holdings to Ordnance H.Q. monthly.
to enable complete stocks to be advised to War Office.
All ports
clearing ammunition also sent progress reports to Ordnance H.Q.
One of the difficulties in the organization of ammunition supply during
this campaign was the storage of
"dead stocks".
Throughout the cam-
paign modifications to equipment, re-armament (especially of A.F.V. units),
and the introduction of improved types of ammunition, led to large tonnages
for which there was no turnover occupying valuable space in depots.
Very large quantities of ammunition were also returned from units after
each battle, nearly always unboxed and requiring 100 per cent. examina-
tion.
The field ammunition repair factories, which operated both in the
R.M.A. and Belgium, were invaluable for the treatment of these returned
ORDNANCE ORGANIZATION IN THE L. OF C.
D.D.O.S., L. of C. was responsible to Commander, L. of C. for the
command and administration of certain R.A.O.C. units placed under com-
mand for all purposes from time to time. He exercised full control over
certain other R.A.O.C. units (e.g. port ordnance detachments and
ammunition detachments), with the limitation that he could not alter the
function or location of such units.
In the case of main units under control of H.Q. 21 Army Group (e.g.
A.O.Ds.), D.D.O.S., L. of C. had no responsibility for provision, stocks of
depots, etc., nor for the internal administration and working of depots,
but he reported to D.O.S., without giving any orders direct, when it appeared
that G.H.Q. provision policy was resulting in an excessive load on depots
or when, for any reason, depots were
unable to carry out their tasks
D.D.O.S., L. of C. operated through A.Ds.O.S. and D.A.Ds.O.S. of L.
of C.
areas, sub-areas,
and
base
sub-areas.
These
A.Ds.O.S.
D.A.Ds.O.S. operated in the same manner as an A.D.O.S. of a formation
and their duties were, in general, the same as those laid down for an
A.D.O.S. of a formation, e.g. they dealt with unit indents, maintained forma-
tion dumps, dealt with bulk indents and administered such ordnance units
as were put under command.
Some variation was necessary in dealing with indents for warlike and
M.T. stores as there was no ordnance field park available.
for all stores were dealt with in the A.D.O.S. or D.A.D.O.S. office.
Therefore, indents
The channels of communication were:—
(a) All matters of local administration- C.O.O. to sub-area H.O. In
difficulty through ordnance L. of C. channels.
(6) Ceneral administrative matters of depot nolievC 0.0. to D.O.S.
with copy to D.D.O.S., L. of C.
260
(c) Personnel-C.O.0. to D.O.S.
(d) Provision and Stocks—C.O.O. to D.O.S.
(e) Accommodation and Transport C.O.O. to sub-area H.Q. In diffi-
culty through ordnance L. of C. channels.
(A) Pont clearance and movement -C.O.O. to sub-area H.Q. In difficulty
through ordnance L. of C. channels.
(g) Issues to units on L. of C.
C.O.O. to sub-area H.Q. In difficulty
through ordnance L. of C. channels.
The ordnance organization at each port consisted of the port ordnance
officer (on the strength of the port operating group) and port ordnance detach-
ments and port
ammunition
detachments.
the number of which varied
according to the size and activity of the port.
During the planning period, it had been possible to build up detachments
properly trained in port duties,
and the port ordnance officers had been
working with their port operating groups.
This early organization un-
doubtedly contributed to the smoothness with which port clearance worked
throughout the campaign.
Care had been taken to work out with the Transportation Service details
of the respective transportation and ordnance responsibilities.
As a result
there was only one serious disagreement and this arose out of Transportation's
eagerness to clear the ships and docks at all costs, which in the early days
resulted in base depots being inundated with mixed consignments of stores,
supplies and ammunition.
The principle was then accepted that sufficient
sorting must take place on the quayside to enable commodities to be cleared
to the appropriate depot.
This meant that stores of approximately one
day's off-loading capacity were always on the quayside.
LAUNDRIES
A laundry area was allotted in the R.M.A. near the hospital area.
consisted of
a two-mile stretch
of river between
Vaucelles
and Sully.
Although the river banks were soft, it was possible to work mobile plants
close to the river pending more permanent Base installations being set-up
above the flood line.
The hospitals were given priority over all other laundry service and
a scheme was worked out to satisfy their requirements.
This involved a
commitment of 3,000 beds by D + 17 building up to 40,000 beds by D + 90.
For the first 60 days,
the use of base hospital laundries was out of
the question, a trial setting up of one of the plants having established
the fact that a period of 30 days was necessary for installation.
Had the
machinery been mounted on trailers it would have been easier, but with the
bulky nature of the plant,
and the heavy crane lifts involved, it was not
feasible to bring the machinery over the beaches.
The plan decided upon was as follows:
D to D
17—Corps and divisional mobile laundry and bath units
(M.L.B.Us.) would give priority to hospital washing.
D + 17 to D + 30-L. of C. and army troops M.L.B.US.
would
take over the commitment from corps and divisional M.L.B.Us.
261
wez9477
wO 277/21
18
