Conclusion
Three points in connection with the organization of C.P.O. must be
stressed.
Firstly, the
great advantages obtained by welding the provision and
procurement functions into one body.
Secondly, the disadvantages of having
the storeholding, issuing and
shipping functions under D.O.S. India.
With the Burma war on India's
doorstep all eyes at G.H.Q. India were turned that way and little effort
was applied to correcting
the inefficient administration
of the depot
Dehu.
If the War Office had taken over control of this depot and had
been responsible for its administration at an early stage, most of these
difficulties would not have existed.
Thirdly, the Dominion officers from Australia, New Zealand, S. Africa,
S. Rhodesia and India in the Ordnance Branch worked in close harmony
with the R.A.O.C. officers and formed a most loyal and conscientious team.
CHAPTER VIII
AMMUNITION
Situation Before the Outbreak of War
In September, 1939, the R.A.O.C. had one Central Ammunition Depot
(C.A.D.) in operation and two others nearing completion.
There was no
separate ordnance ammunition branch at the War Office.
There were only
16 Inspecting Ordnance Officers (I.O.0s.) and 51 Ammunition Examiners
(A.Es.) directly employed on ammunition duties. Training for war was
based on the current Magazine Regulations.
The mildest description of this situation would be to say that it was
quite inadequate to meet the heavy demands which arose immediately on
the outbreak of war.
At this time, the provision of ammunition was not an
R.A.O.C. function.
The Mobilizing of Ammunition Depots
On the declaration of war, the three Base Ammunition Depots (B.A.Ds.)
for the B.E.F. were mobilized at C.A.D. Bramley. Apart from one I.O.O.
and three A.Es. allocated to each of the B.A.Ds., none of the personnel had
more than a perfunctory knowledge of ammunition in itself and no experience
of its storage, handling and maintenance beyond that provided in Magazine
Regulations.
Part I of this publication did not in any sense apply to active
service conditions and Part II conformed rigidly to the teachings of the last
war.
Instruction given at the School of Instruction at Bramley was pains-
taking in its efficiency within the scope of the regulations, but personnel
were not taught to foresee possible variations under active service conditions,
and many lessons learnt in the first few months of the war had to be adopted
without
hesitation, in order to bring the ammunition organization of the
Army up to date.
The three B.A.Ds. moved to France and established themselves in well-
selected sites, dumped their ammunition in too great a concentration and
awaited the construction of standard rail depots in accordance with Magazine
Regulations,
Part T
The welcome breathing space between
September,
1939 and May, 1940 enabled the depots to be reorganized and their layouts
revised, while intensive training of all personnel was undertaken by the
I.O.0s. and ammunition examiners.
Creation of War Office Branch
In November, 1939, a new War Office branch was created within the
Ordnance Directorate to take the place of the Master General of Ordnance
(M.G.O.) branches which had dealt with ammunition.
This new branch was
designated "O.S.2." (later W.S.2.), and its primary function was the provi-
sion, distribution and issue of ammunition.
It had to undertake, in addition
to these tasks, many duties which hitherto were performed by M.G.O., such
as executive action on inspection and examination reports and the issue of
technical instructions regarding the inspection, repair and storage of new
types of ammunition.
121
wester
7/17
WO 277/21
18
120
