SERVICE
By late September the administrative difficultie
by the sweep
across France and Belgium were being overcome bur
long administrative tail should be shortened as soon as practicable.
military population in the R.M.A. alone was approximately 100,000 and the
tonnage of stocks there amounted to between 300,000 and 400,000 tons.
1: was decided, therefore, that once the port of Antwerp was opened, the
R.M.A. should begin closing down and that, after all the stocks required
by 21 Army Group had been forwarded to the new Advanced Base, the
remainder should be handed over to the War Office for disposal.
During the period between the cessation of imports into the R.M.A. and
the opening of Antwerp there was difficulty regarding the shipment of replace.
ment vehicles, as the movement of stores was taking up almost all the
capacity of the Channel ports.
becoming serious as many tanks had either been damaged during the advance
or left behind through mechanical breakdown, and stocks in the R.M.A. and
Armoured Replacement Group were almost exhausted.
By 27th September,
there had been no shipments for three weeks, and units had approximately
cal. 70 per ene al their envily em ored in the no and Repy 15 ent
Group and base stocks.
A large number of repairable, tanks were lying
between Rouen and Brussels but it was estimated that a considerable time
would elapse before they would become available to the fighting formations.
The available transporter and rail lift for heavy "A" vehicles was severely,
In the middle of October there were still some 800 heavy "A
vehicles to be moved and the last of these was not cleared until the end
"B" vehicles could be driven under their own power but
the acute shortage of drivers made this a slow process.
Close control had to be kept of all this movement to maintain the
required proportions of all the different makes and types of "B" vehicles
in the Advanced Base.
It was arranged that 40 tanks a day should be
shipped into Boulogne during October.
Early in November landing ships
(tanks) began to arrive in Ostend, after which, until Antwerp was open,
30 heavy "A" vehicles a day were received through Ostend and 20 through
There were no rail facilities from Boulogne and tank transporters,
already heavily committed, had to be used.
In the case of Ostend rail
clearance was hampered by the constant shortage of engines and suitable
The closest touch was maintained with War Office and Build-Up
Control Organization to regulate the flow of tank imports and to ensure
that types of tanks not movable by rail went to Boulogne and the remainder
to Ostend. This shipment of tanks absorbed the whole of the M.T. shipping
Shipment of "B" vehicles,
therefore, had to be
continued through the R.M.A. and from 27th September they came in at the
rate of approximately 250 a day.
Early in October, the use of Le Havre for the importation of vehicles
was considered, but after several reconnaissances had been carried out, it
was found to be impracticable, owing to the U.S. forces needs in the port
area. This port, although not shortening the L. of C. to any appreciable
extent would have afforded better unloading facilities than
R.M.A.
"owards the end of October, however, the Channel ports were available and
"B" vehicles were received through them.
*ie. Tanks other than those with special roles such as Bridge-layers and "Flails".
236
With the advent of winter, it became clear that conditions in the R.M.A.
would be bad and "B" vehicles there would become mud-bound because
there were not enough drivers to bring them up to the new Advanced Base.
All shipments of replacement "B" vehicles were, therefore, discontinued at
the beginning of November until the opening of Antwerp.
Once this port
became available, shipments came through it at an average rate of between
40 and 50 heavy "A" vehicles and between 250 and 300
vehicles
a day. Vehicle companies continued to move forward from the R.M.A.
to open new parks in the Advanced Base area, thereby easing the task of
maintaining an even flow of vehicles to the armies.
Excellent accommodation for advanced base workshops was easily found
in the area, generally in factories.
Difficulty was experienced, however,
in finding suitable sites nearby for returned vehicle parks, as, owing to
the low-lying nature of the country, vehicles left in the open were liable
to sink into the muddy soil.
The most suitable areas were aerodromes and
double carriage-way roads but all aerodromes were being used to capacity,
and to take up much of the road space would have seriously interfered with
the clearance of Antwerp.
In October an Inspectorate of Army Equipment was formed at H.Q: 21
Army Group to assist units in identifying captured equipment and to ensure
the return of excess holdings of equipment and vehicles.
the year, there were four Inspectorates, working in Brussels, 11 and 12
L. of C. Areas and with First Canadian Army.
During December these
Inspectorates were successful in finding and recovering 436 vehicles and
trailers surplus to war establishment and also a very large quantity of
clothing and surplus equipment.
In one base sub-area alone, over 20,000
items were recovered in 3 days.
The inability of divisional laundries to wash bulky items such as
blankets, coupled with the existence of convalescent depots, reinforcement
camps and hospitals in the army areas, made it essential for extensive
laundry services to be provided there if the long haul back to the R.M.A.
where such facilities existed, was to be avoided.
Accordingly, it was
decided that a base laundry should be sited in Second Army Troops area to
serve both armies.
A base hospital laundry was then sited in the Ostend
hospital area while another moved to Brussels in order to assist 17 Returned
Stores Depot.
Two hundred civilian laundries were placed under contract
during this phase to serve troops on the L. of C. in Belgium.
2 B.A.D. was the first ammunition depot to arrive in the Advanced
Base, opening near Brussels at the beginning of October:
Owing to limited
port facilities and the diversion of most road and rail traffic from the
Rear Maintenance Area and ports direct to army roadheads, the stocking
of this depot was necessarily slow at first.
However, after the opening
of Antwerp and when the army roadheads had reached their targets of stocks
to be held, 2 B.A.D. was rapidly built up to a maximum holding of
75,000 tons. Early in December, 3 B.A.D., which had been serving as an
advanced ammunition depot at Dieppe for First Canadian Army, was moved
forward to the area of Ostend.
At the end of the same month, 17 B.A.D.
opened in the Advanced Base just North of Antwerp but, owing to attacks
by V weapons and the limitation that had to be placed on the use of
Antwerp as an ammunition port, it was not possible initially to develop it
to any large extent.
WO 277/21
18
