by 24,000 vehicles which did not need waterproofing as by that time the
beachhead had been secured. For both "A" and "B" vehicles there were
two main types of issue, replacements and reserves.
Over 600 replacement "A" vehicles, complete with equipment, ammuni-
ion, dc. were issued to unis of the assault and build-up force, before
Between May and October the reserve vehicles were moved to the
embarkation ports where they were marshalled into craft loads by the
armoured fighting vehicle embarkation parties.
During this period 8,624
"A" vehicles were loaded on to landing craft.
After September the strain
eased and the number of vehicles moved grew less. One new commitment
was the issue of "B" vehicles, which were first loaded with food, to Civil
Affairs units.
Vehicles
continued to be issued in smaller quantities to maintain the
reserve stocks in North-West Europe up to the surrender of Germany.
addition, a large issue of "A" vehicles was made at short notice to the
French Army.
Preparations were made for issue of vehicles and kits to the Far East.
Arrangements were made for the "B" vehicles to be specially treated at the
contractors' works to withstand tropical conditions and every item of kit
had to be preserved and packed to tropical standards.
After the end of the war in Europe, it was realized that the stock holdings
of vehicles would decrease and, therefore, a complete review of the position
was made.
Plans were formulated for the closing down of depots according
to a scheme of priorities which would correspond to the demands of post-war
reconstruction.
The organization of the Tanks and Vehicles Department at August, 1945,
was as follows: -
H.O. Tanks and Vehicles
Central Vehicle Control (A.F.V.)
Central Vehicle Control (B)
Situated at
C.O.D. Chilwell
Equipment Branch
Central Census
9 Chilwell M.T. Groups
28 A.F.V. Depots
58 V.R.Ds. for "B" vehicles, motor cycles
20 Factory Collection Detachments
and cased vehicles
17 A.F.V. Embarkation Sections
"E"
Branch Detachments (located at factories for checking
vehicle kits).
The M.T. Stores Supply Organization
In September, 1939, spares for both "A" and "B" vehicles were held
at Chilwell and issues were made to home units and overseas bases.
The
number of different stores items held was 98,000.
During the period September, 1939—May, 1940, the main issues were
made to units which were mobilizing in this country.
increased stocks were not sufficient to meet the very heavy demands.
Although receipts
This
Wes747/17
WO 277/21
matter of non-availability eventually became very acute, and it became
necessary to cancel all Middle East demands which had been outstanding
for more than six months.
Following the evacuation from Dunkirk, the re-mobilizing and re-equip-
ping of all units of the army threw an additional strain on the resources of
Chilwell which, in those days, was still the only C.O.D. for M.T. stores.
During the summer of 1940, it was decided that premises used for the
storage of vehicles at Derby should be made available for the storage of
In order to stock this new M.T. C.O.D., 50 per cent. of the Chilwell
stock of most items was transferred to Derby.
within six months and Derby became a full issuing C.O.D. with 18 divisions
It had become apparent by this time that the M.T. stores branch at
Chilwell was unwieldy and arrangements were made to form three sub-
depots within Chilwell, designated "A" sub-depot for " A " vehicle spares.
"B" sub-depot for "B"
vehicle spares, and "C" sub-depot for MT
A central storehouse holding detail spares for these
three sub-depots and a central packing bay for detail and bulk packing were
also introduced. The bulk stores were kept in separate bulk buildings.
As the motor industry became fully employed on the manufacture of
W.D. vehicles and spares, it became necessary to extend storage space by
every possible means. Three large buildings in Chilwell previously used for
the storage of vehicles, were taken over for the storage of M.T. spares in
Tubular scaffolding was erected in these buildings in order to make
the fullest use of the available storage space.
Additional accommodation was found in disused factories, warehouses,
garages and various other types of business premises within a radius of
40 miles of Chilwell.
The number of these relief storage depots increased
throughout the war. During 1941 a large relief storage depot was built
at West Hallam, approximately eight miles from Chilwell. The formation
of M.T. sub-depots throughout the country afforded considerable relief.
The movement of stores within depots was speeded up and man-power
economies effected by the introduction of a system of endless belt conveyors.
The system consisted of a slat ground-level conveyor which carried stores
from the receipts areas to other waist-high belt conveyors which, in turn,
conveyed the stores to the store bins.
The latter conveyors also carried
the stores from the bins to packing bays.
In addition, slat conveyors were
used to convey packed cases from the packing bays to traffic
This method, which began operating towards the end of 1941,
had the effect of increasing the number of items selected for issue from 8 to
At Chilwell the numbers of items issued each day had by now risen to
18,000, of which a large proportion was being shipped to the Middle East
and to Russia.
Owing to heavy losses at sea issues in replacement were
required at short notice.
Increased stocks at Derby necessitated an extension of the existing buildings
and the erection of a large shed and hutting within the depot, and the opening
of a new sub-depot.
29
67612
B*2
