FRICTED
PREFACE
This volume describes the work and the evolution of the Royal Army
Ordnance Corps during the 1939-45 War.
The purpose of this preface is to indicate briefly the constitution and
functions of the Corps and its state when war began, and to describe the
framework of the chapters which follow.
In 1939 the Royal Army Ordnance Corps consisted of a small nucleus
of some 2,500 regular officers and men, with a smaller Territorial Army
nucleus. The officers of the Corps were organised into three main branches
the directing staff, the mechanical engineering branch and the executive
branch; the other ranks were classified under the main trades of clerks,
storemen,
ammunition examiners, armament artificers, armourers
craftsmen.
The main function of the Corps was to supply army equipment to the
Army, to inspect this equipment and to repair it. The mechanical engineering
branch, which carried out the technical inspections and workshop repairs
of all army equipment of R.A.O.C. supply except ammunition, was in 1942
divorced from the R.A.O.C. to form a new, separate Corps, designated the
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers.
Before the war, R.A.O.C. officers (directing staff) were appointed, by
transfer from other arms of the Service, after undergoing a 15 months'
Ordnance Officers' course and qualifying for the "O" certificate.
During
the war this course remained in abeyance.
Ordnance Executive Officers were commissioned from the warrant ranks
of the stores branch of the Corps to carry out executive duties.
the war many of these officers were called upon to fill administrative posts,
in some cases attaining appointments carrying the rank of colonel.
The other ranks of the corps were divided into two branches, the
stores branch and the workshop branch. The workshop branch was absorbed
into R.E.M.E. on the formation of that corps.
The stores branch consisted of clerks, storemen and ammunition examiners.
During the war, when the R.A.O.C. expanded to 131,000 all ranks, non-
tradesmen were introduced for regimental, as distinct from technical, duties ;
specialist training was instituted for storemen, the trade classification of store-
men being sub-divided accordingly into storemen ammunition, armaments,
small arms, engineering, M.T. stores, vehicle, rubber, packing, traffic, laundry,
signals and wireless, radar, clothing and general, and industrial gas produc-
tion. Other trade classifications in the Corps were saddlers, textile refitters.
shoemakers, tailors and driver mechanics.
In addition to the military personnel of the R.A.O.C., the administration
of army ordnance services necessitated the employment of very large numbers
of civilians on clerical, storehouse and general duties.
These civilian staffs
comprised established and non-established civil servants and casual labour.
The pre-war civilian staffs were heavily augmented during the war by the
employment of temporary civil servants.
Both temporary and
permanent
civil servants were given posts of much greater responsibility than was
ordnance depots.
customary before the war, including senior administrative posts in the larger
A.T.S. officers and auxiliaries were employed in large numbers in offices
Military personnel of other arms of the Service were also attached for
certain duties, such as R. Signals and R.E.M.E. for technical duties and
Pioneer Corps for construction work and labour; in all overseas theatres
the R.A.O.C. necessarily employed, especially in the base installations, vast
numbers of local civilians, ranging from French and Belgians to Arabs,
Basutos and Becuanas, as well as German and Italian prisoners of war.
The direction and organisation of ordnance services underwent many
progressive changes during the war years.
At the beginning of the war the head of the R.A.O.C. was the Con-
troller of Ordnance Services (C.O.S.) at the War Office who was responsible
for the direction of the Corps as a whole.
His two principal officers were the Director of Ordnance Services (D.O.S.)
for general administration, and the Principal Ordnance Officer (P.O.O.) for
Senior appointments in Home Commands were held by
Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services (A.Ds.O.S.) and Overseas by
Assistant or Deputy Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services (D.A.Ds.O.S.),
according to the importance of the command or station.
depots were under the control of Chief Ordnance Officers (C.O.Os.) and
command ordnance depots under the D.A.D.O.S. of the area in which the
In 1941 the appointment of C.O.S. lapsed, and a Director General of Army
Equipment (D.G.A.E.) was appointed who was responsible to the Quarter-
Master-General for co-ordinating the supply of army
control of ordnance services being vested in two R.A.O.C. directors, styled
Director of Warlike Stores (D.W.S.) and Director of Clothing and Stores
(D.C.S) respectively.
In 1942 the senior R.A.O.C. director reassumed the
title, additionally, of Controller of Ordnance Services in which capacity he
was head of the R.A.O.C., responsible for general policy and regimental
questions affecting the Corps as a whole, and for the selection of R.A.O.C.
This change was followed, in March, 1943,
by the redesignation as D.Q.M.G.(A.E.) of the D.G.A.E.
The senior R.A.O.C. appointments in large overseas theatres were held
during the war by Directors of Ordnance Services, with the rank of Major-
General or Brigadier.
At army level, the senior ordnance officer was graded
Deputy Director of Ordnance Services, with the rank of Brigadier.
corps level, the senior appointment was D.D.O.S., with the rank of Colonel.
At H.Q., L. of C.; the senior ordnance appointment was D.D.O.S., L. of C.,
with the ranks of Brigadier or Colonel.
In static commands at home, including A.A. Command, the senior
ordnance appointment was D.D.O.S., with the rank of Brigadier.
Central ordnance depots (C.O.Ds.) and Central ammunition
(C.A.Ds.) were under the control of commandants. Commandants of C.O.Ds.
held the rank of Brigadier except that the Commandant of the Chilwell
Depot who was also responsible for the vehicle installations throughout the
country, held the rank of Major-General.
held the rank of Colonel.
The commandants of C.A.Ds.
67612
WO 277/22
A* 2
