STRICT
This extension of contract activity was owing to the increasing shortages
in certain items which made
repair (and in some cases even manufacture)
The difficulty of limited financial powers
a matter of urgent local necessity.
was overcome by using the increased powers delegated to the Command
Secretary and by applications to War Office for special authorities.
The
repair of stores by contract was essential, as the repair facilities of R.S.Ds.,
in the early days were outpaced by the receipts, and congestion developed.
A few W.D. laundries existed before the war and others, including some
equipped with mobile trailers, were established during the war, but the
bulk of laundry work for the troops was carried out by civilian contractors.
As a general rule units made their own laundry and dry cleaning arrange-
ments by competitive tendering with local laundries until 1941, when local
A.Ds.O.S. were made responsible for arranging laundry contracts and for
allocating units according to capacity.
The contracts were in each instance
subject to command approval.
Later, in most commands, the D.D.O.S. Command took over all laundry
contracts and arranged distribution of capacities to meet changing require-
ments, but the actual allocation of a unit to a particular laundry was continued
by the local A.D.O.S. This change was instituted by the introduction of
laundry control under the Board of Trade and the standardization of laundry
prices by Statutory Rules and Orders.
From the date of full control by the Board of Trade in October, 1942, the
work of the R.A.O.C. Laundry Technical Officer became largely a liaison job
with the civilian authority, whereby anticipated requirements in each district
were notified to the Regional Officer of the Board of Trade who found the
necessary laundry capacity.
Until 31st January, 1941, units made their own arrangements for boot
repairs with local firms and accounts were paid by units through Imprest.
On Ist February, 1941, all arrangements for army boot repairs by contract
were centralized at command headquarters, the D.D.O.S. becoming re-
sponsible for allocating contractors to units, for notifying standard schedule
prices and for regulating the release of leather to contractors.
to contract repairs, considerable repair capacity was provided in the form of
R.A.O.C. boot repair centres and every encouragement and facility was given
to units to make themselves self-supporting in the repair of boots.
Tailoring services such as the alteration and fitting of new clothing and
the making of special sized garments were also carried out to a great
extent by contract but the shortage of civilian tailors caused
The Women's Voluntary Service rendered valuable help by carrying out
repairs to clothing and in assembling camouflage nets.
In 1945, in anticipation of the collapse of Germany and the consequential
reduction of man-power requirements of the Army, regulations were published
governing the release of personnel from the Army.
The release scheme
included the provision of civilian clothing for all male personnel leaving
the forces. For this purpose R.A.O.C. Civilian Clothing Depots (C.C.Ds.)
were established at or near each military dispersal unit.
Each C.C.D. was
given an establishment of roughly 200, of which 50 were civilians including
9 tailors, to deal with a maximum of 1,400 men daily.
16
The C.C.Ds. held garments in a variety of styles and colours which were
displayed on the lines of a departmental store, so that each individual was
able to select articles according to his own individual taste, the staff of the
C.C.D. giving advice or assistance as required. If a C.C.D. was unable to
meet the requirements of an individual of unusual size, his measurements
were taken by an experienced tailor.
Special garments were then made and
sent to the man from C.O.D. Branston under a mail order scheme.
mail order scheme was also applied in the case of incapacitated personnel
unable to attend at a C.C.D.
D.Ds.O.S. Commands were responsible for the administration of C.C.Ds.
Commandant, C.O.D. Branston was responsible for the supply of bulk stocks
and the equitable distribution of garments in their various styles and colours.
A special procedure was put into force whereby the individual's release
document constituted the authority for the issue of civilian clothing and a
printed form of voucher facilitated the recording of articles issued.
scheme worked well, the whole process of fitting a man with his complete
civilian outfit being carried out in less than 15 minutes.
The Anti-Aircraft Command
The Anti-Aircraft Command, organized and operated in close collabora-
the Royal Air Force, as part of Air Defences.
(A.D.G.B.) was a new organization called into being to deal with an almost
entirely new aspect of war-defence against enemy air attacks on this country,
which it was anticipated would be heavy and widespread.
A.A. Command covered the whole of the United Kingdom (including
Northern Ireland and the Orkney and Shetland Isles) and required an R.A.O.C.
organization for ordnance services separate from that in army commands.
For several years before 1938, A.A. mobilization stores and workshops
were being built in all parts of the country for the storage and repair of
the equipments (guns, instruments, ammunition, searchlights, etc.) of A.A.
units of the Territorial Army.
As the equipments became available from
manufacture they were stored in ordnance custody for issue for training and
in readiness for mobilization or prior deployment of the A.A. divisions.
Each A.A. division of the T.A. which had been formed was administered for
ordnance services by a D.A.D.O.S.
At Headquarters Ist A.A. Corps there was also a D.A.D.O.S.
During 1938 a drive was made by the War Office for the completion of
unfinished mobilization storehouses and it was during that year that some
of the larger A.A. ordnance installations were completed.
in comparison with most ordnance depots, the mobilization stores buildings
were well designed for their purpose and performed good services throughout
They were re-designated either A.A. ordnance depots, or A.A.
workshops according to the use to which they were put.
On the outbreak of war, the R.A.O.C. establishment at Headquarters A.A.
Command was increased, and the senior appointment upgraded to A.D.O.S.
Ordnance services of A.A. Command handled clothing, general stores
and warlike stores, and administered, independently of army commands, their
WO 277/21
