SAO
11285
Gold Coast
No. 302 West African B.O.D.
No. 302 West African B.A.D.
Sierra Leone
No. 303 West African B.O.D.
No. 303 West African B.A.D.
Gambia
No. 304 West African B.O.D.
No. 304 West African B.A.D.
The total storage accommodation available at the B.O.Ds. listed above
was 797,000 square feet covered, and 1,131,000 square feet uncovered.
total storage space available in the B.A.Ds. was 201,372 square feet.
The
The climate played havoc with the storehouse buildings despite the fact
that they were given
constant attention and repair.
It was found that,
however soundly constructed, a building was not proof against tropical
rain once it had been standing for two or three years.
The sheds themselves
varied in type from laterite walls with thatched roofs to galvanized iron
huts. Both types of building had their defects.
With the former the
thatched roofs had constantly to be renewed, and the fine red dust from
the walls covered everything.
Iron huts soon rusted, even when coated with
tar, and were usually rusty on arrival in West Africa.
It was found that
buildings constructed with concrete walls and floor with a slate or wooden
shingle roof were the best.
The small strength of British officers and other ranks was slightly
reinforced, but the Ordnance services continued to depend on civilian labour
for the bulk of their work and, owing to the lack of R.A.O.C. personnel,
supervision remained difficult. The small R.A.O.C.
establishment only
permitted one British N.C.O. to every three or four sheds.
Civilian labour gave better results when used in an artisan rather than
in a storeman capacity, and the natives were handicapped in that there were
scores of dialects. To converse with one another they had to learn an
additional language, ie. Hausa, and in order to understand their supervisors,
they had to be taught basic English.
However, they were respectful and
amenable to discipline, showed astonishing endurance and were capable of
mastering routine jobs quickly. They could not be relied upon as storemen
and would cheerfully issue black paint for white.
A great difficulty was that few native clerks were available.
Owing to
the low standard of education in Sietra Leone and Gambia, the depots in
those colonies had always to rely almost exclusively for tradesmen On
African other ranks (A.O.Rs.) posted from Nigeria of the Gold Coast,
In Nigeria local efforts had resulted in an agreement that clerks conis
be paid up to 9d, a day above labourers' rates (2s. Od. a day).
rate was sufficient to attract very few
Coast, a more prosperous area with far less unemployment, clerks were
unobtainable.
clerks of good quality; in the Gold
rate Nigeria trades other than that ot clerk had to be paid
at labourers lates. agreement was finally reached in eally l94s on new
rates for all trades. These were based ofe seos aid by Government depart
314
WE ST
1ยบ!
304. B00,
304. BAD.
ERIA
ABIDI
WEST AFRICA.
REFERENCE.
BRITISH COLONIES.
RIVERS
BOUNDARIES ..
SCALE IN MILES
To face Page 3I4
C A
-OME
Boe 60.0
B-0- D.
LATER
301 B-O-D)
B-A-D.
