CHAPTER III
THE EVOLUTION OF CENTRAL ORDNANCE DEPOTS AND
THEIR ORGANIZATION AND METHODS
It had been realized before 1939 that in the event of world war the central
ordnance depots then existing in the
United Kingdom would be totally
inadequate, in size, in number, in layout and in location to meet the gigantic
task of equipping and maintaining the British Army.
The 1939 organization of what was, in effect, the Empire Ordnance Base
consisted of only five C.O.Ds., each dealing with a particular range of
army equipment-Branston
with clothing,
Didcot
with
general
stores,
Chilwell with M.T. vehicles and spare parts, Woolwich with warlike stores
(artillery, engineer, signals) and Weedon with small arms and machine guns.
With the exception of C.O.D., Chilwell, which had been adapted to storage
from original factory premises, not one of these depots was, even by 1939
standards, anything like modern, in layout, in size of storebuilding,
in
accessibility for road and rail transport or in equipment with essential store
racking, cranes and other mechanical handling devices.
Plans had been approved, however, for the construction of an entirely
new central depot at Donnington (Salop) to replace Woolwich, and for several
new, modern, depots such as Derby and Old Dalby for the covered storage
of mobilization M.T. vehicles, but when mobilization was ordered in 1939
construction of the new depot at Donnington had not begun.
In order to handle the increasingly large volume of army equipment
already flowing in to ordnance charge from the factories,
a flow which
become gigantic as the Army expanded, as production rose and as war wastage
increased, energetic steps were taken to requisition many millions of square
feet of both covered and open storage accommodation. New depots designed
for M.T. vehicles were misappropriated and allotted to stores, and open
storage decided upon for all M.T. vehicles as unavoidable for the war period.
More than 100 sites, on closed sections of arterial roads, in large country
estates, etc., were eventually allotted to the storage of tanks and vehicles,
the overall covered storage accommodation of the 1939 C.O.Ds. was increased
from 5 million sq. ft. to 38 million sq. ft. and the open storage area from
4 million sq. ft. to 47 million sq. ft.
The additional covered accommodation included over 14 million sq.
ft.
of requisitioned premises: the remainder of the increase was provided during
the war by the construction of new permanent depots at Donnington and
Bicester, by extensions at certain of the 1939 depots and by short term
leasing by the War Department of factory buildings, as at Greenford.
Concurrently with the mere physical expansion of the central depots,
this immense storekeeping organization had to plan, organize and staff the
new depots and sub-depots, to devise and evolve processes and methods
adequate to the urgency and stress of the Army's operational requirements;
in addition it had to meet the day to day need in my equipment of
the newly forming formations and units, of forces mobilizing for service over-
seas and of overseas bases already in operation.
in common with every other R.A.O.C. activity in 1939, the central depot
organization
suffered
from
deplorably
inadequate
R.A.O.C.
personnel
resources, from the depletion of these insufficient resources to provide drafts
for R.A.O.C. field units and from the calling up of reservists among the
civilian staff.
The vast expansion of the central depot organization conse-
quently entailed a very serious and inevitably long problem of training raw
material, military personnel, both officers and other ranks, A.T.S. and civilians,
while maintaining work output.
Before posting to central depots the military
personnel were given short periods of basic regimental training and technical
training in ordnance duties,
but throughout the war continuation training
had to a large extent to be contrived on the " learn as you work"
principle,
because the man-power allotted to R.A.O.C. against the work load never
allowed sufficient margin for clear-cut training periods of adequate duration.
Large numbers of R.A.O.C. personnel, both officers and other ranks, in
the central depots therefore became specialized in narrow spheres of ordnance
duties and remained so throughout the war.
The main function of the C.O.Ds. was to act as the wholesale store-
keepers and distributors of practically the whole range of army equipment.
amounting at the war peak to 750,000 different items of equipment, to the
Army at home and at all overseas war theatres and garrisons.
The range
of army equipment so dealt with by the
C.O.Ds. excluded ammunition,
which was handled separately by the R.A.O.C. central ammunition depots
(C.A.Ds.), and also petrol, oil, lubricants, certain engineering
stores and
materials, and transportation stores, which were the responsibility of other
arms of the Service.
The main principle of organization was to store army equipment by defined
classes of stores as grouped for financial control and requirements forecasts
in the army store votes and vocabularies of army ordnance stores.
Each
main class of stores
was accordingly allotted to the storekeeping control
of one parent C.O.D. with its shadow depot and sub-depots.
The storekeeping layout therefore developed to the following organiza-
tion, which as regards the range of army equipment, is shown in broad classes.
only : —
C.O.D.
Store Vote
Branston
Class of Stores
Clothing and necessaries.
Didcot
Boughton
Elstree
General stores.
Solway
Basing
Chilwell
Derby
M.T. vehicles, assemblies and spares.
Feltham
Donnington...
Bicester*
Greenford
Old Dalby
Warlike stores (including artillery,
engineer, signals, radar).
Workshop machinery and test equip-
* Bicester also stocked and issued M.T. stores under Chilwell control.
21
67612
B2
WO 277/21
18
