allies outside the approved order of battle, prisoners of war and locally
enor ed civilian labour were met as far as possible from reconditioned part-
worn clothing.
In spite of the enormous American industrial potential, the assistance given
to the U.S.A. Forces in Europe by provision of clothing from the United
Kingdom sources was considerable and, as in the case
of general stores,
needed careful watching to prevent its interference with British needs.
Apart from the central provision made for British requirements, a vast
amount of work was undertaken on behalf of the Americans for reverse
Lend-Lease requirements.
Besides common user stores, a great many patterns
were specially provided to meet American needs on scales far more lavish
than those approved for British troops.
As a result many problems arose on
questions of priorities of production or issue from available stocks.
close liaison with the Quartermaster department of the Services of Supply
factopean Theatre of Operations (E.T.O.) resulted in the mutually satis-
factory settlement of the vast majority of these matters, and the number of
cases which needed reference to the L.M.A.B. was extremely small.
In fact
the Clothing and General Stores Sub Committee of that Board confined its
bids for rimost entirely to the consideration of and recommendations on
bids for British and Commonwealth needs from U.S.A. production.
Although,
in theory, such problems should not have arisen, since demands placed for
American requirements were examined by the Ministry of Supply for pro-
duction possibilities before acceptance, changes in the man-power and raw
materials situation and to a minor degree, air raid damage made them in
fact to some extent inevitable.
The work of provision branches was by no means finished after the pass-
ing of demands to the Supply Ministries.
Competing demands on the limited
supply of raw materials involved examination of our requirements
materials control imposed by the Cabinet and their justification.
However
strong the arguments advanced it was rarely possible for a full allocation of
raw material to be made, and in consequence the relative priorities of our own
outstanding needs had frequently to be reassessed to enable the best use to be
made of the available materials.
Similar priority problems arose also when
production capacity in itself was insufficient and these problems as well as
those concerned with the acceptance of substitute patterns were frequently en-
countered in the Ordnance Directorate. Only in major instances which affected
Staff policy was the case referred to the Staff Directorate concerned; with
general stores and clothing these problems were numerous and, to avoid
dangerous delay, they had to be solved within the Ordnance Directorate.
This
required an intimate knowledge of the stores concerned, a sympathy with the
actual user's outlook and, above all, common sense.
Revision of requirements and disposal of surpluses as war ended
WARLIKE STORES
By September, 1944, it was possible to
see future requirements more
clearly, both in main items and spares.
It was essential to achieve
the
maximum economy in manufacture and in the transportation of stores and
raw materials, while grave shortage of man-poransportation oC. and difi-
culty in obtaining storage space made necessaro a reduction in holdings of
those items and quantities which were to be retained in the Service. Re-
quirements were calculated on the assumption that the war with Germany
would end by 31st December, 1944, and reports were called for to see where
production could be stopped, contract demands cancelled or surplus holdings
disposed of, so that the matter could be taken up immediately with the
M. of S. In framing these reports, it was necessary to consider such questions
as the numerical reduction of the items in use after the end of the European
war, whether the item would be required for the Far East operations, the
length of time it would remain in service and if it should be retained for
post-war use.
In November, 1944, further economy was effected by again assessing the
liability period to be applied to requirements.
Hitherto it had varied for
different types of stores and it was in some cases now considered excessive
as the circumstances had altered.
It was essential to ensure that the period
ahead for which stores were being provided should not be too long at this
time when conditions were liable to change and so affect the requirement,
and also that surpluses of stocks to be retained were not unnecessarily large.
The liability period was therefore set at 18 months for modern types of
vehicles and equipments in production and in current use ; and at 12 months
or less, according to the type and probable life, for types already obsolescent
or likely to be so at the end of the war with Germany.
No reduction was
made in the 20 months total initial provision (or 18 months for "A"
vehicles and 2 years for "B" vehicles) under schedule provision, except
where large stocks were already held ; but the second years' cover was can-
celled in those cases where it had hitherto applied.
In April, 1945, the
liability period for modern types was further reduced, in respect of M.T. to
12 months and to 15 months for other warlike stores.
In April, 1945, it was decided to rationalize the global provision of war-
like stores to ensure that the maximum advantage was taken of theatre
surpluses.
The first step was to ascertain the quantities and locations of
stores held surplus to theatre requirements and a phased system of returns
of stocks and surpluses was instituted.
From these returns, inter-theatre
transfer of surpluses were ordered to meet deficiencies, instructions to dispose
of global surpluses could be given when desired, and overseas surpluses
could be counted as an asset when calculating requirements in the United
Kingdom, thereby reducing demands on the trade.
In May, 1945, further economy in spares provision was effected in the
case of quiet theatres by reducing basic usage figure from the war-time rate
to one-third of the original rate, and this was confirmed in the middle of
the month when India/South East Asia Command remained the only active
theatre.
These figures were subject to amendment as a result of user
experience pending publication of new rates by scales branches.
Exceptions
wete made for certain equipments which required equal maintenance in
pace and war, and "B" vehicles and machinery which were treated on issue
experience as there was no record of holdings by makes.
Although automatic maintenance continued for the Allied Land Forces
South East Asia (A.L.F.S.E.A.) it was stopped in the case of India Command.
However, concurrent maintenance for all issues of new types of equipment
continued to all theatres.
67612
91
D*
WO 277/21
18
