SERVICES
ROUS
MAP 8
BURMA
BRITISH RETURN
TO
BURMA.
mensingh was geographically unsuitable as a site for an A. O.D. and
was a bottleneck from the point of view of communications
eventually realized and it was decided to expand 60 O.F.D., Chittagong
into an A.O.D.,
expansion after handing over his depot.
C.O.O. 215 A.O.D. being detailed to carry out the
and designated 226 A.O.D.
To Sentember. 1943. 213 A.O.D. on the Maniour Road was reorganized
FORMATION OF FOURTEENTH ARMY
In October, 1943, Fourteenth Army started forming at Barrackpore.
The Ordnance organization which had been decided was as follows k
(a) A.O.Ds. at Gauhati, Mymensingh, Chittagong, Manipur Road and
Imphal to hold a full range of stores, each with a vehicle company.
(b) A.A.Ds. at Mymensingh, Chittagong, Manipur Road and Imphal.
(c) O.F.Ds. at Comilla, Gauhati, Sylhet, Fathehpura, Majum, Tiddim,
Tamu and Imphal.
(d) A corps ordnance field park consisting of headquarters, corps and
army troops sub-park, and a divisional sub-park for each division
on each of the Northern and Southern lines.
(e) A mobile ammunition laboratory and inspection unit, laundries and
salvage units.
The R.A.O.C.
standard ordnance field park organization consisting of
divisional field parks in addition to a corps ordnance field park made up of
sub-parks for corps and army troops plus one for each division in the corps,
was not adopted for the following reasons: —
(a) Field parks did not come into operation generally in the Far Eastern
theatre until mid-1944, and further reorganization of them would
have considerably delayed the employment of these most essential
units.
(b) An acute shortage of trained personnel necessitated strict economy
in their use.
Moreover few of the formation ordnance officers in
the Fourteenth Army had at that time experience of the employ-
ment of ordnance field parks.
It was considered advisable, there-
fore, for all field parks to be centrally controlled by an experienced
officer on the headquarters of the corps ordnance field park, this
officer being under the direct eye of the D.D.O.S. Corps.
(c) The bad condition of the roads and the constant necessity to cut
transport to the minimum,
made the adoption
of the standard
organization, with its extra sub-units, impracticable.
An organization similar to the standard R.A.O.C. corps ordnance field
park was adopted. As formation ordnance officers in divisions gained experi-
once in the use of the sub-parks, the latter became more and more a part
of the division they served and, towards the end of the campaign, were in
effect divisional ordnance field parks.
The main change in the organization
of each sub-park was the inclusion of a light section (Jeeps and Dodge
weapon carriers) which could besthrown off by the sub-park to support an
independent brigade.
Owing to the
difficulty in obtaining binned Jeeps,
273
18
