MAP 4
5. AAD!
LEGEND.
There was soon considerable activity for mobile ammunition repair units
(M.A.R.Us.) which carried out valuable work in reconditioning ammunition
damaged by field movement
and handling, or non-serviceable through
exposure.
Mobile stores repair units (M.S.R.Us.) were formed in order to carry out
stitch-in-time repairs in the forward areas and to avoid sending stores back to
the base. The units were made up of a few R.A.O.C. personnel to supervise
locally engaged civilians (who comprised the bulk of the unit) and carried
out the repair of a wide range of general stores such as tentage, tables, forms,
cookers, stoves, lamps, etc.
In Naples the port ordnance detachments (P.O.Ds.) and port ammunition
detachments (P.A.Ds.) were extremely busy during this period checking and
sorting incoming consignments of stores and ammunition for correct routing to
their respective depots and sub-depots.
During the first few months, while 557 A.O.D. was setting up shop, there
was no base stock in Italy of warlike stores, including M.T. spares, and interim
arrangements were therefore made to obtain supply from the B.O.Ds. in
All units indents for warlike stores were, despatched by air to G.H.Q.
Middle East Command, whence the issues were made in detail to units in
It will be seen that by the end of 1943 considerable progress had been
made in the ordnance field organization in Italy, all essential maintenance in
ammunition, stores and vehicles was being achieved and ancillary ordnance
services were operating.
Numerous difficulties were being encountered, how-
ever, and much remained to be done.
For the next four months strenuous
efforts were made to expand and develop the whole organization in prepara-
tion for the general advance to the Pisa-Rimini line, which was the 1944
objective.
The Anzio Landing
In January, 1944, a strong allied assault force, initially some 50,000 U.S.
and British troops with more than 5,000 vehicles, landed on Anzio beaches
with orders to advance and secure the high ground of Colli Laziali.
As early
as October, 1943, it had been realized that the enemy intention was to force
the allies to fight a costly frontal battle up the " Leg" of Italy through terrain
Ideal for defence and that, a strong amphibious assault behind the enemy
right flank would be essential.
Plans were accordingly made for this assault,
which was to be launched on 20th December, 1943, as the third phase in the
battle for Rome.
In the first phase of the battle on 26th November, 1943,
Eighth Army attacked across the Sangro River.
Enemy opposition was
fierce, the weather was bad, rivers were at flood, roads became impassable and
supply to the troops increasingly difficult.
The Eighth Army attack was
On 1st December, 1943, Fifth Army began the second phase of the
battle with an attack intended to drive up the Liri and Sacco valleys and
capture Frosinone.
Progress was made in spite of every adverse factor, heavy
rains, rivers at flood, extreme difficulty in getting supplies to the troops, but
by 10th December it was realized that the attack had failed.
It was on the
success of Fifth Army's attack that the projected assault on Anzio on 20th
December had depended and the assault as originally planned was therefore
abandoned.
SICILY & HEEL OF ITAL
SALERNO TO CASS,
CASSINO TO PISA-A
To face Page 197
WO 277/21
