extended the use of the British V.A.O.S. cataloguing system to certain British-
pattern artillery, small arms and signal equipment of U.S. origin.
also prepared Parts Lists and other technical publications where equivalent
U.S. or Canadian publications were unsuitable for British use.
The nomenclature used in U.S. War Department shipping documents
• varied from those shown in official scales and parts lists and therefore, to
prevent difficulty in the identification of stores at the receiving end, B.A.S.
(Ordnance) included every variation in the M.P.I.
A Headquarters Publication Section, with sub-sections in Detroit and
Ottawa, was organized to print and distribute to overseas theatres all scales,
schedules, M.P.Is., Parts Charge Indices and other technical publications.
This section included a photolithographic printing plant.
Monthly distribu-
tion to theatres of war rose to nearly half a million technical publications a
month, over 50,000 of which were prepared and printed by B.A.S. (Ordnance).
The section also organized a complete technical library
available to all
British Missions and B.A.S. branches and also distributed all British publica-
tions received in North America.
Outstation Representation
It was apparent from the outset that if B.A.S. (Ordnance) was effectively
to control shipments and to ensure correct matching of spares and accessories,
ordnance liaison officers must be stationed at the principal sources of supply.
The first step to achieve this representation was taken within one week
of the opening of Ordnance Branch.
One officer and one N.C.O. were posted
to factories working on British contracts.
Two weeks later, a second N.C.O.
was posted to the first U.S. Lend-Lease depot (a converted factory
at
Shamokin, Pa.).
Outstation representation was subsequently
increased by
the posting of additional officers and N.C.Os. to various Lend-Lease depots
then opening up in U.S.A. and to manufacturers'
plants in Canada which
were starting production of tanks, artillery, small arms and ammunition for
Britain.
The job of these Liaison Officers was to explain British requirements
regarding packing, marking and the linking of spares and accessories.
The staff available was insufficient to post a liaison officer or N.C.O.
at each depot and British Ordnance representatives were frequently moved
to meet emergencies arising from rush shipments.
In order to ensure that regular liaison visits were made to depots and
plants at which permanent representation could not be provided,
America
was divided into five geographical areas, each with a supervisory D.A.D.O.S.
Similar representation in Canada could not at first be arranged owing
to financial stringency.
Up till Midsummer, 1942, outstation representation in Canada was con-
fined to manufacturers'
plants,
notably
Canadian
Pacific
Railroad
and
Montreal Loco.
When Longue Pointe Ordnance
Depot opened in 1942,
it rapidly became the main channel for British stores in Canada: British
Ordnance representation in the depot was adequate.
104
v02947
F17
WO 277/21
18
Liaison
In the initial development of relations with the U.S. War Department,
a captain was appointed as a liaison officer with an office in the
Department.
War
six months.
This system proved unsatisfactory and was abandoned within
It was found better for section officers to deal direct with their
opposite numbers in the
made through area D.A.Ds.O.S.
War Department. Liaison with outstations was
In the first two years working, B.A.S. (Ordnance) suffered considerably
from lack of direct liaison with War Office and also with theatres of war.
Later events proved that time and labour could have been saved by the
direct discussion of common problems.
The first liaison tour of overseas provision offices and depots in the
Mediterranean area was made at the end of 1942.
In 1943, a similar tour
was undertaken, and in 1944 two tours were made, one extending to India
and Burma ; the number of liaison visits to the War Office and British depots
also steadily increased.
These liaison visits achieved a great deal; they speeded up the solution
of problems of packing, marking, shipping and maintenance.
They greatly
strengthened the hand of B.A.S. officers in their dealings with American and
Canadian depots and manufacturers by enabling them to quote up-to-date
operational experience.
Special Responsibilities
For convenience, when the B.A.S. Ordnance Branch was shipping stores
procured by B.S.M. Supply Directorates which did not constitute the whole
of an assignment, the branch assumed responsibility for shipment of the
remainder even though such items were not a normal Ordnance issue.
example, B.A.S. (Ordnance) shipped vehicle components in aid of Ford
Dagenham production; B.B.C. and G.P.O., civilian type wireless and line
components; Ministry of Information, propaganda equipment and British-
pattern artillery components for M. of S. production purposes.
The shipping of items which could not easily be allocated to other B.A.S.
branches, although not of R.A.O.C. concern, were also dealt with ; these
included medical supplies, mules and civil affairs stores, excluding food.
In view of the close contact maintained with the U.S. Quartermaster
Corps, which was mainly responsible for research and development of clothing
and general stores in U.S.A. and had made considerable strides in experi-
mental work, B.A.S. (Ordnance) had many duties in this connection.
Special issues of British Pattern military clothing were made to Belgians,
Poles and other allied nationals en route to units in the United Kingdom, and
arrangements were made for the re-clothing of British and Allied prisoners
of war transhipped from the Far East: such issues involved special provision
and financial arrangements.
B.A.S. (Ordnance) had certain responsibilities concerning stores imported
from the United Kingdom. B.A.S. port ordnance officers had to assist in
the inspection, identification and disposal of British experimental equipments
brought to America under B.A.S. "G" branch arrangements.
During an
105
