In order to deal with this difficulty, there were strict instructions that any
ammunition which received an abnormal jolt, such as being dropped off a
truck or off a sling at the dock-side, was to be immediately segregated for
R.A.O.C. examination; at all times in every port there were some boxes or
shells set aside, awaiting examination, because they had been subjected to
an accidental drop.
OFFLOADING AT PORTS OVERSEAS
Unloading at overseas ports was characterized by haste, regardless of
every other consideration.
A classic example was the North Africa campaign.
The docks at Algiers
and at Bone were littered with an indescribable jumble of ammunition for
weeks on end.
Apart from the danger, which was emphasized by a serious
explosion, this unmethodical manner of unloading led to damage to packages,
exposure to the weather and the imposition on the B.A.Ds. of an unnecessary
load of work in sorting and checking which never
caught up with receipts.
The ammunition was hopelessly mixed; it was not a matter of sorting into
lots and batches but one of separating shell from R.A.F. bombs and cartridges
from small arms ammunition.
Here again, port ammunition detachments were not properly used.
TRANSPORTATION OF AMMUNITION
The method of transporting ammunition in various theatres was dictated
by the facilities found or improvised.
The design of ammunition packages
did not cater for its despatch over several hundred miles of very bad road in
springless tank-transporters, nor for free dropping from the air nor the tipping
of ten tons at a time into ditches. The North African campaign again
So serious was the congestion at the docks, that U.S.A. vehicles had to
be used to help to take the ammunition to the B.A.D. areas.
So little regard
was paid to the nature of ammunition transport that tipping vehicles were
used, and, on arrival in the storage areas, loads were tipped like road material
into ditches and on to the road verges.
The only remedy against deterioration would have been the provision of
containers strong enough to withstand such treatment,
Work on the design
of containers for use in special conditions was carried out but the new
packages could not be provided before V.J. day.
THE OVERLOADING OF B.A.Ds.
it is accepted that in the first stages of a campaign, stacks will be without
cover and the outside items exposed to damp and heat.
This is unavoidable,
as it is impossible to provide shipping space for enough tarpaulins or shelters
to cover all the ammunition from the first moment of landing.
If, however,
the rate of receipt is normal the base stocks can be placed under cover in
sufficient time to avoid deterioration.
The normal B.A.D. was organized to store, maintain, inspect, repair and
issue an initial stock of 21,000 tons and to receive and build up to this total
130
at a rate of 1,000 tons a day or 2,000 tons a day for a short time.
This allowed
inspection for broken packages or damaged ammunition and a chance to sort
and stack by lots and batches.
Seldom, if ever, during the war did conditions permit this state of affairs.
In addition to overwhelming receipts, every B.A.D. in Africa and Italy was
in time grossly overstocked, holding instead of a maximum of 50,000 tons,
anything from 85,000 to 115,000 tons.
DUMPING IN FORWARD AREAS
Obviously storage at the base is more satisfactory than in forward areas,
since stocks are less liable to damage and deterioration.
Theoretically, there-
fore, only the smallest possible reserves plus daily maintenance stocks should
be held at, and in front of, rail/road heads.
In the North African campaign these principles were not
ammunition,
the distribution of which was governed by the length and
difficulty of the L. of C. and the anxiety of local commanders never to be
without ample reserves. The result was enormous wastage.
It was computed that at one stage the tonnages held were :—
In two B.A.Ds.-116,000 tons (100,000).
At Railhead (Souk-el-Arba)-43,000 tons (10,000).
In 6 F.M.As.—16,000 tons (6,000).
The figures in brackets are the maximum tonnages which should have
been held with the ammunition units.
The policy adopted by First Army was to hold large stocks as far forward
as possible. Hence the large quantities at railhead and at each corps dump.
This was a reasonable policy in view of the difficult L.
of C.
Dumping,
however, was carried further still and each R.A. battery had its own dump
in addition to its full 1st and 2nd line holding.
When these units moved, this
ammunition was left behind and new dumps formed at the new sites.
The result was the recovery of nearly a quarter of a million rounds of
one nature only (25 pounder) in unserviceable condition, at the end of the
battle for Tunis.
As a result of this experience, strict instructions were issued by 21 Army
Group to limit over-insurance and its unnecessary wastage
ammunition stocks in the Normandy campaign.
SITING OF AMMUNITION DEPOTS AND DUMPS
Unfortunately, in many cases, the requirements and limitations of ammuni-
tion storage were not fully understood by the officers of the "Q"
staff who
exercised strict control over the dumps.
For example, in
North Africa,
some dump sites were chosen regardless of the most elementary principles
and, in one case, resulted in several hundred tons being submerged under
five feet of water in a series of nullahs.
131
WO 277/21
