No. 1 B.O.W. arrived at Le Havre on 14th April, 1940, occupied the
allotted accommodation and took over additional buildings to house the
armourers' section and the instrument and wireless
section, respectively.
The buildings required extensive alterations to provide such essentials as
lighting and suitable power for machinery, offices, sanitation, and concrete
flooring for machine tools.
The workshop machinery arrived soon after the
unit personnel, but owing to the unavoidable delay in completing the essential
works services and to subsequent operational developments, the unit was
never able to operate properly as a B.O.W.
The unit nevertheless carried
out much valuable work by relieving 3. A.A. Brigade Workshop and by
taking over from No. 4 P.W.D. the repair commitment which had been
assigned to that detachment in addition to normal P.W.D. work.
During these months, the ammunition commitment greatly increased.
The existing B.A.Ds. and A.R.Hs. rearranged their storage layouts, closing
up and infringing the safety distance rules in order to make room for the
excess ammunition allotted to them. By local improvisation, they carried
out extensive work, with limited success, to provide overhead cover to keep
rain off the ammunition stocks. By this time, considerable quantities of
gun ammunition were sent back to B.A.Ds. for inspection and repair from
the forward areas where it had deteriorated through long exposure to the
elements during the winter months.
No. 21 B.A.D. opened at Fécamp for the storage of reserves of special
types of ammunition, not held in the standard B.A.Ds. and No. 22 B.A.D.;
a small rail served depot, was established near St. Malo, in order to relieve
the overall storage problem and to handle the small consignments shipped
The fourth standard B.A.D., No. 4 B.A.D., sited in the Foret de Rennes,
and planned as a semi-permanent rail served depot with ammunition sheds
and hutted camp for personnel, arrived in France on 6th February, 1940.
Considerable progress had already been made in R.E. works and transporta-
tion services and the unit settled in and began work with much efficiency.
Throughout the B.A.D. organization, the problem of adequately guarding
the ammunition stocks against fire and
was insoluble,
adequate man-power did not exist.
The ammunition was spread over wide
areas under field storage conditions and small armed patrols were provided
as the only practicable precaution.
As regards the B.O.Ds., the outstanding features during this period were
that they were much overworked, that undue delays occurred in meeting
unit' indents and that the standard of service given to the troops was adversely
affected by persistent and, in some cases, increasing shortages in supply from
At No. 1 B.O.D., Nantes, investigation into delayed issues revealed that
although non-availability of
stock, especially M.T. spares, was the main
reason, sheer lack of personnel resulted in a time-lag of eight days between
the receipt of an indent and the issue of the available stores.
was supplying a Force three times as strong as that on which the W.E. was
based and the entire depot staff were overworked and tired.
For nearly four
mo iths all ranks had worked excessive hours every day of the week with
no leave and no rest day. The time-las was later reduced to three days.
152
In April, construction of the new sub-depot at Savenay had progressed suffi-
ciently to allow the clothing group of No. 1 B.O.D. to be transferred there
from Nantes, with the result that the strain on Nantes was greatly eased.
Meantime, No. 2 B.O.D. at Le Havre which had begun issues of clothing
and general stores (No. 2 sub-depot) had already found that the work load
was an impossible one for the staff allowed in the W.E.,
February, had consequently transferred temporarily to
No. 2 sub-depot the
whole of the personnel of No. 1 sub-depot (M.T.).
possible because the supply of M.T. stores to No. 2 B.O.D. from the United
Kingdom did not begin to arrive until April.
of French female clerks and typists were engaged and trained to carry out
clerical work such as voucher preparation.
No. 2 B.O.D. having had, from the outset, excellent storage accommo-
with compact layout and good traffic facilities,
allowed to settle in and organize before being called on to operate, had an
easier passage than No. 1 B.O.D. Nantes and maintained efficient service to
From the beginning of the war the M.T. spares position for " B" vehicles
had been precarious, and by this time, despite the fact that no operations
had begun, units' demands for spares were excessively heavy.
Over-driving,
carelessness and bad vehicle maintenance work in units were undoubtedly
the main causes of heavy demands. Many of the vehicles in the Force were
non-standard, impressed types comprising a very wide range of makes, for
which it had been quite impossible on mobilization to prepare a census or
a supply of spare parts lists or an initial maintenance stock of spare parts.
Numerous changes in design both of vehicle parts of accessories constituted
By April, 1940, No. 1 B.O.D. was receiving
a daily average of 1,400 indents for M.T. spares and at the end of that month
17,000 unit indents (comprising 7,000 items) were outstanding.
Another main difficulty, which affected both the B.O.D. and B.O.W. and
which came to notice through numerous complaints from units, was the
supply from the home base of certain new items of technical equipment,
wireless sets, wavemeters, switchboards, secondary batteries, etc.,
tive, non-serviceable condition, due to faults in manufacture and inadequate
inspection and testing before acceptance into the Service.
were made to the War Office and a 100 per cent. inspection was instituted at
the Base of all stocks and new receipts.
With the experience of B.O.Ds. gained by the end of 1939, it was decided
to review the B.O.D. organization and a committee of senior R.A.O.C. officers,
including the C.O.Os. and Senior Provision Officers of both B.O.Ds., accord-
ingly carried out a full investigation and recommended that important changes
The main recommendations were that the various
detachments included in the B.O.D. W.E., such as ordnance staff for H.Q.
L. of C. area, medical base sub-area and all railhead and regulating station
detachments should be removed from the B.O.D. W.E. and provided for
separately under their own or appropriate H.Q. W.Es., detachments for rail-
heads, etc., being amalgamated into one unit; that a separate W.E. should
be drawn up for each of the sub-depots, in the form of a company composed
of a headquarters, regimental staff, and technical and general duties staff;
WO 277/21
