The Pizz-Rimini line stabilized and preparations began for the capture
of Bologna and the further advance into N.E. Italy and Austria.
on the right flank, throughout the winter 1944-45, and while the routine
Bologe event, the line remained static, except for, mite fiard progress
supply of ammunition and stores proceeded normally from the base instal.
lations, advanced depots were stocked and moved into forward locations.
ready for the next advance.
500 A.O.D. was stocked with a full range of
clothing, general stores and warlike stores and held ready to move to Trieste :
3 and 25 A.A.Ds. were sited at Ancona.
Later, 501 A.A.D. and 3 A.A.D.
went forward under Eighth
Army control.
Vehicle parks spread forward,
a large park stocking fit "B" vehicles being established at Foligno, a location
whence issues could be made readily to both Armies.
The Final Advance into N.E. and N.W. Italy, March to April, 1945
In March, 1945, the allied advance was resumed, Eighth Army going into
N.E. Italy and U.S. Fifth Army into N.W. Italy.
There was considerable difficulty during the final advance in maintaining
efficiently the supply of ordnance stores, ammunition and vehicles owing to
the greatly extended and interrupted L. of C.
The rail bridges across the River Po were out of action and until they
could be reopened maintenance of Eighth Army was by sea from Naples
and Ancona, with the delays inseparable from the slowness of loading and
discharging cargo vessels.
The plan to establish 500 A.O.D. in Trieste was not implemented owing
to the Jugoslav menace and the depot was instead located at Graz in Austria.
On the 2nd May, 1945, the enemy capitulated; the war in Italy was
ended, and the R.A.O.C. could look back on a war task carried through
without failure, in spite of shortages throughout the campaign
in both
personnel and equipment, shortcomings in training, and other disadvantages,
which needed
much resolution, improvisation and initiative to overcome.
In later sections of this chapter the ordnance organization and activities
are recorded in more detail.
Greece, 1944-1945
When the Germans withdrew from Greece in the autumn
of 1944, a
British force of three divisions re-occupied the country.
The provision of
the necessary R.A.O.C. units at this time was a matter of real difficulty,
as all ordnance resources in Italy were fully employed and very few personnel
could be spared.
It was accordingly
decided that it was not practicable
to set up an
A.O.D. is Athens and that the best that could be done would be to put in
a small, static depot capable of handling only a normal scale of clothing
and general stores, leaving the supply of all warlike stores, including M.T.
to be made from B.O.Ds. in the Middle East in transit through the Athens
depot.
140 Ordnance Depot was therefore set up in Athens during October-
November, 1944 by utilizing 3 and 8 O.B.Ds.
During the E.L.A.S. rebellion
in December, 1944 the security of our reserves in this depot was threatened
200
and it was decided to concentrate all British installations within a protected
perimeter.
The ordnance depot
was theretore moved to a new sile
Piraeus,
where it was developed as
planned, and maintained the Force
throughout the occupation.
Considerable delays occurred in the delivery of stores to the troops, as
there were no railways, roads were bad and coast-wise shipping was most
unreliable.
Ammunition was handled by a sub-depot of 140 Ordnance Depot but
very little activity was involved.
Similarly, the vehicles were handled by 140
Ordnance Depot, and the vehicle park would have been a simple proposition
had it not been for the influx of several thousand captured German vehicles
which were brought over from Crete.
However, the small staff contrived, in spite of all difficulties, to keep
up the flow of oranance stores to unils.
Development of the System of Ammunition Supply
BASE AMMUNITION DEPOTS
At the end of December, 1943, 14 and 16 B.A.Ds. arrived in Italy
and took over the A.A.Ds. then operating at Bitonto, near Bari, and at
Nola, near Naples, respectively.
The depots
were then
stocking about
25,000 tons each.
These depots were road served and located within a few miles of
the docks, whence receipts were delivered in 10-ton lorries.
Vehicles of
this capacity
proved very suitable, enabling consignments to be rapidly
cleared from the docks area.
Issues were made mostly by rail from existing
rail sidings near the depots.
By the end of the campaign both B.A.D.s.
had expanded considerably, each stocking approximately 90,000 tons.
The system of storage was roadside stacks under field storage conditions,
and, normal dunnage being unobtainable, improvised bases were made of
empty
packages or flat
stones.
a supply
of trench
snelters
Wan
received from
the
United Kingdom
the
ammunition stacks were
n111!T.
honeycomb style to improve ventilation and
minimize the
damage from
exposure to rain.
The normal
war establishment allowed for a B.A.D. proved entirely
inadequate at these depots owing to the abnormal tonnages and wide variety
of ammunition handled.
The depots were augmented from the normal three
Oranance ammunition
comnantes 'lo
eight
companies at
14 B.A.D.
and
to six at 16 B.A.D., each employing some 4,000 civilians in addition.
The
civilians included females who were allotted to the lighter types of work, such
as handling
ammunition empties
the inspection
under the
Inspecting Ordnance Officers (1.0.Os.).
For efficient supervision, throughout the large areas covered by the
depots.
adequate depot transport was
an essential,
and the ieen
proved
easily the most efficient vehicle for speed and durability
under rough roads
and weather conditions
Both depots became saddled with heavy inspection and
repair tasks.
Under active service conditions,
large quantities of ammunition,
through
201
we2747/I7
WO 277/21
28
