Allied governments. These issues were made under contract by a selected
firm, one of the largest export packers of cotton in the United Kingdom,
which carried out all receiving, checking, packing and shipment.
For many months during 1939-40 the depot worked under pressure 24
hours a day to cope with the task of clothing the great flow of army recruits
and of maintaining the B.E.F. in France. About four pack trains each week
were despatched to the B.E.F. The evacuation from Dunkirk placed on
Branston the task of receiving large quantities of clothing hastily evacuated
from the B.O.Ds. in France and of re-clothing the Army.
Then came the
commitment of clothing the Local Defence Volunteers (later Home Guard),
and, beginning in the latter half of 1940, a big programme of overseas issues
to build up base ordnance stocks in the Middle East.
By 1941 the development of the clothing sub-depot organization gave
further essential relief to Branston. A new sub-depot had opened in Northern
Ireland to handle the increased local production there and the sub-depots
had assumed approximately 30 per cent. of the total overseas issue load.
The quantities of non-serviceable clothing returned by the troops had become
considerable and all sub-depots were accordingly organized to carry out the
grading, cleaning and repair of all garments, and items which could be made
fit for further wear. In addition, they carried out the dyeing and repair of
unserviceable battledress for re-issue to enemy prisoners of war.
An example of the state of efficiency which C.O.D. Branston had attained
was given in the autumn of 1941 when the German Army was
invading
Russia. With less than one week's notice, Branston was ordered to issue
to the Russian Government three and a half million pairs of boots and
approximately three million yards of greatcoat cloth. The whole consign-
ment was selected and ready for shipment by the hour and day specified.
In the summer of 1942, the arrival of American troops in the United
Kingdom placed new commitments on C.O.D. Branston. In the first place
Branston co-operated actively with the Americans in establishing a new
U.S.A. " service of supply" depot, and, by providing trained civilian per-
sonnel, depot equipment such as runways, internal transport and fire fighting
appliances, helped materially to form the new depot quickly. Later Branston
organized bulk supply to the Americans of a wide range, some 2,600 different
tems, of U.S. Army clothing which was manufactured in England and pro-
ided for the American forces as a reverse lend-lease transaction.
Towards the end of 1942 Branston packed and shipped the clothing and
cessaries portion of the L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. provided for the force which
vaded North Africa.
In August, 1943, mainly as a measure of economy in Canadian Army
an-power and to assist the Canadians to build up their field units for 21
rmy Group, Branston took over and staffed the clothing sub-depot of the
anadian B.O.D. at Brookwood. This proved to be a considerable addition
the workload of the C.O.D. Branston organization as it entailed not
ly issuing to Canadian forces in the United Kingdom and, later, overseas,
t the receipt and repacking in Branston of standard packages of large
antities of replenishment stocks from Canada of the Canadian pattern
ms which the Canadian Army retained in their clothing scales.
147/17
WO 277/21
18
During 1943, in preparation for the impending assault on N.W. Europe,
Branston made a careful study, with the experience of the landings in
North Africa to work on, to decide on the most useful packages, as regards
type, size, weight and contents, for the clothing and necessaries L.Rs. and
B.M.Ps.
The actual packing programme was then planned and in January,
1944, selected personnel began this important task.
No fewer than 246,000
of these packages of reserves for the invasion were made ready within the
planned timetable.
This great reserve unavoidably filled all the traffic bays
of the C.O.D. to congestion, and temporarily dislocated normal issues to
the Middle East and other overseas theatres, as well as impeding the receipt
of new production from contractors. After the despatch of these reserves to
21 Army Group, Branston despatched automatic shipments of clothing and
necessaries in bulk to stock the 21 Army Group A.O.Ds. and finally, operating
as a main base depot,' supplied in detail, in response to units' indents, all
the clothing maintenance requirements of 21 Army Group outside the limited
The last important new commitment allotted to C.O.D. Branston was
the issue of plain clothes outfits to service personnel on release from the
Armed Forces.
The Government had in 1943 approved the policy that at
the end of the war, on release to civil life, each soldier should receive the
free issue of a complete plain clothes outfit and that the suits should be
not only of good quality and well tailored, but made up in a comprehensive
range of sizes, fittings, shades and patterns.
Before the end of the war was
in sight, contract arrangements had been made by the Ministry of Supply for
the manufacture of the estimated requirements (several million outfits) and
the R.A.O.C. organization for the distribution of this clothing was planned
in careful detail.
The scheme provided for stock control and distribution
by Branston and for the establishment in home commands, conveniently close
to dispersal units, of R.A.O.C. civilian clothing depots, laid out, organized
and equipped on modern lines to give efficient and swift service to released
personnel and facilities to choose and fit on their outfits. The scheme pro-
vided for each depot to be staffed by R.A.O.C. and civilians including expert
tailors able to assist in fitting garments and advising where special size
garments should be made to measure.
By August, 1944, considerable deliveries of civilian outfits began to
arrive at Branston from the contractors and action
proceeded to organize
and stock the civilian clothing depots.
When, in 1945, the war ended with
unexpected suddenness, the whole scheme was in readiness, the depots were
stocked and staffed and issues began immediately the earlier releases passed
through their dispersal units in June, 1945.
The Branston organization and
the civilian clothing depots efficiently accomplished, in step with the release
scheme, the immense task of issuing between June, 1945, and December,
1946, more than two and a half million civilian clothing outfits.
Throughout the war the Branston organization successfully met the com-
mitment of keeping the armies in all parts of the world adequately clothed.
There were difficulties and, at times, shortages, inevitable under war con-
ditions, when store ships were sunk, when increased scales were required
at short notice, or when fighting conditions, as in Holland in 1945, caused
unexpectedly high clothing wastage rates.
In the 1939-45 War there were
