SNO
CHAPTER XVII
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN HONG KONG, 1941
The story of the wartime Ordnance services in Hong Kong crystallizes into
a period of re-organization before the intervention of Japan, followed by a
short, sharp action, in which the R.A.O.C. fought as infantry in defence
of their depots. The ordnance troops were hopelessly outnumbered and sus
• the highest of any unit in the command.
tained grievous losses, the percentage of killed to the total strength beine
Organization before the Japanese Attacked
From September, 1939, to June, 1940, Hong Kong remained under peace-
time conditions.
During this period the senior ordnance post was that of
Assistant Director of Ordnance Services (A.D.O.S.), China Command (Col.
G. R. Hopkins).
The main ordnance depot was located on the harbour front, occupying
both sides of Queens Road.
Nearly all the mobilization equipment in the
Command was stored and maintained here
An overflow depot, which also
contained the camp equipment group, was located at Kowloon at Ma-Tau-
Kok.
Ammunition was stored in three magazines, named and located as
follows :—
The Excellent, a newly built and up to date magazine situated at
Lyemun.
The Old Naval Magazine, Kennedy Road.
The Old Naval Magazine, Queens Road.
In due course, a further magazine at Little Hong Kong was completed,
and speedily stocked.
The workshops were located with the main ordnance depot on the har-
bour front,
and were well-equipped and thoroughly
up
to date.
These
workshops did not, however, cater for M.T. repairs, the War Office policy
being that in Hong Kong this service would be provided by the R.A.S.C.
Heavy work beyond the capacity of the R.A.O.C. workshops was under-
taken by the Royal Dockyard or one of the commercial dockyards, with
whom the R.A.O.C. co-operated closely.
The garrison of China comprised two British and two Indian battalions,
three regiments of artillery (and later an anti-aircraft regiment) and ancillary
services in Hong Kong, two infantry battalions in Shanghai, one infantry
company in Tientsin and, in Peking, the legation guard.
In addition to maintaining this force, the R.A.O.C. equipped the Hong
Kong Volunteer Defence Corps.
During the first half of 1940, the force at Shanghai and Tientsin was
withdrawn for Singapore, and the small or nance installations there were
Stores of value were returned to Hong Kong.
The legation guard
was withdrawn from Peking.
and war in the Far East became imminent, all surplus civilians, and women
When the North China Stations had closed
and children from all stations on the China coast were evacuated, and the
strengthening of defences in Hong Kong was speeded up.
For some time,
294
To face Page 294
MAP 10
HONG KONG.
SHEIKE ORPINE LNSALATON IN 3
BEFORE OUTBREE DENCE
DISPERSAL DUE TO TREAT Of UA..
FAUN
YEMUN BARRACKS.
