To guard against over-expenditure, it was the practice to assess initial
contract demands in the financial year for nine months' requirements only,
a later review determining whether the balance was necessary in full and
whether a transfer of funds within the sub-vote of Army Estimates was
required.
The P.O.O. maintained records of all contracts and could readily ascer-
tain the state of delivery, the amount owing to a contractor and the total
expenditure during the year. He could also assess his savings or losses
according to whether the prices paid were higher or lower than the prices
upon which his estimate figures had been calculated.
In the emergency period before the outbreak of war, the Army annual
financial estimates ceased to operate and balance sheets from most command
depots were dispensed with.
Requirements and contract demands, however,
continued to be scrutinized by the finance branches, to ensure that the
policy contained in the periodic provision directives was being correctly
carried out, that requirements were not extravagantly assessed, and that man-
power and material were harnessed in the most economic and efficient
manner.
Financial votes were made which covered the expenditure, but the rigid
financial control which had been exercised in peace was relaxed.
Requirements were notified to the M. of S. but the system of submitting
tenders ceased, contracts being placed direct by M. of S. with suitable firms,
thus decreasing the time elapsing between the submission of the contract
demand and the delivery of the stores.
Developments after the outbreak of war
FORMATION OF NEW PROVISION BRANCHES
At the outbreak of war there were six C.O.D. provision branches under the
Woolwich P: Writess, Siral Stores and Fingineer Stores.
Chilwell P2: Vehicles and M.T. stores.
Branston P5: Clothing and Necessaries.
Weedon P6: Small Arms and Machine Guns.
The great increase in activity and in the range of stores during the war
necessitated the creation of three new "p" branches.
Early in 1940 ammunition was divorced from P.3, and P.7 was opened
at Bramley to deal with it.
Soon afterwards consequent on the opening of
the new C.O.D. at Donnington, P.l and P3 were moved to this district.
In December, 1941, the provision of machinery which had been the
responsibility of M.G.O.10, under the Directorate of Mechanical Mainten-
ance, became an Ordnance responsibility and P.8 was formed at Old Dalby
to deal with it and also with plant and machine tools (from P.4), wireless
test gear (from P.1) and optical test equipment (from P.3).
Finally, P.9 was formed to deal with engineer equipments (from P.1) and
78
In 1941 a Central Purchasing Organization was formed with H.Q. at
Greenford (later at the War Office) and with officers attached to the Mi. of St
Regional .Os, which had been formed in various parts of the country. This
permitted close liaison with industry and the restriction of purchase orders
to the capacity of firms.
Financial power was £500 an item (£1,000 in the
case of M.T. items). Provision officers submitted their requirements on an
enquiry form to the central organization who approached the trade through
their regional offices, Tenders were obtained and a covering purchase order
issued later by the C.O.D. concerned.
The advantage of this organization, was that use was made of the intimate
M. of S. knowledge of firms, while the principle of direct purchase, with its
speedier acquisition, was in no way altered.
PROVISION IN THE FIELD
The despatch of the B.E.F. to France in 1939 resulted in the establishment
of two B.O.Ds., one A.O.D., and a number of ordnance field parks.
The initial stocks of these installations had been scaled before the outbreak
of war, the intention being that stocks should be set aside during peace in
accordance with War Reserve Schedules compiled by the War Office. This
intention could not be fulfilled owing to inadequate financial provision, and
serious shortages of army equipment were experienced in every theatre.
Each B.O.D. had its own provision organization comprising a branch in
each sub-depot under the technical control of a provision officer. At each
B.O.D. H.Q. there was an Assistant Director of Ordnance Services Provision
(A.D.O.S.(P)) who controlled the sub-depot provision officers and was directly
responsible to the D.O.S. so far as provision duties were concerned.
liaison was maintained between the provision officers in the two B.O.Ds. to
ensure that the best use was made of available stocks and the fact that there
provision organizations within the theatre caused no
When sufficient experience of theatre consumption of stores had been
gained the method of replenishing depot stocks by demand on home depots
was adopted. Records of consumption were maintained, P.A.Fs. were fixed
and demands prepared in sub-depots which were passed to the United
Kingdom through the A.D.O.S.(P).
Ordnance field parks and the A.O.D. replenished their stocks by demand-
ing on the B.O.Ds.
In March, 1941, two B.O.Ds., each with its own A.D.O.S.(P) were func-
tioning in Egypt and Palestine.
Estimates as to the force dependent on each
depot were given by G.H.Q., Middle East Forces (M.E.F.), but these were
forecast six months in advance and eventual liabilities differed widely from the
forecast; hence it was found difficult to estimate the precise liabilities of each
depot. In July, these difficulties were aggravated by the formation of a third
WO 277/21
Middle East. This organization was later entitled Central Ordnance Provision
79
