spares and fuel. Normally only small packages could be sent by submarine
because stores had to be loaded through the narrow orifice of the conning
tower.
However, on one occasion H.M.S. " Porpoise"
brought to Malta
from the Middle East a number of A.A. gun barrels lashed to her decks and
in her torpedo tubes.
Problems following the Relief of Malta
Following the success of the Eighth Army, the siege of Malta was raised
late in November, 1942.
A large convoy arrived bringing sorely needed stocks
of ordnance stores, ammunition, foodstuffs, etc.
Enemy air activity ceased
and the safe arrival of this convoy was the signal for a new intensive effort
on the part of the R.A.O.C.
The scale of reserves was greatly increased and, with the regular docking
of convoys, it became necessary for the R.A.O.C. to carry on work 24 hours
a day in order to absorb the influx of stores.
Shifts were sometimes as long
as 16 hours, but the volume of stores was kept under control and the re-
organization of the garrison's Ordnance Services was put in hand.
Early in 1943 Director of Ordnance Services Middle East gave authority
for the Malta depots to be run on the lines of an A.O.D. with a C.O.O. in
The various depots and sub-depots were accordingly re-organized
into the normal sub-divisions of an A.O.D. together with a laundry and
returned stores depot (R.S.D.) attached.
The re-building of damaged build-
ings went speedily ahead, and the extension of the rock storage at Marina
Pinto-which had been begun well before the intensive bombing period but
An officers' shop,
which had progeroed slowly was denolad sall suppies durin the shes,
Malta now passed to the offensive.
The garrison was given an important
for the projected landings in Sicily.
Staging accommodation had to be provided in Malta
for a portion of the Eighth Army and provision made for the issue of Eighth
Army reserve holdings of ammunition and stores during the actual campaign.
At the time of these operations, the strength of the garrison at Malta was
approximately 40,000.
was responsible for equipping 30
transit camps and 3 hospitals. Half a million special issue items were required
for this purpose, and they were obtained from the Middle East.
To cater
for the handling of this considerable increase in tonnage, a combined port
ordnance and ammunition detachment arrived, and in addition an air detach-
ment from an R.A.O.C. stores convoy unit was obtained from the Middle
East to look after items flown in by air.
Plans were also made to provide
a reserve of oxygen and acetylene for the Eighth Army repair services, to
give a 12-hours' laundry service for hospital ships passing through Malta, and
to provide and hold on behalf of the Eighth Army a reserve of controlled war-
The latter were segregated in such a way that small or large
lots could be forwarded to Sicily by air or sea at a moment's notice.
It was intended that Eighth Army units passing through Malta would
arrive fully equipped, but the R.A.O.C. found it necessary to make many
issues to replace deficiencies and complete scales of equipment.
The water-
proofing of vehicles of the Eighth Army was also carried out in Malta, and
the requirements
R.E.M.E.
of M.T. sparés for Eighth Army vehicles serviced in
been scaled to cover.
workshops were, of course, much greater than the garrison had
It was not proposed that the maintenance of the Sicily force should be
carried out by Malta, and consequent upon the capture of Sicily and after
the attack was mounted on Italy, the reduction of the garrison was begun.
This meant that complete unit equipments had to be received back by the
R.A.O.C. as units embarked from Malta for deployment elsewhere. Large
quantities of stores accumulated from this reduction and also surplus stocks
were exhausted, as far as possible, by issues to B.O.Ds. formed in Italy and
by "back-loading" to the Middle East.
The re-concentration of the widely dispersed stocks of ordnance stores
proceeded throughout the whole of 1944, and by early 1945 the depots had
been re-organized on the following basis:
Warlike stores and R.S.D.—Marina Pinto.
M.T. stores-Sa Maison.
General stores-Ospizio.
The above were the original pre-war depots, but in addition other storage
accommodation was available close to these sites, and ammunition was con-
centrated from 19 localities into 4. Late in 1944, Malta once again came
under the direct control of the War Office, although provision remained with
the Middle East; and the reduction of the garrison, together with the re-
concentration of
ordnance stores, were the final phases of the R.A.O.C's
work in the garrison.
323
