Accordingly,
on 18th November, 1941, shortly before the start of the opera-
tion, D.O.S. Middle East organized an ordnance air delivery unit and an
ordnance stores and convoy unit for road delivery.
The air delivery unit
consisted of special detachments at the B.O.Ds., ordnance air escorts who
travelled by air with the stores, and ordnance landing ground detachments
The B.O.D.
detachments were charged with the duty of "chasing"
air
delivery stores, and, in order to make their work effective, they were authorized
to disregard entirely any normal routine which might interfere with speed of
issue
The load aimed at in the first place was two tons a day for the
whole Army and this was achieved so long as aircraft were available.
It is
noteworthy that this service, although later placed under the control of
Movements and to some
extent
manned by the R.A.S.C., was in fact,
at the start a R.A.O.C. organization.
R.A.O.C. Stores Convoy Unit
The ordnance road stores and convoy unit also had a detachment in the
hase
depots to "chase" stores which were required by road.
The unit
was divided into a headquarters and a number of sections, each of which
could cover a limited distance-normally a 24 hours' journey. These sections
were located one day's journey apart in the L. of C. to form staging
nointe
The convoy unit was responsible for delivering not only urgently
required stores, but all "B" vehicles also.
During active operations when
there was a big increase in the number of vehicles to be delivered, additional
drivers were provided by the reinforcement base depots.
Forward Reserve at Rail-heads and F.M.Cs.
R.A.O.C. units.
In addition to the above mobile units there were certain semi-mobile
In each corps area one or more field maintenance centres
were established each holding the necessary petrol, oil, rations and ordnance
stores and ammunition for maintaining the troops.
element of these, the Army
WaC
To man the R.A.O.C.
detachments, each consisting of one officer and ten O.Rs.
provided with four forward ammunition
Three forward
bases were established, one near Sidi Barrani, one near Mischeifa (which was
to be the railhead), and one in the Siwa area.
Each of these was stocked with
all forms of commodity on the basis of a ten-day reserve for the forces to
be maintained
tion and a limited selection of ordnance stores most likely to be required in a
hurry
The ordnance portion of these bases contained both ammuni-
in Egypt.
The R.A.O.C. detachments were obtained from the base installations
They varied according to the size of the base, that at Mischeifa
being the largest and consisting of one officer and approximately 40 O.Rs.
from the B.O.Ds.
Finally, the railheads themselves were manned by R.A.O.C. detachments
When H.Q. Eighth Army was formed the desert railway terminated at
depot fully organized and manned.
Mersa Matruh, where there were a field ordnance depot and an ammunition
Part of the preliminary work for the
operation was the expansion of the desert railway towards the Egyptian
frontier and fresh railheads were to be formed at " Charing Cross
12 miles S.W. of Mersa Matruh and later at Mischeifa as the line progressed
-Mischeifa being the railhead from which the actual operation
be maintained.
As soon as the railway had been extended to "Charing
172
Cross" it became necessary to provide railhead ordnance and ammunition
detachments.
railheads along the L.
These could be found only by taking personnel from various
time.
Some weeks later,
of C. which much weakened them at their busiest
Mischeifa railhead opened and stocking began.
and just before the start of the offensive, the
to form a railhead
Once again it was necessary
obtained from whatever point they could best
detachment from a heterogeneous collection of men
be spared; the resultant
shortage of personnel was all the more keenly felt since stocks remained
on the ground both at Mersa Matruh and at "Charing Cross" during the
period in which Mischeifa was being built up.
Transportation Bottleneck: Delivery of Urgent Stores Delayed
To make matters worse, orders had been issued that during the first days
of the actual operation, no road transport could be provided to carry forward
the daily truck loads of unit stores which were arriving in response to unit
demands.
accrued a very large
The result was that first at Matruh, and later at Mischeifa, there
"build up" of stores which were urgently required
by the units and for which daily and even hourly telephonic hasteners were
being received by Army H.Q.
At one time, in fact, the accumulation at
Mischeifa very nearly reached the figure of 1,000 tons.
The R.A.S.C. trans-
port companies were unable to provide transport for a regular daily carriage
of ordnance stores even when the offensive was more than a fortnight old.
In consequence, it became necessary
for the R.A.O.C. to improvise all
possible means to get stores forward.
Field park lorries were used to deliver
the more urgent stores and the vehicles of the road stores convoy unit were
loaded to utmost capacity,
but the number of these vehicles was com
paratively small.
D.Ds.O.S. of corps and A.Ds.O.S. of divisions scoured
their formations for vehicles and brought down convoys to railhead to
collect their most needed items.
Use was also made of the reserves in the
army vehicle holding park, no vehicle for replacement issue being allowed
to move forward without carrying a load of stores and, during periods when
issues of vehicles were light, reserve vehicles were temporarily mis-
appropriated to carry stores forward.
The result of this bottleneck in transportation was that, although ordnance
stores were arriving at railhead smoothly and regularly from the base, they
were reaching
spasmodically,
either in large and
" indigestible
quantities or after units had been withdrawn for refitting. One result of
this deprivation of the dail brain withdramance stores was to intensify
hoarding and " scrounging" by units.
long before the operation.
Hoarding had been a serious problem
an hour would be stripped even ten the ventines.
Unattended vehicles left by the roadside for
The failure to provide
any regular transport for the for a then semin of important and urgent
ordnance stores undoubte the forward movement praclices and conduced
to waste of equipment.
The tasks of the R.A.O.C. railhead detachments, already heavy as a
result of the hold-up of unit stores,
necessary to hold certain tocks of storaa dither in short sunbly or likelv
quickly increased when it was found
rapid destruction of certain types of tyres and the enormous number of
to be wanted at very short notice.
For example, the acute shortage and
spring breakages made it essential that these items should he stocked forward
173
WO 277/21
28
