finishers and pressers.
The ready availability of skilled civilians and an
ample supply of many of the requisite materials from local resources, enabled
the factory to produce a large supply of battle dress and khaki drill uniform,
cooks' overalls and hospital clothing,
and requirements for omcers shops
such as pyjamas and bush shirts.
The factory proved not only an economic
proposition,
but an invaluable asset to efficient clothing supply by virtue
of its capacity to meet any reasonable requirement at the shortest notice.
PAINT FACTORY
This unit, with a war establishment of 6 officers and 71 other ranks,
was formed in Naples early in 1944 and continued to operate until the end
of 1945.
The majority of the raw materials and machinery were available from
local resources.
The factory achieved a weekly output of 500 tons of paint
which met the requirements not only of the Army but of the Royal Navy
and the Allied Commission of Control.
This project, in addition to saving
shipping space, avoided the damage to drums which always occurs when these
packages are handled in and out of ships.
Central Purchase and Production Unit (C.P. & P.U.)
This unit was formed to exploit local capacity for purchase and manu-
facture to the utmost in order to relieve the home market and save shipping
space.
It was formed in February,
1944, at Naples, near A.F.H.Q. and the
B.O.D. The work required special knowledge and experience of raw materials
and commercial manufacturing processes not normally within the experience
of R.A.O.C. officers. Fortunately there were certain personnel available who
had already had experience of this kind of work in the Middle East.
Contacts were made with the Allied Control Commission and the various
commercial authorities and a survey of those factories, forges, sawmills, etc.,
in the Naples district, which had not been put out of action by bombing, was
carried out.
It was found that a shortage of raw materials was the most
serious problem.
After consultation with the provision officer at the B.O.D. in order to find
out the most urgently required items and the quantities needed, the work
began.
A great deal of timber, which was in short supply, was recovered
from the crates in which partially dismantled vehicles had arrived in the
theatre.
As the Armies advanced, advantage was taken of the industrial capacity
of Rome, Florence and the other larger cities.
The unit gradually expanded
from the original strength of 5 officers and 11 O.Rs. to more than ten times
that number with a considerable quantity of transport.
Detachments were attached to the Armies but this was found to be
unsatisfactory and full central control was again adopted.
When the advance had reached a stage when the resources of Milan could
be exploited it was found desirable to transfer the bulk of the manufacturing
work up to this area in which the main industry of Italy is centred and to
restrict the work done in Naples to the manufacture of furniture and packing
cases.
216
During the earlier stages, delays were caused by the inability of con-
tractors, generally through lack of the correct materials, to make exact copies
of the Army standard samples, and C.P. & P.U. therefore set up a small
factory and made samples of modified patterns which could be manufactured
from local materials and yet meet service requirements.
The C.P. & P.U. was in competition with similar organizations operated
by our French and American allies and whereas the latter paid Italian con-
tractors in cash the C.P. & P.U. was bound by the British Army method
of deferred payment.
This was not popular with contractors, and militated
against the success of C.P. & P.U. in placing contracts where the French and
Americans were also in the market.
STATIC OFFICERS SHOPS
These units were set up in the big cities such as Naples, Rome and
Florence, and gave similar service to that of the mobile shops.
The allocation
of replenishment stocks was centrally controlled by the D.D.O.S. L. of C.
GENERAL REINFORCEMENTS TRAINING DEPOTS
These units, which included a R.A.O.C. company, held newly arrived
reinforcements pending their posting to units.
In the case of R.A.O.C.
reinforcements, it was found advisable to locate them, near the B.O.D. and
B.A.D., and give them combined employment and training pending thei
217
WO 277/21=
