Ordnance Depot.
14 Vehicle Coy. will provide drivers from D+ 18 to about
D+35 to ferry across reserve vehicles.
These drivers will continue ferrying
until about D+35, when they remain on the Continent and join up with
the advance party of 14 Advanced Ordnance Depot.
14 Forward Trailer Section is to be scaled to cover A.A. and Radar, with
a proportion of M.T. for G.H.Q. and L. of C. Troops.
It will carry no
Vote 7 and 8.
It will be sited by D.D.O.S.
L. of C. to give the quickest
service to L. of C. Units preventing the submission of large numbers of
indents to 14 Advanced Ordnance Depot for quantities less than carton units.
15 Advanced Ordnance Depot.—15 Advanced Ordnance Depot will be
the next Advanced Ordnance Depot after 14 to operate as a fully fledged
depot on Advanced Ordnance Depot Packs.
It will be held in reserve in
the U.K.
until the opening of the Pemberton Ports and will
probably be
established in 7 Base Sub-Area.
15 Forward Trailer Section is initially scaled to cover three Tank Brigades.
11. BASE AMMUNITION DEPOTS
17 B.A.D. These depots revert to command L. of C. on establishment
15 B.A.D. /
of Rear Army boundary, and will continue operating in
the areas which they occupy on D + 15 until required at a
later stage to leapfrog forward.
12 B.A.D.
12 B.A.D. will operate in the Rear Maintenance Area from
about D+ 18 onwards.
1 B.A.D.
) These B.A.Ds. will be held in reserve for establishing in the
2 B.A.D.
3 B.A.D. J
Clarence or Munster areas unless progress is slow and
the commitment in the Rear Maintenance Area is heavy
enough to warrant putting one of them into the Rear
Maintenance Area (2 B.A.D.).
12. MOBILE LAUNDRIES
103 Mobile Laundry and Bath Unit is the first to establish in the Rea
Maintenance Area.
It will give priority to hospital washing and will be
placed under the command of D.D.O.S. L. of C. 104 and 110 Mobile
Laundries will have the same role, but may not be established in the Rear
Maintenance Area.
13. BASE HOSPITAL LAUNDRIES AND BASE LAUNDRIES
2 Base Hospital Laundry and 34 Base Laundry come over together and
establish in the Rear Maintenance Area.
In the early stages personnel of
2 Base Hospital Laundry will be used to operate the mobile plant of 34 Base
Laundry.
At the same time, 2 Base Hospital Laundry plant will be erected
and should be operating by about D+ 45.
These Laundries will be placed
under command of L. of C. and will give priority to hospital washing.
and 4 Base Laundries come into the Rear Maintenance Área or Munster-
Clarence area, and will operate on similar lines.
in reserve to go forward as necessary.
35 Base Laundry will be held
14. ARMY INDUSTRIAL GAS UNITS AND BASE INDUSTRIAL GAS UNITS
Army Industrial Gas Units will initially be placed in the Rear Maintenance
Area and controlled by D.O.S. 21 Army Group.
As the L. of C. lengthens
they may be placed under command of D.Ds.O.S. Armies 31 Army Industrial
332
Gas Unit
ve an increment for the production of inert gases. 1 Base
Industrial Gas Unit will be placed in the Rear Maintenance Area adjacent
to a selected-Army Base Workshop.
be phased in later probably to the Pemberton Ports.
2 and 3 Base Industrial Gas Units will
15. PORT ORDNANCE DETACHMENTS AND PORT AMMUNITION DETACHMENIS
The
remaining Port Ordnance Depots and Port Ammunition Depots
which have not been placed under command of Second Army for the initial
stages will be held in U.K. for calling forward as required, either for work in
ports or for any other purpose.
16. 3 FIELD AMMUNITION REPAIR FACTORY
3 Field Ammunition Repair Factory will be placed in the Rear Main-
tenance Area where it is expected that there will be considerable stocks of
repairable ammunition by about D+ 60.
17. FORMATION OF UNITS OVERSEAS
It is proposed to form, certain other units as required in the theatre out
of existing manpower resources.
(a) Officers' Shops
It is proposed to form Mobile Officers' Shops to serve the forward areas
and a number of static shops to be established in selected points on the L.
of C. and at the base.
(b) Air Field Detachments
These will be formed as necessary for base and forward air fields.
(c) Stores Convoy Units
As the L. of C. lengthens it is proposed to form Stores Convoy Units
by making use of the 25 prime
movers requested for each Forward
Trailer Section.
It is not visualized that more than two Forward Trailer
Sections will be in movement at the same time, and the personnel and
vehicles for 2 Stores Convoy Unit will be found from those Forward Trailer
Sections not in full operation.
18. LABOUR ALLOTMENT TO ORDNANCE UNITS
See Annexure V attached.
Owing to the extremely heavy demands on Pioneer Labour, depots will
have to be prepared to employ civilian labour on a large scale.
19. STORES
(a) The breakdown of tonnage showing proportions of types of stores
landed from D + 18 to D + 30 is shown at Annexure II attached.
(b) Maintenance stores landing up to D+90 are being packed in Beach
Maintenance Pack boxes.
They consist of Vote 7 and 8 Beach Maintenance
Packs packed on a per capita basis, equipment packs based on the number
of equipments and M.T. packs based on numbers of vehicles of each type.
In addition Signal Officer-in-Chief's reserve of signal stores will be coming
Accommodation stores in sets for 5,000 men are being landed daily
from D+18 onwards.
333
e2747/17
WO 277/21
18
