records of the War Forwarding Corporation (W.F.C.) and British
Ministry of War Transport (B.M.W.T.).
inspection and progress of shipments.
shipped from that port and the New York office arranged for the
bulk of stores were
Ordnance Outstations
British ordnance officers and N.C.Os. were stationed at the principal
American depots and arsenals to keep in touch with the American
personnel actually engaged in the physical handling of stores destined
for British and Dominion use.
Headquarters-Organization
B.A.S. Ordnance Headquarter Branch was
organized into the
following sections, each handling a limited range of stores: —
Ord 1-Quartermaster Stores.
» 2-"A" Vehicles and Armament.
3—Signal Stores.
4—Engineer and Chemical Warfare.
5-—Ammunition.
The designation of these sections and the stores they
dealt with were
subject to a number of changes as the branch developed, but the principle
remained constant throughout, viz. that one section should handle only a
limited range of stores and that it should be in a position to maintain direct
liaison with a similar section in U.S. War Department, Department of Muni-
tions & Supply, and the War Office.
As responsibility for additional stores was added, new sections were
created.
U.S. Quartermaster to the U.S. Ordnance Corps and, at the same time, British
control of these vehicles passed from the Supplies & Transport (S. & T.) to
the Ordnance Branch of the B.A.S.
The following
list shows the
development: —
position at the period of fullest
Ord 1-Planning and Statistics.
„ 2—Technical Section.
3-"A" Vehicles.
4 - Artillery.
5-Small Arms.
6- Engineer Stores.
7—Signal Stores.
8 General Stores.
9—Ammunition.
„ 10-"B" Vehicles.
„ 11-Clothing, Textiles and Medical Stores.
» 13—Medical.
, 14-Shipping of Clothing and General Stores.
96
~029117
71+
WO 277/21
18
These sections normally contained sub-divisions dealing with particular
functions, e.g.: —
(a) A Shipping and Progress Division sub-divided into main equipments
and spares.
(b) A Statistical Division sub-divided into main equipments and spares.
(c) A Scaling
Division
(until
transfer of
scaling
Electrical & Mechanical Engineers (E.M.E.) Branch, B.A.S.).
responsibility to
/ (d) A Spare Part Procurement Division.
(e) A Division designed to handle demands from theatres of war.
(A) A Documentary and Accounting Division.
These sub-divisions were not necessarily distinct and separate units: the
flow of work determined the degree of amalgamation or decentralization
necessary in individual cases.
Relationship with
British
Agencies Responsible for Procurement
B.A.S. (Ordnance) procurement responsibilities were largely confined to
the provision of maintenance spare parts for major ordnance equipments.
Very close liaison had, however, to be maintained with other British agencies
responsible for military procurement in North America, since maintenance
provision was normally
effected through the latter agencies.
Liaison was
also necessary with the U.S. Supply Corps ultimately responsible for supplying
American Ordnance equipments and relative spare parts.
There were three main methods of procurement of military stores in North
America, viz.: —by purchase on a " spot " or contractual basis, by requisition
or by assignment.
These methods became operative in the order mentioned. Both U.S. and
Canadian supplies were originally obtained by contractual or spot purchase.
Following depletion of British dollar reserves and the passing of the U.S.
Lend-Lease Act, further U.S. supplies were obtained by requisitions submitted
to the United States Office of Lend-Lease Administration (O.L.L.A.).
The
latter, subject to Presidential approval, authorized procurement under Lend-
Lease arrangements, either by purchase through U.S. Treasury or by transfer
from U.S. Army stocks. Following U.S. entry into the war, the requisition
system was largely superseded by that of assignment, i.e. direct monthly
allocations from U.S. Army production.
Parallel development occurred in Canada.
British cash contracts were
equally affected by the depletion of British dollar reserves.
Certain supplies
were made available by U.S. purchase in Canada through a Canadian
Government Agency known as War Supplies Ltd.
These supplies were
subsequently transferred to the British account under U.S.
Lend-Lease
arrangements.
The bulk of Canadian supplies, after completion of the
Original British cash contracts, were, however,
financed under Canadian
Mutual Aid arrangements.
The Ministry of Supply was directly responsible for the negotiation of
British cash contracts in Canada.
The Ministry maintained a small liaison
staff in Canada.
Detailed arrangements were made by the Canadian Govern-
ment Department of Munitions and Supply.
The latter acted as agent of the
Ministry in this connection.
