the army vehicle holding park and was undoubtedly responsible for saving
many vehicles, and for putting back into R.A.O.C. channels large quantities of
vehicle tools and equipment.
Concurrently with the reorganization of workshops and field parks, all con-
cerned had been actively engaged in an attempt to clear up the wreckage result-
ing from the advance.
In addition to the R.A.O.C. units of Eighth Army, the
D.O.S., Middle East, arranged for an Australian divisional workshop and three
Australian recovery sections to scour the desert.
They recovered a great mass
of material which had been discarded during operations.
rarucularly at
Sidi Rezecq and on the road from Bardia to Tobruk, there was a vast quantity
of derelict tanks and vehicles together with stores of every description.
addition, large quantities of ammunition had been dumped in F.M.Cs. and
at battery sites.
There were many German and Italian ammunition dumps to
be cleared.
Such work, although in principle the responsibility of the salvage
organization, invariably devolved on the R.A.O.C., without however, any
allocation of additional R.A.O.C. personnel.
Ordnance field units carried out
the task as best they could but in practice it was only during a lull in opera-
tions that R.A.O.C. personnel could be spared for their legitimate duties.
British Ofiensive Forestalled by Enemy Attack
The lull in operations continued until 26th May, 1942, when the Eighth
Army was ready to resume its offensive.
On that date, however, the enemy
attacked. forestalling the Eighth Army by a few days. In addition to the main
attack, an enemy armoured car raiding party passed round the southern flank,
penetrated into the El Adem railhead area, where a large proportion of the
R.A.O.C. field units were located, and caused much disorganization.
One
forward ammunition detachment was wiped out entirely, and all the field
parks and workshops in the area were compelled to retire some 30 miles.
Apart from this, the reinforced R.A.O.C. organization
worked smoothly
and efficiently.
In particular.
500 A.O.D., which had been completely
restocked in preparation for the advance and held three months' supply of
ordnance stores for the Army, met the demands made upon it with consider-
able speed in spite of the fact that it was in an area subjected to heavy
bombing,
British Withdrawal-Fall of Tobruk-
Evacuation of railheads
By the middle of June the British tank force was so badly " mauled"
that it had to retire, and the evacuation of the advance base at El Adem
and of the railhead at Fort Capuzzo became necessary.
Practically all
ordnance stores were cleared before the sites were occupied by the Germans.
It had been decided that in the event of an enemy advance,
Tobruk
would not be evacuated, but action had been taken to withdraw from 500
A.O.D, a quantity of valuable controlled stores to be held as a mobile
reserve available for urgent issue.
To carry this reserve, an improvised
field park was formed, utilizing personnel and vehicles of the stores convoy
unit augmented by surplus personnel from 500 A.O.D.; this unit worked most
satisfactorily, right through the retreat.
made in the staff of 500 A.O.D.,
A 60 per cent. reduction had been
Tobruk being volunteers.
all R.A.O.C.
The CO0. 1 DOC p. son had served with
personnel remaining
117%
500 A.O.D. throughout the first siege, were among those who volunteered
to remain for a further tour of duty.
They became prisoners of war when
Tobruk was captured by the Germans on 21st June, 1942.
When Fort Capuzzo was cleared and Tobruk was in a state of siege,
it became clear that the railhead at Mischeifa must also be cleared.
Here
also losses of ordnance stores were not serious, except that a large quantity
of 25-pounder ammunition had to be left behind. (Again during the advance
after El Alamein this ammunition was recaptured).
Losses of equipment
would have been serious if, at this critical period, the staff operating the
railhead and the railway had not been able to load and clear nearly double
the tonnage which had been regarded as the maximum for daily delivery.
The army vehicle parks, using all the drivers they could get from reinforce-
ment camps and other resources, were able throughout the retreat to clear
all the vehicles they held.
The unserviceable vehicle park had to destroy
a large proportion of the worst non-runners.
Even so this unit, with the aid
of loaned personnel of 5 Indian Divisional Workshops, cleared rather more
than 50 per cent. of the disabled vehicles.
As the retreat continued it became necessary to evacuate in turn the
railheads at Matruh and El Daba.
In the case of Mersa Matruh, there was
a period of indecision whether or not to evacuate,
and, as a result, an
dooreciahle
quantity of stores
and ammunition
were
abandoned.
All
controlled stores however, were evacuated.
The railhead at El Daba, which the enemy captured on 30th June held
large stocks and the losses of both equipment and ammunition were heavier
than at any other railhead, as the rail capacity was
quite inadequate to
evacuate the tonnages involved in the short time available.
Enemy Advance Halted at El Alamein
On Ist July, 1942 the Germans reached El Alamein, and fierce fighting
ensued in the vicinity for some weeks, until the enemy advance was finally
halted.
By August the battle front was stabilized on a line running from
Tel-el-Eisa in the north to Qaret-el-Himeimat in the south.
Precautions to Safeguard Base Reserves
The establishment of this battle front only 60 miles west of Alexandria
constituted a serious threat to the safety of Egypt and precautionary measures
were accordingly taken to safeguard the great base reserves of equipment
and ammunition.
No stores or ammunition were allowed to accumulate in forward areas;
a proportion of incoming ammunition was diverted to the Sudan; west of
Alexandria vehicle repairs arene limit was assembly exchanges, plans were
prepared for the evacuation of vehicle parks and for large quantities oi
clothing and stores to be sent from the Delta to Palestine, and for the
ovacuation of machinery from the B.O.W. at Alexandria.
Plans to Resume British Offensive
Simultaneously with these precautionary measures, however, the R.A.O.C
began its share in the task of preparing for the resumntion of offensive action
Men, equipment and stare oh pr peringouring into the Middle East during the
67612
717
WO 277/21
28
