TRICTED
officers' dress; A.T.S. clothing; personal equipment; camp equipment and
acommodation stores ; barrack and hospital stores; fire fighting equipment ;
hand tools; specialist unit equipment, eg, airborne and arctic equipment ;
industrial gases, oils, paints and chemicals; cinematograph stores ; camou-
flage; and for the management and administration of C.O.Ds. for clothing and
general stores, and of all command ordnance depots, returned stores depots.
(R.S.Ds.) and boot repair and laundry services.
Coincidentally with the above re-organization (October, 1942), the new
Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (R.E.M.E.) was formed
to take over complete workshop responsibility from the R.A.O.C.,
R.A.S.C.
and partly from the R.E. At the same time, the R.A.O.C. itself absorbed
personnel previously employed in the provision, storage and distribution of
R.A.S.C. vehicles and spare parts.
The R.A.O.C. thus became entirely responsible for the provision, storage
and issue of all army vehicles and M.T. spares.
The merging of these respon-
sibilities exclusively under ordnance control enabled the R.A.O.C. to pool
all M.T. resources to the best advantage.
The R.A.S.C. establishments which
were now taken over by the D.W.S. included M.T stores and vehicle depots
(less workshops elements), MT. Provision Co-ordinating Centre, M.T. Vehicle
Collecting Centre, etc.
A considerable number of R.A.S.C. personnel were
accordingly transferred to the R.A.O.C. when these units were placed under
ordnance control.
Although it had been decided that the senior major-general of the corps
should hold the appointment of C.O.S. in addition to his normal appoint-
ment, and assume responsibilities for regimental and other matters which
affected the corps as a whole, no extra staff had been allotted to discharge
these additional functions.
This presented considerable difficulties to an
already over-worked director, and it was decided by the Q.M.G. that, since
the D.G.A.E. was exercising certain functions which were really a C.O.S.
responsibility, a deputy C.O.S. should be appointed to take over these
additional functions.
The most important of these was the preparation of
R.A.O.C. field force units.
The state of readiness of these units had given
cause for concern, and a committee which the C.O.S. had appointed to
examine the matter had made strong recommendations that the C.O.S. should
assume full responsibility for the preparation for war of all R.A.O.C. units.
In March, 1943, therefore, the appointment of I.A.O.S., under the Q.M.G.,
was placed in abeyance and a D.C.O.S. (Brigadier C. Cansdale), under the
C.O.S., was appointed in his place.
In addition, a new branch, known as
following :—
"Ord. 1", was formed under the D.C.O.S. to organize and supervise
the
(a) the preparation and nomination of R.A.O.C. field force units for
overseas and special forces;
(b) R.A.O.C. field force planning and organization; R.A.O.C. Order of
Battle ; the forecasts of man-power requirements to the Deputy
field units;
Director of Staff Duties (Operations) (D.D.S.D.(O)), for R.A.O.C.
(c) the preparation of War Establishments (W.Es.) for all R.A.O.C. field
tion H.Q.;
force units, R.A.O.C. units overseas and R.A.O.C. staffs on forma-
(d) the initial selection in consultation with C.O.S. of R.A.O.C. officers
for field force appointments and advice through A.G.9 to the War
Office Selection Boards (W.O.S.Bs.), on their appointments ;
(e) the specialist selection and training, in conjunction with Director of
Organization (D. of O.) and Director of Military Training (D.M.T.)
of all R.A.O.C. personnel for field force units;
(f) the notification to D.M.T. of all developments in the organization and
technical procedure of the R.A.O.C.;
(g) co-ordination of procedure; issue of instructions and supervision
of the activities through D.Ds.O.S. of commands, A.D.O.S. divisions
and districts, etc.;
(h) the inspection of all R.A.O.C. units of the field force at home,
together with such other inspections
that the C.O.S. should direct.
Shortly after the appointment of the D.C.O.S., it became evident that®
his co-ordinating duties were so extensive that he had little or no time left
in which to carry out inspections.
It was during this time
that the new
R.A.O.C. field force was being built up for the invasion of Europe, and a
heavy programme faced the D.C.O.S. in forming and mobilizing this field
force.
It had been hoped that the Commandant of the R.A.O.C. Training
Establishment could assist in carrying out inspections, but the Training
Establishment itself was facing its heaviest commitment. It was obvious that
a full time inspector was essential and on 12th November, 1943, an Inspector
R.A.O.C. was appointed, under the direction of the D.C.O.S., to report on the
state of all R.A.O.C. field force units and their fitness to proceed overseas;
to give advice and guidance to commanding officers; and to interview officers
holding field force appointments, and to report on their suitability.
Meanwhile, both the Q.M.G. and the C.O.S. had noted, in their visits
overseas, the need both for co-ordination and instruction in the latest methods
of procedure to save man-power and increase efficiency in overseas installa-
tions.
It was obvious that the recently appointed inspector was fully occupied
with his home duties, and that another inspector was needed for overseas.
Accordingly,
in February,
1944, the appointment of Inspector R.A.O.C.
(overseas) was approved with the rank of Colonel, later upgraded to Brigadier.
The existing Inspector was re-designated " Inspector R.A.O.C. (home) ".
The new Inspector R.A.O.C. (overseas) was instructed to assist heads of
ordnance services in theatres of war, particularly in regard to the introduction
of the latest methods and procedure adopted at home, or found to be
operating in one depot but not in another; the ultimate standardization of
procedure to the maximum possible extent; increasing speed of issue and
receipt transactions; conservation of man-power; and ensuring that surplus
stores were reported for disposal, especially those resulting from changing
operational role.
The organization of the Ordnance Directorate at the War Office on 8th
May, 1945, is illustrated at Appendix 3.
WO 277/21
18
