between the summers of 1940 and 1941.
By the autumn of 1940 there were
approximately 25,000 troops dispersed in the island.
To serve this lorce
the R.A.O.C. detachment was considerably increased having eventually a
total strength of 835 all ranks for stores, laundry and workshop services.
Storage accommodation was at first obtained by utilizing fish sheds but
later Nissen huts were erected.
The dispersion of the garrison and the mountainous nature of the island
which rendered supply by road to outlying districts impracticable necessitated
a dispersion of ordnance stocks.
The H.Q., the main ordnance depot and a
laundry were sited at Reykjavik.
This depot comprised M.T., general stores,
warlike stores and returned stores sub-depots.
Subsidiary depots were estab-
lished for general stores and clothing
at Hafnarfjordur (12 miles from
Reykjavik) Akureyri (in the extreme north) and Seydisfjordur (on the east
coast.
Two
vehicle
parks
were located
at
Lagafell (11
miles
from
Reykjavik; ammunition dumps were sited at Grotta and in the Artun-
Alatoss area: workshops were established in the Keyklavik area and at
Akureyri.
Late in 1941 after the arrival of U.S. naval forces and army forces the
British garrison was reduced and later evacuated.
No active military opera-
tions took place in Iceland.
Interest in the occupation of Iceland lies principally in the unusual nature
of the climate and terrain.
For training purposes,
special equipment not
normal for British troops was provided, namely skis, snow-shoes, sledges,
sleeping bags and down mattresses.
Blankets and oil heaters were required
in large quantities.
was a serious shortage of those items.
All coal, coke and timber had to be imported and there
Wear and tear of vehicles was heavy, particularly on tyres which had
a life of only about 6,000 miles.
the lava which covered the ground.
Wear on boots was also heavy owing to
Washing of clothes was facilitated by use of water from the hot springs
which were located in many parts of the island.
Weather conditions were bad.
work had to stop almost completely.
Spring gales were so fierce that outdoor
Working hours had to conform to the
hours of light which during the winter were from three to five and a half
hours. In the summer months the hours of darkness were few.
164
PART IV
OPERATIONS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN THEATRE
CHAPTER XI-ORDNANCE SERVICES IN THE MIDDLE EAST
1940-1943
Formation of Middle East Command
The Middle East Command, comprising Egypt, the Sudan, Palestine and
Trans-Jordan, and Cyprus, was formed in August, 1939, with General Wavell
as its first Commander-in-Chief.
the Command was war planning.
When formed the main responsibility of
Operational control rested with the respec-
tive Commanders-in-Chief in Egypt, the Sudan and Palestine.
On the outbreak of war, the C.-in-C. Middle East assumed operational
control of the troops in the Command but complete administrative control
was not assumed until June,
Until then ordnance services in Egypt
and Palestine were separately administered, each by an A.D.O.S.
In the
Sudan there was an ordnance officer who was in charge of the ordnance
depot at Khartoum and acted as ordnance adviser to H.Q. British Troops in
the Sudan.
Pre-war Ordnance Installations
The system for the supply of ordnance stores and ammunition was similar
to that in force in home commands before the war (see Chapter II).
In Egypt the command ordnance depot and workshops were at Abbassia
with a camp depot at Alexandria and ordnance dumps at El Daba, and
Mersa Matruh.
In Palestine there were two depots, one at Sarafand and one at Haifa.
The command ordnance depot at Abbassia comprised the main stores
depot and workshops, four sub-depots and an ammunition depot.
The main
depot consisted of a congested and inadequate collection of buildings with
no room for expansion, and was an easy target for air attack. It had only
one modern building, the M.T. storehouse.
This was a concrete two storied
building with insulated underground basements which were used for the
storage of tyres and rubber articles.
The ordnance dumps at El Daba and Mersa Matruh held stocks of
tentage, accommodation stores and am munition seserves for units ordered
to mobilize and operate in the Western Desert.
Ammunition was stored partly in the main depot at Abbassia and partly
in the new depot stil stodet orty in the mtin dera caves, abst eight miles
from Cairo.
Equipment Shortages
The equipment in possession of units was neither complete nor up-to-date. -
Ordnance stocks were inadequate for war.
The main
and most serious
deficiencies in holdings during 1920 were spares for recently introduced
armaments and vehicles, ruring 193h les, asp transporters and engine test
The position was aggravated by the production policy then in force
in the United Kingdom of stonning the production of spares for obsolescent
equipments before cufficiant snares wers quailable for the new tune of equin-
ments the result heing that neither the old nor the new tune of eauipment
could be adequately maintained.
165
wes 947/17
WO 277/21
18
