The total area of the A.O.D. was about 150,000 sq. ft. of covered
accommodation.
As the Force expanded and the forward reserves cor-
respondingly increased, acute storage congestion resulted as the area was
very crowded and additional storage accommodation hard to find.
Within the policy that the main bases should be located south of the
river Seine, the maintenance project provided for the establishment of a
second B.O.D. in the Rennes Area, when personnel became available, prob-
ably five or six weeks after the first landings.
The Rennes area was to
be developed as a base by permanent construction, and
September, 1939, at Bruz, some seven miles south of Rennes.
latter part of September, the War Office
suggested that the Rennes project
should be dropped and that Nantes should be developed as the main base;
but the Q.M.G., B.E.F. advocated base development in the Rennes and
Beauvais areas and the retention
important object of shortening the lines of communication.
In October the policy was altered and authority was given for No. 2 B.O.D.
to be located in the Le Havre peninsula.
The reasons for this decision were
that the area south of the river Seine was entirely agricultural and contained
no possible accommodation for No. 2 B.O.D. Further, the Admiralty insisted
on the use of the Channel ports on account of the shipping shortage and
the strain on the Royal Navy for convoy vessels imposed by the long voyage
from South Wales to the river Loire.
The French authorities had offered some 800,000 sq.
accommodation centred on Yvetot, but specified that the depot must be
This offer was rejected as inspection showed that
the accommodation was impossible, being spread over about 600 square miles
and consisting, to a large extent, of isolated barns on farms and the like.
In the meantime, the C.O.O., No. 2 B.O.D., with swift initiative by
personal contact with the President of the Compagnie Generale Transatlantique
(C.G.T.), had secured for the B.O.D. some of the finest storage accommoda-
Le Havre, including the Gare Maritime of the
520,000 sq. ft.) and other warehouses outside the dock area, totalling in all
more than 1,000,000 sq. ft. of excellent accommodation.
The lack of storage accommodation at No. 1 B.O.D. Nantes had now
become acute and it was realized that many months must elapse before
permanent accommodation in the Rennes area could be constructed.
Q.M.G. therefore ordered construction to begin at Savenay, 20 miles N.W.
of Nantes, of some of the buildings intended for Bruz, together with hutments
for personnel, etc., and immediate reconnaissance to be made of suitable
existing accommodation which could be used temporarily in the Caen area
for No. 2 B.O.D. and on the Rouen-Beauvais line for the A.O.D.
modation was found in both areas, but the French authorities were unable
to agree to its use by the B.E.F. because that at Caen was already reserved
for the use of refugees from Paris, if need be, and that at Beauvais was
outside the area allotted to the B.E.F.
operating under static conditions
At hi pric the co coon anange fold puke in the mort crore
instructions, they had already accumulated stos fomuch in excess of their
146
approved scale and far beyond the capacity of their unit transport to carry
in the event of a move.
Action was accordingly taken to restrict the field
park holdings.
It was also noted that owing to the size of army field workshops and to
the generally congested conditions in N.W. France, it was quite impossible
to find adequate sites where workshops and field parks could be located
together in really close proximity.
Reserve of Vehicles and Ordnance Stores
Ordnance field parks held, under G.H.Q. control, a proportion of the
force reserve of "B"
vehicles and G.H.Q. policy envisaged the use of these
to replace units' vehicles under repair.
It was soon realized, however, that
the supply of M.T. spares was not adequate to implement such a policy.
Moreover the War Office intimated that the vehicle
would not be able to meet heavy wastage rates from the B.E.F.
quently a scheme was evolved to conserve the Force reserve of vehicles as
much as possible during the winter months, by withdrawing a proportion
of unit vehicles to form an intermediate M.T. reserve.
The position generally of ordnance stocks and reserves at the end of
revealed that the target laid down of not less than three months'
stock in the theatre (maintenance stock two months, base reserve one month,
with one month's stock in transit) was not being reached and that, even
while no active operations were in progress, the day-to-day maintenance
requirements of the B.E.F. could not be met.
Local purchase was resorted to for non-warlike stores, but careful control
had to be exercised to keep expenditure within the limits authorized. In
addition to extensive purchases of stores, ordnance contracts were in force
for the supply of oxygen and acetylene gases for workshops, for laundry
service to hospitals and other L. of C. installations, and for cleaning and
repair of clothing.
Laundries
The chief laundry requirements were for the medical base
Dieppe, for hospitals and base depot in La Baule area and for the returned
stores depot at Doullens, which was handling considerable quantities of
summer underclothing.
Local laundry facilities had been recorded in the No. 2 Key plan as
available in Nantes.
In fact they were negligible and in
available to the B.E.F.
The machinery needed to equip ordnance laundries was not yet forth-
coming from home production.
Urgent contact arrangements had therefore
to be made.
For the Dieppe sub-area, a local laundry 35 miles away at
Rouen, washed 200,000 pieces weekly, a similar contract was arranged at
Le Havre and smaller laundries wherever possible were either taken over
or employed under contract.
Developments-October, 1939 to January, 1940
The A.O.W. moved to Arras at the end of October and was soon operat-
ing efficiently, not only on repairs for local units, but on a very high
proportion of base repairs for equipment from units in the forward areas.
WO 277/21
