The disadvantage of these depots was the difficulty of achieving security
owing to the evident impossibility of fencing in such large areas.
This
difficulty was, however, largely alleviated by the war-time patriotic spirit
of the public, who were themselves anxious to prevent interference with
the ammunition.
W.S.9.
On the formation of the Ministry of Supply, certain War Office branches,
including Director General of Armaments (D.G. of A.) and Chief Inspector
of Armaments (C.I.A.) were transferred to that Ministry-a logical move
which put all the branches dealing with research, experiment, design
production of ammunition under one unified control.
and
This however left no authority in the War Office to deal with the many
and varied technical aspects of ammunition once it was in the hands of the
(a) Issuing instructions for the handling and storage of ammunition in
the field, which superseded Magazine Regulations II.
(b) Safety regulations in permanent depots at home and abroad.
methods of proof, surveillance,
rectification, modification and disposal of ammunition.
(d) Mechanization of laboratories and repair plants.
(e) Ammunition publications: —
The scope of these publications can be judged by the increase
in the number of types and natures of ammunition, which grew
in design and requiring detailed study from the point of view of
maintenance and inspection.
The study of German and Japanese
ammunition became another of the branch's major duties, and was
the subject of special publications.
The inspection of new ammunition became necessary early in 1942, at
the peak period of output,
when many accidents were traced to faulty
assembly or manufacture.
A 1 per cent. examination of all new stocks
was, therefore, instituted and involved the examination of individual rounds
in over 120,000 tons of ammunition.
In the period May, 1943—April, 1945, 1,695 faults were revealed by
this inspection and resulted in the modification or repair of some 210,000 tons
of ammunition.
The work of rectification was considerable. For example, the 1 per cent.
inspection of one consignment alone of 25-pounder cartridges disclosed a
defect which led to the 100 per cent. examination and repair of 80,000
rounds.
The investigation
of accidents became of supreme importance.
1n1-
accident to alone standard in the penade o to even and ate ag
issue of precautionary or remedial instructions for the prevention of further
accidents of the same type.
126
Between March,
1942, and June,
1945, there were 4,660 accidents
with
country,
of
1,259
soldiers and causing injury to 6,793.
As trustees to the General Staff in
all matters relating
to the safety and serviceability of ammunition in the
widest aspects, the branch issued such instructions as it thought fit following
all accidents; as a corollary, it acted as adviser to the Claims Commission.
The branch also assumed responsibility for safety campaigns conducted
in conjunction with the B.B.C., the Press and youth organizations such as
A.T.C.
and Cadet Corps.
Apart from accidents which might be termed
a legitimate risk, many accidents occurred among the
civilian population,
and particularly among children, from interference with " blinds" on practice
"blinds" and as the result of petty pilfering from stocks stored
In 1944 there were 166 civilian deaths and more than
This meant much work in attending police courts, Home
Office consultations and conferences with the Claims Commission.
The branch also represented the War Office on inter-service committees,
and at conferences of various scientific bodies; it was also the source of
information on land service
ammunition for the Air Ministry, Admiralty,
India and the Dominions.
A vast amount of modification and repair work was undertaken, not
on old ammunition
deliveries from the
Ministry
of
This threw an unexpected strain on I.O.Os. and A.Es. and it was
to arrange with the Military College of Science and with the
Training Establishment, R.A.O.C., for double the number of courses at first
During the war 31 I.O.Os. Courses and 99 A.Es. Courses were
run, resulting in some 400 I.O.Os. and 1,800 A.Es. being trained, but
nevertheless there always seemed to be a shortage.
As each home command held 20,000 tons of ammunition, it was necessary
to reinforce command ammunition personnel with mobile ammunition repair
invaluable for
maintaining
stocks in a serviceable
In War Office controlled depots, laboratories and repair factories were
The C.A.Ds. each employed about 80 soldiers and 100 to 130
A.T.S. on repair work.
The latter received a basic ammunition course and
the brighter and more apt auxiliaries then received a more intensive course
and were graded as Assistant A.Es.
The amount of ammunition modified in ordnance depots was 320,000
tons and
some of the largest
tasks undertaken
were modifications to
5,500,000 3-inch trench
mortar bombs, 2,000,000 rounds of 3.7-inch A.A.
and 2,000,000 rounds of 25-pounder.
To plan this work and allot priorities,
a Committee was formed which met once a month, allotted tasks to each
depot and progressed the work systematically.
Ammunition services in United Kingdom commands
When the War Office organized the second phase of ammunition supply
by establishing A.S.Ds. of 20,000 tons and capable of vast expansion, the
small anti-invasion ammunition depots were handed over to Northern,
WO 277/21
18
