STATARS
0, S003
East
In July, 1942, it was decided to bring vehicles from North America into
Africa
Atlantic coast to Nairobi.
using the land route from Mutadi (Belgian Congo) on the
were moved by
In most instances, vehicles arrived cased and
rail and river transport to Paulis and Aketi.
There the
vehicles were assembled by Belgian civilian labour and were then driven to
Juba (Sudan),
on the Nile,
Command.
Ferrying to
where they were handed over to East Africa
Nairobi
using a complete
carried out mainly by
E.A.A.S.C.
general transport company of Rhodesian native drivers.
The distance from Paulis to Nairobi was approximately 1,200 miles.
method
of transporting vehicles, although
This
shipping, involved a large number of handlings.
effecting a definite saving in
East Africa as a Training Base
The decision to use East African troops in the Far East changed the
role of the Command from garrison duties to that of training and mobilizing
a modern division.
This programme affected Ordnance in several ways.
New war equipment tables had to be produced and large numbers of
African tradesmen trained.
The building programme for the B.O.D. at Nairobi never caught up with
the influx of stores, and the " shack-cum-tarpaulin"
development had to be
greatly extended.
A new B.A.D. was built during 1943.
Situated at Gilgil,
it was planned to accommodate 35,000 tons including 10,000 tons of R.A.F.
ammunition. During this year the re-organization, including the absorption
of the M.T. commitments of the E.A.A.S.C., was completed.
The B.O.D.
then comprised a headquarters, three sub-depots, a returned stores depot
and a vehicle depot.
The A.O.Ds. were organized on a similar basis.
The formation of the 11th (E.A.) Division Ordnance Field Park for
overseas service, and the introduction of Ordnance Stores Sections for attach-
ment to workshops necessitated such a withdrawal of personnel from depots
that it became necessary to introduce English-speaking Africans as clerks
and storemen.
This was only partially successful, but it did enable a slight
reduction to be made in European man-power.
The arrival, in March, 1943, of a draft of A.T.S. considerably relieved
the shortage of clerical staff and by the end of that year the Ordnance staff
position was: -
Officers
British O.Rs.
810
A. T.S.
116
Africans and Asiatics
4,308
In February, 1945, D.D.O.S. decided to re-organize his installations on
lines suitable for a static command.
The number of A.O.Ds., etc., was
reduced.
The general disbandment of units throughout the Command mean-
while had led to new commitments, but these were satisfactorily dealt with.
The Madagascar Campaign
The occupation of Diego Suarez began in the early hours of 6th May,
The R.A.O.C. contingent accompanying the Force was under the
rection of an A.U.O.s. and consisted of an ordnance beach detachment
(U.b.D.) and a workshops detachment, the O.B.D. contailed bota stores
and ammunition sections.
67612
309
L2
