DUS
considerable: unrivalled port facilities, a shorter L. of C., and a choice of
ready-made and permanent storehouses and offices.
The decision of the D.O.5. to keep his fourth A.O.D. in reserve and
not commit it in the carly days to an operational role from which it might
be difficult to withdraw, proved to be a wise one.
As a result, 15 A.O.D.
was available to get the new location ready in the
Antwerp base while
MAO D, its original role completed, was soon at liberty to supplement
the personnel for the new base.
On 4th September, Antwerp was entered by units of the lIth Armoured
Division.
While the town was still under shell-fire from German positions
on the opposite side of the Scheldt, the reconnaissance party of 15 A.O.D.
arrived to site the new. depot.
By their early arrival,
secure many premises
which required only a minimum
they were able to
of R.E. services
to make them fit for use as ordnance storehouses and offices.
By the end
of October, most of the units of 17 A.O.D. had joined the 15 A.O.D. com-
panies already on the spot.
The new depot soon took shape: buildings
were planned, constructional changes made, roads and sheds swept clear
of enemy demolitions and dumps,
civilian staff found and engaged and
trained in schools of instruction.
Since D-Day, the ordnance requirements
of our Armies had multiplied with the arrival of vast reinforcements. Accord-
ingly, the D.O.S. decided that as soon as 14 A.O.D. ceased making issues,
the personnel of 16 A.O.D. (who were temporarily helping there) would
be merged in the new enterprise.
In addition an increment that had been
sent out from England to assist 14 A.O.D. would be available.
Ultimately, therefore, 15/17 A.O.D. (as it became known), strengthened
by the arrival of 16 A.O.D. and the increment, had an establishment equiva-
lent to that of three and a half A.O.Ds.
in reserve, for any fresh emergency that might present itself, 14 A.O.D.
in its entirety.
temporarily assigned the formidable task of cleaning-up the old A.O.D.
sites in the R.M.A. by sending surplus stores forward to Antwerp, or back
to the United Kingdom, according to a planned programme.
were required in the Advanced Base were sent there to minimize shipping
from the United Kingdom, while those which were not so required, but
were needed by the United Kingdom for other theatres, were shipped back.
The remainder were placed in care and preservation pending final decision
on their disposal.
It was known in September that the Scheldt
mines in time for the despatch of 15/17 A.O.D.'s initial stock from the
Main Base to Antwerp by sea.
Arrangements were therefore made for the
shipments to be consigned to Dieppe and Ostend, so that as much stocking.
up of the Antwerp depot as possible could be done, pending the opening
of the port.
By Ist November, stores from England began to arrive, and at the same
time surplus stores from 17 A.O.D.
were sent forward
By 14th November, about 3,000 tons had been received,
and by the end of the month receipts totalled nearly 13,000 tons.
month of December, when stores continued to flow
through these three
sources, and a powerful impetus was afforded by the opening of Antwerp
port, receipts for the four-week period rocketed to 43,000 tons.
At the same time, large numbers of Belgian clerks and storemen were
being instructed in ordnance duties.
An advantage
denied to the earlier
A.O.Ds. and one which exceeded expectations was the very high propor-
tion of these Belgian civilians who spoke English fluently.
It became a
stipulation that clerks should be engaged only if they could both speak
and write English, and no difficulty was met in finding sufficient numbers.
In all depots schools were opened at which new intakes of civilian staff
were given courses of instruction not only in the specialist job earmarked
for them but in related clerical and storehouse functions.
This policy had previously been pursued in the R.M.A. where courses
in ordnance
procedure were given in French.
The advantage of having
sufficient time to adopt and elaborate this instruction in the Advanced Base
was seen immediately the A.O.D. began operation, when the civilian staff
went about their tasks with foreknowledge of what was expected of them.
A constant review of the range of items being received and binned showed
that by the beginning of the New Year the issues load for 21 Army Group
could
taken
over.
It was planned to take over issues to the First
Canadian Army on 1st January, 1945, the British Second Army ten days
later, and the L. of C. troops by 22nd January, 1945.
It was found possible
to adhere to these target dates.
This take-over was achieved smoothly and
easily; the
breaking down of the commitment into three stages was a
lesson learnt from the experience of 14 A.O.D., which had assumed respon-
sibility for issues to the whole of the theatre in one day, a step which neces-
sitated the United Kingdom Main Base Depots carrying on certain issues of
stores actually held by 14 A.O.D. until personnel in that depot had settled
down to their tasks.
15-17 A.O.D.
• was now operating as planned.
By the end of January,
receipts had still further increased to 83,000 tons for the month.
Issues
in this first month of operations amounted to the remarkable figure of 60,000
tons of stores.
The advantages of having the depot sited in permanent
buildings well forward on the L. of C., and the possession of port facilities
on a grand scale nearby,
were apparent and resulted in improved avail-
ability and quicker deliveries to units.
The
slower
"build-up" of the
A.O.D., plus usage experience gained earlier in the campaign, were other
telling factors.
During January a total of
191,000 items were demanded.
By March
this figure had risen to 469,000.
With this ever-growing commitment, further
accommodation
and staff had to be found.
The advantage of having
" school-trained" civilians was now obvious, new personnel could be intro-
duced to work under others experienced in the work, while the military
staff were free to carry
on general control and supervision.
Some idea
of the task
hourly
task performed in those critical days, punctuated as they were by
weapon bombardment,
may be gathered from the figures of
tonnage handled in the month
of March.
Receipts during that period
reached 112,000 tons and issues had soared to 97,000 tons, compared with
83,000 and 60,000 respectively in January.
In November, 1944, 3,900 military and civilians had set to work to
get the depot ready.
In April, 1945,
nearly 13,000 people were
employed.
In November, the A.O.D. occupied 1,250,000 square feet
249
~029477
17
WO 277/21.
18
