n Christmas Day 1943, at the Tunis conference, it was decided that the
ult on Anzio was a pressing necessity, that full resources must be made
available ey plans should accordingly be laid immediatel event the aim of
available, especially an adequate supply of Landing
Ships
Tanks (L.S.Ts.),
launching the operation on 20th January, 1944.
In the event the assault
laune sit sail from Naples on 21st January: the landings were swiftly and
large quantities of ammunition and stores were rushed ashore.
succestilly achieved and, immediately following th atroops and vehicles,
For the initial ordnance maintenance of this operation 2, 5 and 8 O.B.Ds.
were detailed, later handing over to 511 A.O.D. to continue the supply of
ordnance stores, and to 21 A.A.D. for ammunition.
The stores and ammuni-
tion were loaded into lorries and the laden lorries then embarked at Naples
into landing craft, which proceeded overnight to Anzio, where the lorries
delivered their loads direct from landing craft to the beach dumps.
This
system was simple and quick, cut out double handling and greatly facilitated
the maintenance task.
During the first few months that the Anzio force held the beach-head the
whole area was under enemy shell fire and the A.A.D.
therefore adopted
a system of storing ammunition in very small stacks (3-6 tons), adequately
distanced, in order to minimize losses.
In the result very few stacks were hit.
By the end of January, 1944, the first allied attack designed to break out
from the Anzio area and seize the high ground of Colli Laziali had been
thwarted, and early in February the enemy launched heavy counter attacks.
These were repulsed and the beach-head defences stood firm.
16th
February the enemy resumed his attempt to throw back our beach-head forces
into the sea, by massed attacks which continued throughout four days.
Although some penetration of our defences was made, the attacks were
decisively repulsed, and again on 29th February renewed attacks were flung
back with heavy losses.
At this time, although it remained the first task in allied strategy to
join the main forces with the beach-head and to go on to Rome, it was
becoming evident that no early break-out from the beach-head would be
possible.
There followed the consolidation of the beach-head and the
urgent build-up of reserves.
Ammunition reserves in 21 A.A.D. were in-
creased to 19,000 tons and the need for dispersed storage in a confined area
under shell fire created unusual features; for example, the guns of medium
batteries were actually sited inside the ammunition depot, between the
ammunition stacks
During the investment of Anzio by the enemy,
A.A.D., under trying conditions, carried out a large amount of inspection
and repair, including the task, which was completed in two days, of converting
28,000 3-inch mortar bombs to meet a call for long range bombs.
On the main front, up till the end of March, 1944, repeated and deter-
mined attacks caused heavy casualties and battle wastage of material.
Fierce
and skilled enemy opposition, aided by exceptionally adverse wintry
ditions in country especially ideal for defence, had halted the allied offen-
sive, in particular stopping any breach of the key defences of Cassino.
During the whole winter period ordnance services were hard at work
in develop the depole winter period oshance facig battle wastage and in
building up reserves for the future offensive.
In view of the trend of events
198
and the indication of a slow advance, the initial ordnance plan regarding
base stores installations was reviewed in February, 1944, and the important
decision made to change the role of 557 A.O.D. to a B.O.D.
This in effect
meant the creation of a large permanent base depot stocked with the full
range of ordance stores required in the theatre.
By 15th March, 1944,
557 B.O.D. was sufficiently developed and stocked to take on the issue of
all classes of ordnance stores to all formations and units in the Force.
At this time, in preparation for the resumption of the offensive in the
spring, a novel and somewhat daring decision was taken to site 501 A.A.D.
well forward, at Mignano, a few miles behind Cassino, and, in fact, in front
of the medium artillery.
In this location the depot came under enemy fire,
but by well dispersed storage in small stacks, serious losses by enemy action
in both personnel and ammunition were avoided, the advantage of holding
ammunition reserves well forward being amply proved later when the spring
offensive was successfully launched.
It was in March, 1944, that the R.A.O.C. organization for supplying
replacement vehicles was drastically altered.
At the outset there were two
vehicle companies, each a component part of a standard A.O.D., and each
operating separately.
The D.O.S. decided that the vehicle companies should
be divorced from the A.O.Ds. and combined into one unit with headquarters
at Naples in direct telephonic communication with A.F.H.Q.
Further details
regarding the vehicle organization are given
later.
Cassino to Pisa-Rimini Line, May, 1944, to March, 1945
In May, 1944, the allied offensive on the main front was resumed and
the enemy key defences of Cassino were breached.
Simultaneously the long
deferred break-out from the Anzio beach-head was effected.
There followed
the capture of Rome and Eighth Army's swift advance unchecked till the
allies reached the Pisa-Rimini line.
For ordnance services, the advance called for the rapid and progressive
forward movement of vehicle parks and ammunition dumps.
The whole
organization,
including ordnance field parks,
store convoy
units and the
sections of the ordnance maintenance company,
worked
under
extreme
Mossule to maintain
efficient forward flow
of stores, ammunition and
vehicles to replace the heavy battle wastage.
There was no respite until
the allied advance was checked on
the Pisa-Rimini line.
The decision to place 13 Corps under command of U.S. Fifth Army
created a new administrative problem, requiring rapid improvisation to meet
a novel set of maintenance commitments which could not have been foreseen.
For administration, a British increment was added to headquarters U.S. Fifth
Army, the increment including for ordnance
services, a branch analogous
to that of a D.D.O.S. Army, and two new R.A.O.C. units were extemporized
to operate as an Army troops ordnance field park and an ordnance main-
tenance company.
In anticipation of the advance it had been planned to instal a new A.O.D.
at Ancona and the A.O.D. advance party entered Ancona within 48 hours
of its capture.
25 A.A.D. had meanwhile moved forward and established
a depot at Arezzo.
199
we2747/17
WO 277/21
28
