pg_0002.pdf:
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
or su out il be questi, throughube whethe ar no, to the diary stored by ost be D..
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries o
heir formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experienc
in regard to weapons,
equipment, tactics, organisation and inter-service
co-operation which
may be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
A war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
on A.F. C. 2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4. —In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(li) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
7 of mobilisation or
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
abordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
ments (Sec. 36), and
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
d his representatives.
y, war duties will be
PARA. .—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field retúrn (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
Appendices will be
umbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author.
References
o appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
(iv) Copies or important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H.Q.
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached.
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
orwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c G.H.Q
transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office
The duplicate copies of
he diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the officer 1/c
and Echelon to be transmitted to records offices at home for safe custody
SPECIAL NOTE. The time entered should be the time the information or order reaches
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known.
Instructions regarding War Diaries
and Intelligenc
are contained in F.S. Regs.,
War Diaries will be enclosed in A.F
this
not
avalla ole.
Summaries,
the
cover
prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year.
August 1944•
Place
Date
Hour
In the Field
1 Aug
SHET I
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form C. 2118
Unit 90 Coy RASC (Armd Bde - Assault) •
Commanding Officer Major JeR. Cuthbertson MC.
References to Appendices
3
4
5/9 Aug
10 Aug
Nothing to report.
It R.L, TOULMIN (165577) reported from Y Sub Unit 34 RIU to fill ofricer
vacancy in this Coy ("B" P1) •
Rations delivered to 3/4 COUNTY OF IONDON YEO, Residue, temporarily under
admin cond of Bde.
Since 29 Jul this Coy's only transport cormitments have been in respect of
daily delivert of Supplies and small deliveries of POL to Ede residues,
consisting of Bde IQ (incl Sigs Sqn), 1-ERY and 266 Fwd Dely Sqn.
Coy largely engaged on maintenance, vehicle overhaul and training.
Remainder of "A" Pl joined existing 2 Sections detached at RUCQUEVILIE on
instructions of CRASC 22 Ipt Coln.
Nothing to report.
On orders from CRASC 22 Tpt Coln "A" & "B" Pls under comd of CAFT D.M. ROBERTSON
moved at 1200 hrs to an advanced location in 53 Div Area at AVENAY (Ir EVRACY) 944582.
With effect their arrival, these Pls come under the temporary operation cond of
CRASC 53 Div for the purpose of troop carrying for a Bde of that Div during
impending operations.
#6391. Wt.48123/1073. 31931. 2/43. Wy.L.P. Gp.656,
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No.
1.9 SEP 1944
G. H:Q. 2nd Echelen

