Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
A.T.S. on the march (1940).
[British Official Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER
ARMY
The Story of the A.T.S
by
EILEEN BIGLAND
LONDON
NICHOLSON & WAISON
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
All Rights Reserved.
First Published in 1946 by
Nicholson & Watson, 26 Manchester Square, London, W.r.
HEMARY
030 2 5 1990
CINVERSITY OF TORCHIN
This Book is produced in complete
conformity with the Authorised
Economy Standards
Printed by Love & Malcomson, Ltd.,
London and Redhill
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
To the officers and other ranks of
the Auxiliary Territorial Service.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author's most grateful thanks are due to Public
Relations Branch, the War Office for according her all
facilities; to Mrs. L. V. L. E. Whately, C.B.E., Director,
A.T.S., for allowing her to visit so many A.T.S. establish-
ments ; and to General Sir Walter Kirke, G.C.B., C.M.G.,
D.S.O., D.L., J.P., for his kind interest in this book.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I ...
II
.. •
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
.. •
.. •
...
IX
...
X
XI
XII
XIIII
XIV
...
XV ...
PAGE
• THE BIRTH OF A SERVICE
9
THE TESTING TIME
20
"WE SEND THEM THE ARMOUR"
32
THEY HELP THE ARMY MARCH
49
...
THE UNSUNG
71
'"*.
... Аск-Аск
76
"THE BRIGHT EYES OF DANGER"
95
..•
"THE BACK ROOM GIRLS" 107
...
PRELUDE TO INVASION
121
•••
THE MERCURY GIRLS
133
AND STILL THEY DRIVE
144
...
"'UNWILLINGLY TO SCHOOL" 149
NORMANDY AND BEYOND 163
...
PREPARING FOR CIVVY STREET
174
ENVOI 188
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
CHAPTER I
THE BIRTH OF A SERVICE
I
ON September 9th, 1938, the Auxiliary Territorial Service,
under the leadership of Dame Helen Gwynne-Vaughan,
G.B.E., L.L.D., D.Sc., came into being by Royal Warrant,
and on September 27th this fact was publicly announced.
The announcement (as was proved a bare year later)
fired large numbers of young women to volunteer for
training so that they might be of service to their country
in the event of war; but it is doubtful if the British
public as a whole paid much attention to it. Everyone
was suffering from that state of nervous tension known as
"Munich jitters." Radio and newspapers poured out a
spate of news-vital, terrifying, breath-taking news, and
nobody had time to give much heed to what a pack of
girls were doing. All their energies were concentrated
upon wondering what Adolf Hitler was going to do.
I confess I shared in this intense preoccupation. It was
not until two months later, when a couple of women with
shopping-bags squeezed into the already crowded com-
partment of a London-bound train, that I remembered
the existence of the baby A.T.S.
"My," said the first, "you'll never guess what our
Betty's done now!"
"What?" asked the second.
Came home destina yas it sha as liary, hate, eritis,
she says, 'I've joined the Army!' 'Army?' I says,
'whatever rubbish are you talking now?' 'It's true,
9
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
10
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
she says, "and then she shoves a lot of papers under my
nose. I tell you, you could have knocked me down witl
a feather !"*
Her friend made sympathetic noises. "There now
don't you go upsetting yourself. It'll turn out to be just
one of those Youth Clubs they talk about. Whoever
heard of such a thing? Women joining the Army !"'
"That's what Dad said when I told him first, and he was
four years in the trenches in the last lot, so he ougnt to
know. But when he read those papers he carried on
alarming—there it was in black and white, parades and
camps and goodness knows what, and a long bit about how
they'd put themselves under military law if they had to go
on active service."
The compartment rustled into life. Someone said
that the Girl Guides were carrying a joke a bit too far
altogether; another suggested the whole trouble had
started when women were given, the vote; a third
remarked anyone might think we were living in Russia,
and a fourth that camp life would be a blessing if it removed
some of the paint and lipstick with which the young
women smeared their faces.
It was left to an old gentleman in the corner to prick
the bubble of argument. "Stuff and nonsense," he
said. "Everyone knows there isn't going to be a war!"
The compartment subsided and a faint breath of relief
fanned across it.
"Didn't I tell you?" said Betty's-mother's-friend.
"Worrying about nothing. That's you all over ! "
"M'm, I daresay I was a bit stupid. To tell the truth
I was that taken aback I forgot Mr. Chamberlain had
been to see that Hitler and settled everything so nicely.
And our Dad took on so, not about the war, you know,
but this camping idea. Our Betty's always been one for
chills, and sleeping in a tent will do her no good, and
She and her friend began a muttered conversation in
which the words "wet feet," "infection," "delicate
stomach" kept recurring, while the rest of the compart-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
11
ment crackled newspapers and I stared miserably out of
the window.
I had wandered too long in Europe and elsewhere to
share their easy optimism about peace in our time and
my sympathies were all with the unknown Betty. She
and her kind had shown a certain courage-even in 1938
it wasn't so simple to fly in the faces of Mum and Dad
and the ribald comments of friends. Maybe they had
been caught up by the glamour of adventure and had no
notion of why they were doing this thing, or what the
phrase "active service" implied, or how they would tackle
it when they met it; but somehow their spirit seemed
supremely right. Other people were either full of com-
placency regarding averted danger or full of gloomy
forebodings: these children were bent on preparing for
any eventuality.
Their efforts might not be successful. Having witnessed
rehearsal of the present war I had no illusions about
hopeful bands of volunteers ; indeed, I couldn't imagine
how any such, particularly of my own sex, could hope to
avert, or even mitigate, the appalling horrors of modern
warfare. If I could have seen forward to 1945 I might
have altered my view ; but the future was a black cavern
into which I dared not look and I reverted to my dismal
thinking until the train drew into Waterloo and a little
man next me groped in the rack for his hat.
"Funny," all this outcry about women in the Army,"
he said.
"Why, soldiers' wives served in the Peninsular
War.''
"'That's a far cry?"
"Yes, yes."
(I still remember his little deprecating
cough.) "But it was a beginning, you know, a
beginning.
II
As I write this book about the Auxiliary Territorial
Service I recall his words and realise how true they were,
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
12
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
because if one wishes to study the history and tradition
behind the khaki-clad girls of today one has to go right
back to the year 1808, when the British determined to
free Spain and Portugal from Napoleon's dominion.
under the Duke of Wellington were accompanied, in mang
cases, by their wives, these women being "on the married
strength'' of the various regiments. In no sense of the
word were these women camp-followers (perhaps that fact
requires stressing) and their jobs were varied and arduous.
Besides the more ordinary tasks of cooking, washing and
mending for their menfolk they often undertook nursing
duties, despite their ignorance of medical matters, in
conditions which must have been deplorable; and they
also sought for and allotted billets as the troops moved
from place to place.
They were the pioneers of their sex so far as service with
the Army was concerned. Sick and fevered in the summer
heat, cold and wet in the winter snow, fatigued and ill-
clothed and debilitated by an existence which tried the
strongest of the soldiers, they trekked gamely back and
forth across the Peninsula for six weary years. They got
no medals, no praise; indeed, it is doubtful whether
anybody outside their immediate families understood what
they had gone through. A few died from hardship
and the remainder returned, many as widows, tattered and
forlorn, to England and obscurity. They never knew,
that regiment of women, that they had laid a foundation
stone on which successive generations were to build.
But in the early 1830's a young English girl asked eager
questions about their work-especially about their nursing
activities. Her name was Florence Nightingale and she
was, in that day and age, far removed from the wives of
serving soldiers, for her father was a landed proprietor and
she was expected to conform to the strict rules governing
young ladies of her upbringing. She might take the
vapours if she would, but she must not hanker after
knowledge of human suffering. She might sail gloriously
through a London Season to become the decorous bride
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
13
of a respected baronet, but she must not strive to find
out how the other half of the world lived.
One can imagine with what misgivings the friends of
Florence Nightingale viewed her early likes and dislikes !
A girl-child who preferred bandaging the paw of a
shepherd's dog to dancing was simply incomprehensible,
while a débutante who forsook the London Season in
order to haunt hospitals and reformatories was really a
being beyond the pale.
Fortunately for humanity, her parents were strangely
sensible and gave their odd daughter a free rein. Avidly
she dug up details of the medical service with the Army
in the Peninsular War and studied conditions in many
hospitals and institutions both here and abroad. What
she learnt of England's backwardness in nursing and
sanitation revolted her so much that she went as a student
first to the Institute of Protestant Deaconesses at
Kaiserswerth and then to Paris, where the Sisters of
St. Vincent de Paul taught her a great deal concerning
hospital management.
She used both knowledge and money freely in the
reorganising of an extremely badly run Sanatorium for
Governesses, but far from being satisfied her restless
ardent spirit longed for the chance to do more and in
1854 came the report on the needless and horrible
sufferings of British sick and wounded in the Crimea.
As Florence Nightingale herself said, this was " the
trumpet-call of duty." Immediately she wrote to Sidney
Herbert,
then Secretary of War, offering her services.
Most curiously (considering the date) this letter crossed one
of his containing a request that she proceed to the Crimea,
and on October 24th, with a staff of thirty-seven nurses,
she set sail on her great mission. Through it she not only
prepared the way for the inauguration of a recognised
Military Nursing Service but also gained material for her
book Notes on Nursing which revolutionised nursing
methods in this country.
The foundations of a service of women helping the
Army in time of war were now well and truly laid, but for
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
a long time there was little further progress or expansion.
Following the South African War in 1902 Florence
Nightingale's Nursing Service was reorganised under the
title of Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing
Service, and in 1909 the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry
(F.A.N.Y.) came into being, a corps whose shoulder
flashes are still familiar to us but whose work has so
vastly changed with the growing mechanisation of modern
warfare that it is almost startling to recall that only
thirty-six years ago they were "horsewomen who under-
took to ride on to the battlefield and carry the wounded
back to medical help ! ,,
Tending the sick and wounded remained the only form
of service with the Army open to women until the
declaration of war against Germany in 1914. Then a new
corps called the Women's Volunteer Reserve was formed,
and it came in for a deal of criticism from the ignorant
since its members wore khaki and indulged in rather a lot
of drilling. Perhaps they were a little over-anxious to
impress their self-imposed military status on the public
mind, bay i gim a so dier the is who resent him
dignity of womanhood" could not have seen them at work,
for this consisted of a variety of drab and menial tasks
which, incidentally, had been performed by women in
private life for centuries without any criticism from
anybody.
The Women's Volunteer Reserve "ran" innumerable
canteens. That is to say, they scrubbed endless floors,
tables and benches, washed up endless piles of greasy
dishes, cooked and served endless meals to the accom-
paniment of "fish and chips four times-and make it
slippy, miss." They were a purely voluntary organisation
and most of them did their jobs in time spared from their
paid work or home duties, often going straight from a
canteen night-shift to their offices. Like their sisters of a
hundred years earlier they got no medals and no pay;
but it is pleasant to record the social advance of Mr.
Thomas Atkins during that period, for gradually these
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
15
women of 1914 became the recipients of a somewhat
grudging meed of praise from him-perhaps because they
were not "on the married strength."
By 1915 there was an acute shortage of trained cooks in
the Army and with all the goodwill in the world the
Women's Volunteer Reserve could not cope with the
requests for cooks which poured in, so it was decided to
form the Women's Legion. This was not, as is sometimes
thought, a military organisation. It was a purely private
society which any cooks and waitresses might join, and
from it they were hired by the War Department. It held,
however, very great significance. Through it, for the
first time, the Army were paying for female labour other
than that of the nursing profession.
And very soon the Army wanted more women... and
more women. All through the dark year of 1916 the
seriousness of the man-power situation grew and in the
December the Commander-in-Chief of the British Armies
in France agreed to accept women for duty in back areas.
With a celerity which would have been impossible a brief
two years before the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps
(W.A.A.C.) was established.
Mrs. Chalmers Watson,
C.B.E., M.D., sister to Auckland and Eric Geddes, was
its senior officer, and Mrs. Gwynne-Vaughan its Chief
Controller Overseas.
It had been proved that some 12,000 soldiers engaged in
non-combatant duties connected with the lines of com-
munication in France could be replaced by women, and
on March 31st, 1917, the first draft of W.A.A.C.'s arrived
to take over these duties.*
They were so successful that
they were quickly followed by other contingents, and by
the early summer of 1918, when the corps was renamed
demobilisation took place no fewer than 57,000 had
passed through the ranks. They were of all types, all
classes. They worked in amity, proving Kipling's con-
tention that "the Colonel's lady and Judy O'Grady are
sisters under their skins''-and behind them stretched the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
16
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
long procession of women who had laboured that their
successors might have the right to serve with the Army.
III
Nineteen hundred and nineteen was a year in which
women were praised and rewarded for their work under
active service conditions; 1934 presented a very different
picture. War was a thoroughly unpopular topic. People
shuddered at the bare mention of the word and told each
other fiercely that the European barometer was at set fair,
so the group of women who announced a proposal to
organise a new Women's Legion which would be available
for duty under the direction of the War Office or other
Government Departments were regarded with a con-
siderable amount of distaste. Old gentlemen in clubs
shook their heads and talked of "war-mongers." Left
(and other) Wing intellectuals spoke loftily of "ex-
hibitionists" and "'Imperialistic Die-Hards." The average
man in the street vaguely remembered the Bright Young
Things of the 1920's and said you never knew what
"high society women" would be up to next. Then the
excitement died as excitements do and people said that
women were always silly creatures, and thought about
something else.
Quietly and without undue fuss, the council of the new
Women's Legion went on with their plans. It operated
under the leadership of Lady Londonderry and had Dame
Helen Gwynne-Vaughan as Chairman, and its first activity
was to enrol members for training in anti-gas precautions.
One might have thought that the public's contemptuous
indifference to the scheme would have killed it at birth,
but this was far from being the case and by 1936 the
Women's Legion, a small yet thriving child, was sub-
mitting plans for an Officers' Training Section to the War
Office and the Air Ministry, together with requests for
advice and support.
Both were granted and Authority was extremely helpful.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
17
Courses of lectures for potential officers were arranged and
a large summer camp. was held at Hemel Hempstead—
much to the alarm of some of its inhabitants, while parents
whose daughters indulged in this unusual form of summer
holiday explained defensively that so-and-so had always
liked an open-air life and anyway it wasn't doing her any
harm.
As a baby outgrows its clothes so the new Women's
Legion outgrew its planned limitations, and at a meeting
of the Officers, Training Section it was decided to close
the existing organisation and to carry on a more ambitious
and extensive programme under the name of the
Emergency Service, which received recognition from both
the Army Council and the Air Council, as a voluntary
organisation, the purpose of which is to train women as officers
for any women's corps that may be employed on duties other
than nursing in a national emergency.
The rechristened child throve so well and began to
grow so sturdy that in 1937 discussions took place as to
its future, and it was decided tentatively to expand the
Service right away so that training of N.C.O.'s and other
ranks might be undertaken, while more discussions were
arranged to work out the lines on which a far bigger
Women's corps-already hinted at in the official recog-
nition-might be organised.
Then came the Munich crisis and the Royal Warrant
of September 9th. The baby of many names who had
struggled so tenaciously against a variety of difficulties
was now a definite and official being-the Auxiliary
Territorial Service.
Thanks to the foresight of the Women's Legion the
new Service had a nucleus of trained officers to draw upon,
but the number of volunteers was so large and consequent
B
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
18
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
development so swift that the leaders had to use all their
experience and skill to cope with the situation by the
spring of 1939. Companies were formed in each county
under the direction of County Commandants and while
these were hard at work training, officers up and down the
country were attending courses, with the result that over a
thousand of them had received instruction before the
outbreak of war. Camps were organised so that the
A.T.S. might become accustomed to military procedure
and atmosphere and, more important still, learn how
officers and other ranks could work together smoothly and
efficiently. Just to make things a shade more difficult
when everybody was striving to compress three months'
work into a week and the majority of the volunteers could
only give their spare time or holidays to the job, these
camps were deluged by the worst downpours of rain
known in England for many summers and Auxiliaries
who had held bright visions of a little brisk P.T. under a
benign sun found themselves slithering through the mud
to leaky tents which dripped under a leaden sky.
They took discomfort gallantly, those thousands of
girls who had, like "our Betty,"
offered their services to
their country. As one of them said to me long afterwards,
"It was simply everything we thought it wouldn't be. We
hated the first three days, then we settled down and when
we broke camp we wept salt tears at the thought of going
home. We'd got tough, you see-Gosh, by the second
week| was eating like a horse, and then-oh, I can't
explain but you sort of got down to essentials in camp
and forgot to worry about trifles.
She had something there. For myself I think that early
month in camp gave her the moral stiffening necessary to
carry her through the far more strenuous times she has
known since.
Taken all round, the A.T.S. had a feverish first year.
There was a constant stream of recruits to deal with ;
there was any amount of vital training to be got through ;
until the summer of 1939 there was the R.A.F. to serve
as well as the Army... and all the time the Auxiliary
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
19
organisers had to plan for expansion and more expansion.
They planned well. When crisis came again and the
Auxiliaries were called to "action stations" they were
ready, trained and quietly eager, and it is a matter of just
pride to the A.T.S. that on September 3rd, Britain's
declaration of war was transmitted by a woman operator.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER II
THE TESTING TIME
On the eve of the outbreak of war 17,000 Auxiliaries had
enrolled, pledging themselves to serve their country in
whatever capacity and at whatever place the authorities
desired. Their number was significant; but for my part
I feel that the most important part of their voluntary
action is one which the majority of the public do not
realise even now. These early volunteers "signed on for
the duration" without having the foggiest idea of their
possible rates of pay, as these were not fixed until general
mobilisation took place.
The Auxiliaries of 1939 had had a sense of high
adventure to help carry them through initial difficulties
and problems, and when they swung from part-time
training in peace to whole-time service in war they were
Keyed n to ty highest posible this is way we drilled
and cooked, checked stores and scrubbed, learnt about
signals and Army records, tinkered with lorries and motor-
cycles. Fine-we're ready for anything! Air-raids,
gas-attacks, invasion !''
And nothing happened.
When people have worked at fever-heat for a specific
purpose and that purpose fails to materialise they are
apt to suffer a rather grim reaction. It says a very great
20
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
deal for the A.T.s. that they kept both pluck and en-
thusiasm during the weary months of the "phoney" war.
They went on with the various jobs allotted to them
without any sign of boredom and as autumn deepened into
an exceptionally hard winter they tussled with a series of
discomforts which made the previous summer's camping
interlude appear positively roseate.
They developed an uncanny knowledge of Nissen huts
and their vagaries.
Roofs which let in the rain, stoves
which either refused to burn or successfully kippered the
hut's inhabitants, ill-fitting doors and floor-boards which
encouraged all the winds of heaven, bunks which were
concave or convex but never flat, ablution blocks where the
hot water taps ran icy cold or froze up altogether.
"And yet we didn't mind awfully," said one after
recounting her story of that winter.
"We were all in the
same boat, which made it fun; and then it was a new
experience none of us had had before. I mean, we're
awfully poor at home, but we'd always been warm
anyway. And I'll be ever so useful in the house when this
lot's over! I can lag pipes and thaw frozen ones with a
blowlamp; I can make any stove in creation burn; I
know exactly how to sling a tarpaulin under a leaky roof
or stuft wads of paper between draughty floor-boards.
Oh, and I can eat anything at any time."
Besides this valuable knowledge the first months of
war taught her and her companions something even more
important-understanding of human nature. In one hut
or dormitory there might be twenty or thirty girls with
entirely different backgrounds and violently different views
on food, health, love and life in general all thrown
together in close propinquity. Under such conditions
petty snobbishnesses and antagonisms quickly dis-
appeared. The girl from the English Public School
discovered that the girl who had started work in a factory
at fourteen was a generous creature of sensitive mind ;
the factory girl found that the Public School one hadn't
an atom of "swank" about her. The mannequin made
friends with the university graduate; the housewife dis-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
22
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
cussed the price of stockings with the shop assistant;
the secretary got tips on make-up from the beauty
specialist.
"The odd thing was," said one, "how frank we became
with each other. In civvy street you'd' hesitate to tell
another girl that her little habits-like tappingher teeth
with a pencil or fiddling with her hair-drive you frantic.
In the A.T.S. you just tell her plunk out. . It goes deeper
than that too. Everybody trots out their private worries,
something to do with home life, or money, or love
affairs- even skeletons in cupboards; and we all give
whatever advice we can think up."
"Being with the men so much has done us an awful
lot of good," said another thoughtfully. "Most of us
had husbands or fiancés or brothers, I know, but we
hadn't had to work side by side with them on the same
job. In the Army you develop a kind of feeling of
comradeship with men that it's very difficult to get in
peace-time,
women do."and you learn that they think straighter than
So the A.T.S., through their contact with each other
and with the Army, grew to appreciate the strange
brotherhood of war and to learn many things-almost all
of them good. Naturally, of course, they also picked up
the soldier's age-old habit of grousing and a certain number
of his choice expletives, but far from doing them harm
these provided a much needed outlet for frayed tempers
when things went wrong and lessened the monotony of
work, and it was monotonous in those days for at the
outbreak uf war only five kinds of employment were open
to Service women: cooking, clerking, orderly. work,
storekeeping and driving.
From the military viewpoint, of course, the "phoney"
war period was an immense help. It enabled the A:T.S.
girls to become thoroughly conversant with their different
jobs, with Army methods and with the totally new way
of life into which they had been pitchforked on mobilisa-
tion. It also gave that grand but conservative being, the
British soldier, time to get over his initial resentment at
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
having a "lot of girls fussing round" and to discover that
they were in reality extremely useful working companions.
Meantime volunteers kept pouring in so fast that the
Recruiting Officers and N.C.O.'s had what is known as a
"jammy job," while the Authorities were sometimes hard
pressed to arrange preliminary training for all who wanted
to join. There was plenty of work for everybody; the
difficulty was to find enough people to prepare them for it.
Soon after the war broke out Her Majesty the Queen
had honoured the Auxiliaries by becoming their Com-
mandant-in-Chief, and in February, 1940, H.R.H. the
Princess Royal, who had previously accepted the rank of
Controller in Yorkshire, was formally enrolled as Chief
Controller, signing the same undertaking as did all other
members of the Corps. In August, 1941, H.R.H. was
gazetted Controller Commandant.
These Royal recog-
nitions were justly deserved and the A.T.S. were
exceedingly proud of them. On parade they stepped out
more briskly; at work they bent over their tasks with
added vim. Now, they seemed to say, we are what we
set out to be _ a real Women's Army.
But at the back of their minds there was always one
question. When will action come ?
Action came suddenly, swiftly, at the tail end of a winter
so miserable that it seemed as if nature herself was
sulking in protest against the madness of man. Con-
tingents of the A.T.S. were to be posted to France. In
camps and billets innumerable Auxiliaries besieged their
friends for the loan of "Soldier's Friend" powder and
polished buttons with zest, singing the while about
rolling barrels, and washing which would hang on the
Siegfried Line. (They had sung at every available
moment since they first enrolled, but now their voices
held an added fervour.)
The units that were posted to the B.E.F. left England
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
in the belief they would not return to it, except on leave,
until the war was won. They had scarcely settled down
and become versed in their new jobs before the Germans
began their prelude to the great break-through, the
invasion of the Low Countries.
As the news worsened
and anxiety increased, these Auxiliaries-who less than a
year ago had been beauty specialists, business women,
housewives, typists, university students, mannequins and
goodness knows what else-showed their worth and
steadiness. In a very short time they had journeyed
far from the humdrum ordered life of the 8.15 every
morning and a bath bun and a coffee for lunch; yet
they faced up to the problems of danger and evacuation
as coolly as though they had missed the 'bus home from a
picnic.
There were many instances of individual courage,
there were more, if less spectacular instances of sound
team-work and the following two are typical examples.
As the Germans pushed forward in France a group of
A.T.S. drivers were working desperately hard evacuating
wounded from the forward zones to Paris. Driving along
a main road they turned a corner-and ran straight into
an enemy convoy !
"We thought we were for it and would be sent back
towards Germany under guard," one told me, "but that
convoy was in far too much of a hurry to bother with such
a move. They made us turn our ambulances round ;
then they sandwiched them separately between strings of
German vehicles so that we hadn't a hope of com-
municating with our fellow drivers. The officers were
most correct and punctilious but they watched us as
cats watch mice and there didn't seem the slightest chance
of eluding them.
"We went all haughty, of course, very disdainful with
our noses in the air. We refused to answer any questions
and when one or two of the German soldiers tried a bit
of fraternising we simply didn't answer. Some of our
wounded were badly hurt and needed a lot of attention
each time the convoy stopped-which wasn't nearly often
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
enough. I must say that when we asked for food and
so forth for them we got it, but it was maddening not to
be able to speak to each other or try to think up some wild
plan of escape.
"For three whole days we toddled along with that
convoy. During the night stops I had desperate ideas
of getting away, but the guards were much too vigilant
and anyway I couldn't have manhandled the stretchers
without help. But on the fourth morning for some
reason they changed the order of convoy and stuck all
our ambulances up at the front behind one leading
German truck. We tootled off and pretty soon the
vehicle behind our last ambulance slackened 'speed
maybe it had engine trouble or something. Our driver
passed the word forward—you should have heard us all
yelling to each other above the noise of our engines !
-and as I was driving the first ambulance I decided I'd
take a chance. It was a slim one, heaven knows, but
anything was better than grinding forward with the
Germans.
"We knew the country pretty well through driving over
it continuously during the past month or two, and there
was a short cut I remembered, a little lane that cut off
the main road just short of a sharp bend and rejoined it
later on. The trouble was, could I remember which
lane? I passed word back for the others to follow me
whatever I did, crossed my fingers as we approached
what looked to be the right bend, waited until the truck
ahead had disappeared round it and then shot up a lane
to my left.
"The others followed me all right, but we had to step
on it if we were to beat the main convoy and the surface
was simply ghastly. I hate to think what the poor
wounded lads suffered as we bumped and bucketed
along that lane, but they agreed afterwards it was worth
it for we regained the main road well ahead of the Germans
and beat it for Paris. When we got there we parked the
boys-they were all safely evacuated afterwards-and
set off on our own trek to the coast. We made it all
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
26
right."
"And you're still driving?"
"Oh, rather!" She rubbed her nose reflectively. "It's
a bit tame nowadays."'
The second example comes from the A.T.S. tele-
phonists who were stationed in Paris before that city fell
to the enemy. They were all bilingual and working in
an Army exchange which could not be done without until
the last possible minute; they were living in a city of
rumours; they knew from the calls they put through or
received exactly how bad things were, but they carried
on with their job and even pleaded to be allowed to stop
when the order came through for their immediate
evacuation. As it was they got away by the skin of their
teeth. As they piled into a waiting lorry and drove off
towards the coast the Germans were marching through the
suburbs on the far side of Paris.
"What did you feel like?" I asked one of them.
"An awful mess," she answered candidly. "I hadn't
had a decent wash for days and my hair was like a bird's
nest. Our driver was mad because I wanted to go back
for my face-cream. Oh, well, maybe I'll see Paris again
one of these fine days."
"You want to go back?".
She grinned.
find my face-cream."
"Rather! You never know, I might
The great majority of the A.T.S. were still in this
country, and following the tragic evacuation from
Dunkirk they did a job which will remain as one of the
finest in the annals of their Service; they fed and re-
equipped the Army which returned from the shores of
France. No matter what their rank or their particular
category they turned to with a will and attended to the
men's immediate necessities. There is a story on record
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
at the War Office of an A. T.S. officer faced with the prob-
lem of welcoming and feeding 8,000 soldiers.
She was
in the depths of the country and her resources were nil,
but she promptly requisitioned a bath, a sheep and a field
of cabbages, sent her sergeants chasing around to
organise local help, and got down to business. An
enormous wood fire was lit in the open and while it was
kindling the sheep was skinned, cleaned and jointed.
Then the bath was slung, the biggest soup-caldron ever,
on poles above the fire and into it went water, sheep,
cabbages and seasoning. The 8,000 men were fed.
All over England officers and other ranks of the A.T.S.
cooked and washed up, cooked again and washed up again,
went on with these two jobs until they were dropping with
fatigue-but the soldiers had their much needed meals.
In clothing and equipment depots up and down the
country clerks and storewomen worked night and day
issuing and checking new uniforms, new gear, new
gas-masks, new everything. Ambulance drivers drove
tirelessly, some of them making incredible journeys, and
in the Army garages girls who were grease up to the
eyebrows kept vehicles in running repair.
That summer the A.T.S. attained a new dignity. It
had passed through the teething troubles of babyhood,
the growing pains of childhood. It was a strong-growing
adolescent, eager for maturity.
IV
Now expansion began in earnest. As the man-power
situation became more acute so the A.T.S. took over more
and more duties to release men for active service and from
the five categories of employment open at the outbreak of
war grew over a hundred. For the first time in Army
history women became (to quote at random from the long
official list) carpenters and joiners,
coach trimmers,
draughtswomen (architectural, mechanical, railway or
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
port construction, and topographical, electricians, instru-
ment mechanics, camouflage modellers, kine-theodolite
operators, plotters, radiographers, sheet metal workers,
tinsmiths and whitesmiths, vulcanisers and welders.
Tf there were misgivings in some quarters as to whether
women were really capable of undertaking such tasks
these quickly disappeared, and in April, 1941, the A.T.S.
received the greatest recognition the Service could have
asked—it was given equal military status with men.
This
meant that the A.T.S: came under the Army Act, enjoying
the privileges and responsibilities of the Armed Forces of
the Crown, and that its officers held the King's Com-
mission.
Shortly afterwards the first contingent of A.T.S. to
leave England since the evacuation of the B.E.F. went to
Washington and in December of the same year Auxiliaries
were drafted to the Middle East, forerunners of the many
thousands of women who were to be serving in different
theatres of war three years later; but the most significant
happening of 1941 was the posting of Auxiliaries to
ack-ack gun and searchlight batteries where they won a
fame deserving of immortality.
The public had grown used to seeing girls in khaki.
Indeed slowly, and in some cases reluctantly, they had
developed an admiration for "the way they stuck their
job," but when the announcement was made early in
1942 that owing to the spread of the war and the urgent
need for more organised and economical use of woman-
power there would in future be conscription for the
A.T.S., people were shaken to the core.
Conscription for women! The thing was unheard of,
impossible, revolting! All the old gags about the dignity
of womanhood, and the terrors which might result from
licentious soldiery"
delicately nurtured girls consorting with the "brutal and
were trotted forth once more.
People wrote indignant letters to their M,P.'s, and others
wrote equally indignant letters to the Press, and would-be
experts calculated that home life was gone for good and
that feminine dictatorship was imminent.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
The storm died, and it is hard to know what it was all
about. The Ministry of Labour was already "directing"
women into industry: why not "direct" them into the
Army? The war was going badly, the Army's need was
great, and the A.T.S. had already more than proved their
worth. Most significant of all, the girls concerned weren't
fussing in the slightest-they realised they had to do
something to help and they might as well do so in the
A.T.S. as in a factory.
The Army handled the situation superbly. It went on
with its plans quietly and systematically, and on a visit to
a large A.T.S. training establishment I found it impossible
to tell the difference between a conscript and a volunteer.
Wisely the word "conscript" was never used. When
Xamshing officers rea the he dipt mardy lasept tha
girl's papers. She was received in the same manner as
volunteer, had the same accommodation and
privileges, was given the same training and ultimately
posted to a unit in the same way. • Any idea of difference
simply did not exist, and she was allowed to choose the
category for which she was most fitted.
The result justified the means. With a steady increase
of A.T.S. personnel thousands of men were released for
fighting service.
By the,
Autumn of 1943, when Chief Controller
J. M. Knox, C.B.E., resigned the Directorship of the
A.T.S., because •of ill-health, and Chief Controller
L. V. L. E. Whateley, C.B.E., was appointed as her
successor, the Service had 212,000 members . . . . a
number equivalent to that of a large standing army in
peace-time! For details of their distribution one cannot
do better than quote the following extract from the
Director's address to a Press Conference in December,
1943.
"In the United Kingdom there are more than 200,000
Auxiliaries and more than 6,000 officers. Nearly a
third of the women serving in this country are trades-
women-that is to say, they have qualified in a skilled
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
trade and are directly replacing or supplementing soldier
craftsmen. In all there are 80 trades—14 of which are
"Group A" trades calling for the highest qualifications
—such trades as armourers, draughtswomen, fitters and
wireless operators fall into this category. There are no
fewer than 15 different types of clerk and there are in all
more than 30,000 women engaged on clerical duties—
replacing men of the Royal Army Pay Corps, Royal Army
Ordnance Corps and maintaining records of soldiers in
the various Record Offices. There are
also
>,u0U
technical storewomen who do vital work in Ordnance
Depots-more than 3,000 Teleprinter Operators and 4,000
Switchboard Operators assisting the Royal Corps
of
Signals in manning the vital lines of communication
throughout the country and keeping in touch with theatres
of war overseas. These are dependent for their existence
on the gallant army of 4,000 cooks, of whom 2,000 are
tradeswomen cooks, and 2,000 assistant cooks who help
to feed the men and women serving in this country."
Apart from these specialised tradeswomen mentioned
in the Director's speech there were, on the date she
gave it, nearly 120,000 non-tradeswomen in the Service,
15,000 of them were drivers, 30,000 were doing essential
work as batwomen and orderlies of various kinds, and the
remainder were distributed in over thirty kinds of non-
technical employment.
Today the Service has grown still bigger-and is again
calling for volunteers. Practically each week drafts of
A.T.S. personnel are sent overseas-to France or Belgium,
to the Middle East, to North Africa or to Italy, sometimes
to even further afield, for there are Auxilaries stationed
in the United states, in the Caribbean and in East Africa,
while parties of A.T.S. officers are temporarily attached
for instruction purposes to the C.W.A.C. in Canada and
the W.A.C.I. in India.
From Hell-Fire Corner to the Caribbean, from
Washington to Delhi. •
not a bad record for a Service
less than seven years old !
I shall always be glad it has been my privilege to watch
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
the A.T.S. develop, to see its members at work and talk
to them in their leisure moments, to learn of their general
and especial problems, finally to write a book about this
Women's Army.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER III
"WE SEND THEM THE ARMOUR"
THe great Ordnance Depot was a world on its own. All
along the valley stretched the rows of neatly camouflaged
sheds and huts ; on the slope behind were more huts—a
veritable town of them, where the men of the R.A.O.C.
lived, and on the hill top lay a similar town which housed
the A.T.S. These three divisions were linked by a net-
work of concrete roadways, each bearing directions and
numbers on trim white placards, and on every available
space between hutments people had very evidently been
digging for victory.
"Entirely self-contained and all our own vegetables,"
said the A.T.S. officer who met me at the gates. "There's
the men's Y.M.C.A. canteen and reading room, we have
a Y.W. of our own up the hill. We also have a N.A.A.F.I.
where we can buy most things from cigarettes to hairclips,
and on the way to the mess I must show you our gym.
It's. our pride and joy. Oh, excuse me!" she paused and
hailed a passing Auxiliary, "My appointment is 1400
hours tomorrow, isn't it.?''
"Our chiropodist," she explained as we went on up
the slope.
"You seem to have all the comforts of a home?"
"Rather! I'll show you the hairdressers' establish-
ment-better than Bond Street. But the girls here have
32
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
" We send them the armour.
[British Official Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
FI8502
The Cromwell tanks are ready.
[British Official Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
33
a tough life. They need all the light relief we can provide.
D'you mind if we cast an eye over the gardens? There's
a competition on for the best one and I'm judging it."
The "gardens" were in most cases strips of flower-beds
running along the fronts of the huts, though occasionally
one met a carefully tended lawn about the size of a pocket
handkerchief, but there was no limit to the ingenuity
displayed by their guardians. Some enterprising souls
had set up a rustic wooden arch around which a rambler
rose twisted young but forceful tendrils—a board in the
centre had stencilled on it in rough poker-work the words,
"My Home in Tennessee." There were strips full of
gillyflowers and narcissus that smelled sweet in the hot
May sun, clumps of blue, pink and yellow lupins, clusters
of budding pinks, roses of all sorts, standard, bush and
climbing, a brave show of bright Siberian wallflowers,
hedges of sturdily growing sweetpeas.
All the huts-which were A.T.S. sleeping quarters-bore
names.
• "Kosy Kot"' was next to "'Dunroamin',"'
Rest cam to one calor the Mecha cost a t
stood and gazed.
"What on earth ...?"
At that moment a small Auxiliary dashed out of the
door and down the path. I said politely, "D'you mind
telling me why you chose this name for your hut ?"
twang yes, the na, bef pic heathe in t okay
Inn Road. Seemed kind of suitable for us here."
(Only later, when I had been through the shops, did I
fully understand her remark.
As we progressed further up the hill, stopping at
intervals to admire gardening efforts, we met a party of
Auxiliaries some two hundred and fifty strong marching
down to their work.
"We have three shifts here," the officer told me.
"These girls have had an early dinner and will finish about
nine o'clock tonight. They have breaks, of course, for
meals. The drawback is they have to trek all the way up
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
and down the hill each time. It's very nice in weather like
this, but it's not so good in the winter.
"They look extraordinarily fit ?"
"Tell the M.O. that — she'll bless you ! As a matter of
fact they do keep amazingly well considering the amount
of work they get through. Last winter we had mighty
little sickness and no epidemics."
We walked into the Officers' Mess and I knew
momentary panic. I had visited many "atteries"' ; never
had I been confronted by so many of their officers all at
once.
The Controller saw my bewilderment. "We don't
bite," she said as she invited me to sit down besideher.
"I know there seem an awful lot of us but we've got close
on 3,000 girls here, quite a handful. After lunch I'll take
you round."'
My ignorance of Ordnance Depots was appalling.
"What exactly do you all do here ?"
"M'm, that's a big question and it would take hours to
answer it fully, but you know how highly mechanised the
Army is nowadays? Well, we send them the armour,
from tanks to bullet-proof cars. Every piece of armour
passes through here for testing, greasing, sealing, packing,
labelling and-ever heard of an 'arcticised' tank ?"'
"No."
"It means a tank which is treated in a certain way
before it is sent to, say, Russia, so that it will operate
satisfactorily in that climate. We 'desertise' tanks too,
for Africa."
Going down the hill to the workshops she said
suddenly, "I'm glad you've come to see my poppets.
We're mighty proud of them, you know.. Three years
ago nobody would have believed girls could tackle some
of these jobs without breaking down under them, but
they've proved they can not only do the work but stay
fit—maybe fitter than they ever were before."
"Do they work alongside the men?"
"In many cases, yes, It really depends on the type of
job but generally you'll find a mixed team with the girls
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
doing the lighter work and the men the heavy lifting and
so forth. There are civilians here too, you know,
hundreds of them, but the Auxiliaries don't work with
them unless we have a 'Number One Priority' rush."
"What's that?"
"Ah, that's one of our full steam ahead periods when
we all get straws in our hair and think we'll never, never
get the stuff through by the given date. We do though,
somehow, and the girls are marvellous. You see, for
security reasons we can't actually tell them why there's
a sudden rush on, why they must work overtime by day
and night; but they sense the urgency and go simply all
out. They get their reward sometimes months later when
news of a landing or a big battle is published and then
so ll so one, chey ag me, as much as to say, ' We
II
It will be long before I forget my first afternoon spent
in that Ordnance Depot. We went first to watch the
Auxiliaries working with the tanks. Very small they
looked, these girls in dungarees with khaki kerchiefs
round their heads, as they swarmed over the huge
armoured vehicles
testing screws, greasing nipples,
checking every part of the equipment.
"You might not think greasing was a skilled job,"
said the Controller, "but believe me, it is ! The greatest
care has to be taken over it and these girls would never
forgive themselves if a tank went out of here deficient in
grease or oil."
We moved on to where more Auxiliaries were busy
covering all metal parts with anti-rust preservative, a
revolting dirty job which didn't seem to worry them one
whit for they were all either whistling or singing-the
faculty of the A.T.S. for song in any circumstances
always amazes me.
Even from the pits below the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
"recce"' cars which were being serviced floated the strains
of "The Whistling Mother-in-Law," and a child covered
in black grease who was perched atop a tank was singing
lustily that there would "be no promotion this side of the
ocean.
"We get all kinds of tanks in here," said the Controller,
"so the girls have to be pretty nippy as each make
requires different handling."
Next we visited what was known as the "upholsterers'
shop," where Auxiliaries were recovering sorbo cushions
with leather and making the semicircular headrests on
which the man in the tank leans his forehead when he
wishes to look through the periscope. Some of these
girls had trained in upholstery before the war; but most
had only learnt the trade since joining the Army. Six
of them were sitting at the largest sewing-machines
imaginable running up canvas hoods, curtains and aprons
for different vehicles, and I asked one what she had done
in peacetime.
come-down ! Still,
it's far more use at the moment
You know, every time I make a hood I wonder if my
husband will get that particular one. He's in the Middle
East."
I watched an Auxiliary wrestling with an extremely
resilient sorbo cushion that seemed determined not to
go into its leather cover.
"You get one like this sometimes," she panted.
"Honestly, you'd think the wretched thing was alive !"
But before we left the shop I noticed she had that
cushion well under control.
In another shop the welders were hard at it, wearing
dark glasses to save their eyes from the glare and holding
shields before their faces to prevent injury. Their job
was to weld armament parts together, while further on we
saw girls oiling, greasing and preserving the guns which
would presently be fitted on to the tanks.
"Grease, grease, and yet more grease,"' I said to the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
Controller as I slithered across a concrete floor.
37
"We thrive on it. Come and see the wireless experts,
they're rather fun."
Each tank that entered the Depot had its wireless set
and fittings removed by a mixed party of A.T.S. and
soldiers, who checked them and put them away safely in
store until the tank was fully serviced.
Then the wireless
sets were replaced and extensive testing of headphones
and microphones carried out. To ensure this was
complete it was necessary for someone to take the place
of the wireless operator in the tank and someone else to
take the place of each member of the crew in turn-the
tank commander, the gunner and so on. First a con-
versation was held between wireless operator and other
members of the crew to ensure the internal extension
lines were working properly; then the former spoke to
another party testing another tank wireless, sometimes at
the far end of the same shed, sometimes in another shed
altogether.
The usual form for such conversations is simply?" until
you hear me, over."
"Can you hear me, over,
the reply is received, "I am receiving you loud and clear,
over,
" but on the particular afternoon of our visit it had
evidently been decided to brighten up the proceedings a
trifle, for as we entered the Auxiliary playing the part of
the operator was saying, "Hullo there, Ginger, how're
you doing ?"
"Fine!'' came a stentorian Scots voice out of nowhere.
'Listen to me. How many dances are you going to give
me at the dance on Saturday? I'm not having any
more of yon
nonsense about you jitter-bugging with
Dusty Miller."
"Ooh!"' breathed the Auxiliary. "Cave-man, aren't
you?'"
"Cave-man be damned! You're my girl and you
know it."'
"Oh, Ginger dear, you see .;
My ...!" Scarlet
to the roots of her hair she gazed down on the Controller.
To the latter's eternal credit she paid not the least
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
38
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
attention but passed on, chatting to me the while. Only
when we reached the far end of the shed did she twinkle,
"I told you they were fun !"
Further on we came to the stores—or rather part of
them, for an enormous space is needed to hold the
immense amount of things, from nuts to tank engines,
which have to be kept at the Depot. Here A.T.S. store-
women and clerks were checking, invoicing and storing
away the contents of the packing-cases or crates which
were being delivered all the time by soldiers.
"And they also get everything ready for landing-packs."
Several storewomen were at this particular job, taking
from the shelves all the things necessary for each special
list, then sending the complete lot through to the sheds
where the packers received them. Clerks were preparing
vouchers, checking locations and catalogues and pushing
through priority orders with a speed which left me open-
mouthed.
"All practice,"' said the A.T.S. sergeant in charge,
cheerfully. "When I started here I was all thumbs, but
I soon got used to it. And then we've got a wonderful
system. Each type of store is always kept on the same
shelves and everything is listed.''
She pointed to
these lists nailed up at the end of each shelf.
"But you have so many different articles ?"
"Yes, the last count was thirteen hundred odd."
If I had been that sergeant I should have given up an
unequal struggle, but she remained calm and methodical
in the midst of her welter of machinery.
In the packing shed a terrific amount of business was
going on. At a long bench ranged along one side some
fifty Auxiliaries were dealing with bearings, piston-rings
and similar delicate parts which all required to be coated
in mineral jelly and wrapped individually in grease-
proof paper before being packed into strong cardboard
boxes.
The filled boxes were then passed on to another
batch of girls who fixed a contents list on the outside of
each, securing it under a transparent waterproof tape
These lists are highly necessary, for while the main object
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
39
in preparing landing-packs is to ensure that nothing can
be damaged in transit whether it be immersed in sea-water
or buried in sand, the danger of wasting time through
insufficient content-listing and labelling has to be guarded
against also, and if the soldier can tell at a glance what
particular store he is unpacking then he blesses the
Auxiliary who affixed the list.
The landing-packs themselves stood in rows in the centre
of the shed, solid wooden boxes, waterproof lined. Deftly
the girls popped in the cartons, careful to see that each had
its list uppermost and that no atom of space was wasted ;
while others fitted camouflaged rope handles to the packs.
Even then the job was not finished. Along came a
team of Auxiliaries wheeling a huge palette of multi-
coloured paints on a trolley and proceeded to stencil cryptic
signs and numbers on the sides of the boxes.
These
give clear indication as to contents and are memorised
by the R.A.O.C. beach detachments so that no time need
be lost when destination is reached; and as extra safe-
guard a facsimile contents list is placed by an Auxiliary
outside the pack under a simply unscrewed metal guard.
"Now the loading," said the Controller.
With difficulty I tore myself away from watching a
girl pack batteries containing acid in a specially shaped
pack so that there was no least risk of their upsetting, and
went out to the yard where girls were lashing packs together
and hooking the ropes to a crane also manned by an
Auxiliary. As the crane swung its load slowly towards
some waiting railway trucks other girls jumped aboard,
unlashed the packs and stowed them ready for their
long journey to some port.
When it is remembered that every type of fighting
vehicle, from the smallest Bren gun carrier to the biggest
tank, is serviced from these packs it is easy to realise the
magnitude of this job which the A.T.S. perform-and
they do the whole thing, from selecting tiny washers from
the stores to driving motor trucks laden with tons of goods
around the Depot.
As we turned from the yard to make our way up the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER
ARMY
hill we passed a kind of giant's car-park, where tanks
by the score were standing, not neatly in line, but in what
looked like to be somewhat haphazard fashion.
"Don't worry," said the Controller, "every one of
those occupies a place corresponding to a mark on what
is called the "location chart'-there's method in it
although it looks untidy. By the way, have you ever seen
a tank's identity card ?'
One was produced for my inspection and I studied it
with interest for it bore not only a number but a full
record of service, while attached was a "'medical card",
showing the dates it had been inspected and the amount
and type of work carried out upon it.
" Thorough, aren't we?'
But I didn't answer. I was staring at the side of a
tank. On it in red was some familiar Russian lettering.
"Where did that come from ?"
"The A.T.S., of course! Our stencillers rather pride
themselves on the different languages they're learning.
After all, it isn't much use sending a tank to Murmansk
with English instructions on it.'
Plodding up the hill the Controller said, "You're
very quiet ?"
"I'm sorry. I was just thinking "The Mechanics'
Larder' was an excellent name for that hut."
IlI
Afterwards I talked to the M.O. and the dentist.
"Yes, it's true," said the former, "we have remarkably
little serious illness. Last winter we had two pneumonias,
neither of them really bad; and, of course, we have a
certain number of appendix cases, but dire ailments are
rare. In a place such as this you're bound, unfor-
tunately, to have accidents-heavy weights dropped on
feet and so on, but I find the girls extremely careful on
the whole."
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
4I
"What about the ' mikers "?" asked the dentist darkly.
"Oh, those! They're always with me, my old faith-
fuls. As soon as I see through one dodge they think up
another-the one thing to do is to order some most
unpleasant cure. Even then they'll come hopefully back
complaining of the same disease. But if anyone's going
we don't get more, for most of the jobs here are the
kind I'd personally run a mile from.
Toothy's lucky—
the 'mikers' don't bother her that much.'
"Too afraid of the drill," grinned Toothy. "That's
my trouble-all my patients detest me. At the same time
I pride myself that my fell work has made a vast difference
to their mouths. When I think of the Odol smiles I've
saved! Why, in peace-time half these girls never went
near a dentist unless they had a screaming toothache ;
now they're pus are along trickeyes rises," said the
M.O. "They're the most difficult to deal with. It stands
to reason that you get a certain number of women who
are psychologically unsuited to the Service. They can't
help it-but we do all we can to help them, send them to
a specialist, draft them out if nothing can be done. Quite
often though we effect amazing cures—all by our little
selves. It's wonderful what can be done by changing a
girl's job or moving her to another sleeping hut.
The Education officer bustled in.
"'There you are!
Come along and see the Art class."
The Art class was held in a big airy hut where twenty-
odd serious faced Auxiliaries sat before their easels and
two others skipped from pupil to pupil advising the
alteration of a line here, a shadow there. Both these
instructors had been art students in civil life, while their
pupils-all of them entirely voluntary-had hopes of
becoming art students some day. It was a life class, and
the model-believe it nor not!-was a rugged faced
R.A.O.C. sergeant-major who seemed to be enjoying his
role immensely.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
42
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
"They're good little girls," he informed me in a hoarse
whisper. "There ain't much to do of an evening, an' if
they get a kick out of drawing my phiz-well, I don't
mind."
One of the tutors looked up and put a finger to her lip.
We tiptoed out feeling the Art class was a solemn business.
We wandered into another hut where about fifty
Auxiliaries were cutting-out, stuffing and sewing a magni-
ficent collection of animal toys. One girl had made a
delicious family of penguins; another was concentrating
on a life-like monkey (it had begun life as a velour hat) ;
a third was fashioning an elephant complete with howdah
and trappings-but everywhere you looked you saw birds,
animals, fish.
" Christmas presents," said the Education officer.
"In May ?"
"Oh, you don't understand! We start ours in January.
You see, there's tremendous rivalry among the different
companies as to who will make the most toys. In the
autumn we're going to have a sale in aid of a war charity.
Of course, the girls can mark their own toys 'sold' if
they want to buy them for relations or friends. It was an
awful job getting them keen on the work to begin with—
now I can't stop them !"
From the toy-shop we visited one of the recreation huts.
Here girls lounged in easy chairs, scribbled letters at the
desks, clustered round the piano-singing as usual. Some
read, others sewed or mended, a few just smoked and
stared drowsily at nothing, glad to relax after the long
day's work. The place was as-pleasant as a hut could be
with flowers in the corners and pictures on the walls.
" But it's still a hut," sighed the Education officer. "I
feel we all get so mighty sick of huts !'
We then did a lightning circuit of a country-dancing
class, a cooking demonstration and a shorthand-typing
class before ending up in the gymnasium where Auxiliaries
were swarming up ropes, vaulting a "horse," and hanging
face downwards from the monkey-bars.
"The gym is frightfully popular," said the Education
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
43
officer with pride.
"Education seems a pretty wide word here?"
"I wish it were wider yet ! It's so important to have
simply lots of things going on here for the girls to do in
their free time. We have a cinema twice a week but a
great many of them prefer doing something themselves
rather than watching flicks. I know the city is fairly near
but then there's the difficulty of transport. By the way,
we're having a grand pantomime at Christmas. Can you
possibly pay us another visit then? "
When we got back to the ante-room the Controller was
not there.
" She's still working," they said.
I glanced at the clock. It was 9.30 p.m.
"Oh, that's nothing! She literally never stops unless
we go down to her office in a body and simply drag her
away."
I was staying overnight in her bungalow, and it was well
after ten when she appeared. She was not a young
woman, and there were little lines of fatigue under her
eyes. Since eight that morning she had been interviewing
her officers and N.C.O.'s; listening to the personal
problems of some of her flock ; smoothing out difficulties ;
planning, guiding, altering so that the smooth running
of the vast A.T.C. establishment might be assured. In
addition she had spent valuable hours escorting me round
the shops, and as I looked at her tired face I felt guilty.
"You must go to bed at once."
"No fear! I want to know how you got on with my
poppets, how you liked them, what you think of their
work ?''
"They're grand. It's hard to put what I feel about them
into a handful of words, but two things stand out— their
energy and their happiness."
She smiled. "I'm so glad about the happiness."
Then she told me how the Depot had grown, how with
the pressing needs of war more and more girls had been
drafted into it. She did not eulogise them. She did not
gloss over their faults. She was perfectly frank concern-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
44
ing the trials and tribulations which had beset the task of
looking after the spiritual, mental, moral and physical
well-being of thousands of women; but I wished-and
always shall wish— that the people I have heard from time
to time bewailing the conditions in the A.T.S. could have
listened to her.
One fact shone out clearly : she wasn't
only the "boss,"' the "big shot," the ""old girl'' of the
women who spoke of her by these various nicknames—
she was their friend.
IV
I went back to the Depot many times. I saw the
magnificent pantomime, in which the Controller played
low comedy in ermine-tipped robes and a tiara, and a
tradeswoman-cook made an entrancing Principal Boy
and the whole level of the production wasn't far short of
west-end standards. I went to a party in the sergeants'
mess, and a gymnastic display, and a dance where I saw
my wireless telephonist of the tank revolving blissfully in
the arms of a corporal who, from the colour of his hair,
was "Ginger"' of that far-off day. I talked to the
Auxiliaries about Russia and China and was astounded by
the shrewdness of their questioning, and I attended dis-
cussion groups on subjects ranging from post-war houses
to careers for women in the engineering trade.
Once I struck a "Number One Priority" rush.
The moment I passed through gates and guard-room I
knew there was something afoot. I don't quite know why,
because everybody always moved quickly at the Depot,
and there were always large groups of A.T.S. and R.A.O.C.
marching to and from the shops; but this day people
seemed to walk more purposefully and the very air was
full of tension. Climbing the hill I met a party of A.T.S.
going down to their shift. Was it my fancy, or were
their faces paler than usual, their features more set?
A sergeant I knew smiled at me, but it was a hurried
smile gone in a flash, and several other girls of my acquaint-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
45
ance marched by without glancing to right or left, frown-
ing as if in concentration.
"Ha!"' said the Education officer, "come right in and
make yourself at home; but don't expect any talks or
discussion groups today. You always said you wanted
to see us full out—well, you've bettered your wish. You
find us battling with the father and mother of all 'Number
One Priorities.' Nobody's seen the Controller more
than a minute the last week so you're lucky. She's just
vanished into her office and wants to see you."
I found her sitting at her desk surrounded by papers.
She had looked weary before: now her features seemed
to have dwindled to half their usual size. As ever she was
immensely cheerful.
"Sorry we couldn't find you to let you know our 'do'
for tonight is off. Everybody's working all the hours
God sends. Don't ask me what it's all about, but we've
got only another forty-eight hours to the deadline and
how we're going to make it heaven knows! Do stay
overnight as arranged, if you don't mind scrounging for
your own food. You'll find it interesting. Pay no
attention if people grunt and snap-we're scarcely
human at the moment.
" How right she is !" groaned a Junior Commander,
as we walked along to the Mess.
"We're not flesh and
blood at all these days, we're just robots. Oh, lord,
look at my paws! " She held out blackened hands with
broken, discoloured nails.
"I'll never strafe my com-
pany again for being grubby. I've plastered these with
issue hand-cream but it's made precious little difference."
There were no orderlies in the Mess. They had all been
co-opted and officers helped themselves from the cold
dishes on a side-table, at one end of which tea and coffee
urns hissed. Normally at lunch-time some eighty officers
would be having their meal, but today people popped in
and out at random, munched their food abstractedly and
at speed, poured coffee and forgot to drink it, wandered
around with plates in their hands.
"We eat because we must," said a Senior Commander.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
"I've even lost my sense of taste. I know this veal and
ham pie's good, but to me it's exactly like sawdust. Hi
there, Tommy, got those lists? We might check up on
them while we feed."
Everyone looked strangely altered. As a rule these
women were immaculate, each hair in place, each button
polished. Now they had a slightly scruffy appearance
and their noses shone and several had tell-tale smears of
grease on cheek or tunic.
"Where's the M.O. ?"' demanded somebody.
"In the tank shop. And Toothy's on landing packs.
If you require any medical or dental care, my pet, you'll
just have to grin and bear it."
"I say, did you know the Controller drove a truck
yesterday when the driver went sick ?"
"M'm, jolly good show. Did you hear the Brig. this
morning ?
Took one look at the tank wireless stores and
said, 'Ahem, ahem! Those can be cleared in thirty-six
hours.' Thirty-six! Saints alive, it'll take a week at
least !'
"Heaven save us from what he'll say when he visits
our shed. I counted ball-bearings in my sleep last night.
Oh, Phyllis, I'll be on till the wee sma' hours, can I borrow
your Thermos? "
"My sergeant's a miracle. She was afraid she'd go
to sleep over her typewriter so she bribed a corporal to
stick pins in her every half-hour.
"You know that square solid little lance-corporal of
mine, the one with the black frizzy hair? She deserves a
B.E.M., that one. Half the Depot fell on her right foot
yesterday, but she's carrying on in a sort of felt boot.
Absolutely refused to go sick."
The Senior Commander scraped back her chair.
see you ler, O Lord, how long?' Well, my children,
I sat in the Mess all afternoon watching the officers as
they straggled in in relays, for there could be no settled
mealtimes on days such as these. Two harassed cooks
came in, cleared the tables, replenished the urns and
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
47
vanished again. Five disconsolate dogs of varying breeds
huddled by the stove unable to understand this sudden
disturbance of routine. The Controller's cat and the
kitchen cat had a
stand-up fight on the windowsill.
Somewhere an Auxiliary sang softly, but she didn't sing
about mothers-in-law or barrels or oceans.
"Bring me my bow of burning gold,
Bring me my arrows of desire . .
"Jerusalem" may be hackneyed, sentimental, anything
you like: it was so strangely suitable to the place and
circumstances that I got a lump in my throat listening to
Blake's words.
And the clock above the door ticked on. As the
officers appeared they glanced up at it, timed their munches
by it, eyed it again as they went out. Involuntarily I.
kept eyeing it myself, thinking: there aren't forty-eight
hours now, only forty-six and a half... forty-five and
three quarters ... Oh, let them do it, let them do it !
"Hullo,"' said a voice; "penny for them ?"
"I was thinking about 'England's green and pleasant
land.' I say, how're things going?"
"Lousy!
Five cartons
with wrong contents lists.
Oh, my, oh, my, why did I join the Army? Anyone who
thinks England's green and pleasant should come on the
Depot strength for a bit. Could you shove over that
salad? Thanks."
Unable to bear sight of the clock-face any longer I
took myself a walk. The A.T.S. camp was deserted.
No laughter or singing came from the huts. In some of
them drawn blinds told that the occupants were enjoying
much needed rest. In a few hours they would be on the
job again packing, sorting, listing, oiling, testing. There
was still a feeling of tenseness in the air.
The evening was the same as the afternoon, a continual
coming and going, a tremendous number of snatched
conversations-most of them highly technical. The
dogs looked more dejected and even the cats gave up
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
fighting and the singing Auxiliary was mute. In the
chair next me in the anteroom one of the Senior Com-
manders dozed, long legs stretched out. Presently she
sat up with a jerk.
"Heavens! Ten o'clock already.
I must make tracks for bed, I start duty again at six.
Come and get a breath of air first, I'm all muzzy with
being stuck indoors all day."
She opened a door leading to the verandah and put her
hand up to her tunic pocket for her cigarette case.
Very
soon she would wear above that pocket the dull pink
ribbon of the M.B.E. Very soon too we should hear the
news of the North African landings. But we didn't
know these things then; all we knew was that the clock
hands were racing round as if determined the "father and
mother of all Number One Priorities' wouldn't be
finished on time.
We lit cigarettes and leaned over the rail, staring ahead
into the darkness. It was a black, still night, without a
star in the sky and heavy with the threat of rain. Suddenly
a rhythmic sound came from the distance, grew nearer,
rose and fell. Tramp-tramp-tramp-the A.T.S. night-
shift were going down to their work. They marched in
perfect time like soldiers-but nobody would ever have
mistaken their steps for those of soldiers. I cannot explain
the effect that rhythmic sound had upon me.
"Left,
right. Left, right. Left—left—left." shouted the ser-
geant in charge. The company were right below us now,
but the night was so black we could not see them, we could
only listen to their footsteps. All night long these girls
would work in the stuffy blacked-out sheds.
The Senior Commander tossed her cigarette end over
the rail. "My God, I'm tired ! This past week has been
one mad scamper.
It can't be true we'll get through in
less than two days' time. I feel I have no bones and no
brain, what's worse that I'll never possess any again."
"Your job's worth it. After all, "you send them the
armour.' "
I could feel her straighten beside me in the dark.
"Yes," she agreed.
"We send them the armour."
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
" Never put your bread dough
[British Official Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
" Is the stew good ? "
[British Official Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Woman were
Bakars
CHAPTER IV
THEY HELP THE ARMY MARCH
"WHEN I heard we were to train girl bakers for the
Army,"' said the Master Baker, "I was dead against the
idea. For one thing, I was sure they'd never tackle such
a heavy job, and for another—well, if you've served with
the R.A.S.C. as long as I've done you get a bit conservative
in your views. However, in the first batch came-seven
of them—in February '42, just three years ago. I often
think now we were hard on them. I couldn't see them
becoming special tradeswomen and the men resented
them being here at all at first.
It says a lot for the girls
that they stuck both us and the job! Here is a record of
their progress I've made out for you."
The list he handed me had several interesting points.
It showed how from very small beginnings the A.T.S.
bakery branch had been built up until a total of four
hundred and five girls had been trained in this huge bake-
house which is the "parent" one of all those supplying
the Army at home and overseas. It was cautiously
worded, stating fairly that about a third of the trainees
had failed to make the grade and giving details of the
difficulties with which they had to contend-their lack of
height and reach, the length of working hours, the three-
shift system which debarred them from several social
activities, the monotony of the job and the strain of
working in a hot atmosphere that was mighty hard to
40
D
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
50
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
ventilate properly:
"I suppose they do feel the monotony a good deal?"
"Not so much as you might think. We switch them
over from one process to another each week or so. First
they'll be adding the water and yeast to the flour, then
they'll be lifting the dough from the mixers and feeding it
into the shaping and cutting machine, then brushing the
loaves or taking them off the hot plates or wheeling the
trolleys or working in the store. The work has variety all
right, it's more the monotony of being in the bakehouse
itself that's apt to get people down-though I will say
the girls face up to it better than the men."
"I see you sent some of them to try field baking on
exercise and the experiment didn't work ?"
"That's true. We had our ups and downs in the
first year as all pioneers must have and we found out our
limitations; but that doesn't alter the fact that the
A.T.S. girls have turned out splendidly as bakers. Turn
to the last page of the record."
I read :
"The amount of bread produced chiefly by
A.T.S. bakers since they started baking on their own at the
main bakery is 50,000,000 pounds."
"And that's only here,
said the Master Baker. "'In
addition we have three static bakeries opened and run by
girls we've trained. I'll tell you another thing too. In
one of the biggest invasion exercises they had a daily
output of 82,000 Ibs. for eight weeks against an all men
output of 68,250 Ibs. That's no mean performance!
As for the overload before D Day when they were helped
by two mobile bakeries of 21st Army Group and one from
Western Command —well, it was a grand business."
The Master Baker was warming to his subject, and as I
reverted to his record I found that warming up too.
"H Company A.T.S. was formed ... and we owe the
Junior Commander a lot from those pioneer days."
"Girls of the following different nationalities have passed
their Army trade test: Welsh, English, Scottish, Czech,
Shetland, German, Swiss, Falkland Islands, Manx and
Irish." "A.T.S. have replaced men as issuers in the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
51
bread stores and are real hardworking and all-weather
girls." "The girls here have worked right through,
always ready to receive what may come. They have had
266 air raids and warnings, of which 115 were flying
bomb raids." Finally, a lovely touch, "A.T.S. bakers
make up their own songs about their work in the bake-
house."'
Those remarks from a Regimental Sergeant-major who
was dead against Auxiliaries as Army bakers three brief
years ago are pretty good.
"Now," said the Master Baker, "the Quartermaster
will take you through the bakehouse to see the girls at
work."
"We'll start on the top floor," said the latter, "and
see the sacks of flour being tipped into the chutes. It is
one of the two jobs Auxiliaries aren't allowed to do.
The other is to place the loaves on the hot plates. The
Medical Authorities say such work is too hard for them."
Having inspected the chutes we came down to the
middle floor, where immense activity was going on. It
was staffed entirely by Auxiliaries who looked very trim
in long white overalls and white slacks and seemed
extremely busy on different jobs.
In one corner two girls stood beside a giant mixer, one
weighing out yeast and the other drawing buckets of water
from a tap set in the wall. These jobs finished they tilted
water and yeast into the mixer where an enormous metal
arman" it ye examine yon arm," explained the yeast
weigher, "ye'll find it's just the same as a human one.
It's got a wrist joint and an elbow joint—my, it's mar-
vellous !''
She came from Angus and had a father who had said
she was "gey saft" to join the Army. "But he'll no'
say that when I start ma own wee bakery in our village,".
she added.
"Coo,"
said her companion, "you're barmy. Me,
I'll never eat bread again if I can help it !''
"Don't you like the job then ?"
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
52
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
• She winked at me. "Grand—I just like taking a rise
out of Mac. C'mon, Mac, this lot's ready."
To my horror the pair got behind the mixer and began
to push it. I knew it held over five hundred pounds of
flour.
"Well, talk about heavy work!"
The Quartermaster smiled. "It's on wheels."
Abashed, I followed and watched the mixer being
parked beside a row of its fellows and covered with a
large white cloth.
"They leave the dough to rise for three hours or so;
then it is ready for the next process."
This was one which intrigued me. Two Auxilaries
plunged their arms into the sticky mess and lifted a
great lump while a third cut their load free with a wooden
knife; then they swung the stuff into the maw of a
machine that shaped it into loaves and two more girls
rolled these lightly in flour and sent them spinning down
a chute to the ground floor.
I said, "Now this really is heavy work.
Those lumps
must weigh forty or fifty pounds apiece !''
"Ah, but funnily enough the girls feel the weight far
less than men do. In this job, for example, they use their
abdominal muscles.
Now in a man those muscles are
not so strong. If he's lifting dough he puts the strain
on his back and his legs."
The girls themselves grinned happily when I asked if
the work tired them.
"We're used to it-it's all knack. I've been here two
and a half years and my mate two. We're both Class One
bakers,'
," she added proudly.
"Oh, we get fed up sometimes," said the other, "but
you get that way in Civvy Street, so what ? Besides, you
feel you're doing something useful when you're feeding
the bocan understand that. After all, an army marches
on its stomach.' "
"That's a good crack," remarked a third Auxiliary.
"I must remember that one."
We left them repeating. Napoleon's maxim and
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
53
descended to the ground floor. Here girls were setting the
loaves on to trays as they came out of the chutes, brushing
them over, wheeling trolley-loads aside to rise again,
stamping them with the date.
"Only me and the Master Baker know the mark for
today's date," said a small girl from Yorkshire. "Even
the Quartermaster doesn't know it. But if any complaints
come in, loaves have to be returned too, and we know
at once which day's baking they belong to."
On the far side of the bakehouse were the great ovens
set in the wall. When the doors were opened and the
long hot plates drawn out men tipped the uncooked loaves
on to them; but the part which fascinated me was to see
the Auxiliaries at work on the same plates when the
baked bread was removed from the ovens. They worked
as a team, precisely and deftly, two of them separating
the loaves which had stuck together, two sliding sixty
loaves at a time on to a tray which they then placed on a
trolley, two wheeling the laden trolleys away to the stores,
one brushing the browned flour off the hot plates before
they clanged back again into the oven.
So soon as one batch of loaves was dealt with there
seemed to be another ready for attention, and I said to the
Quartermaster, "There isn't much let-up between jobs,
is there ?"'
"No, and an eight-hour shift is a long time; but they
do have ten-minute breaks in turns as well as their meal-
times. I'll show you the mess-room. It's a bit dingy
and we're not very proud of it, but improvements are on
the way."
Certainly the mess-room was smallish and rather dark,
but it possessed a bright fire in a kitchen range and the
Auxiliaries who were drinking tea seemed quite satisfied.
"It's this way, ma'am," said a sergeant.
"If we feed
here while on duty we don't need to change our kit and
go out in the cold to our billets. Bakers like to be cosy,
you know."
As the month was January, 1945, I agreed with her.
view, but asked if she felt the same way in summertime.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
54
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
ven is that's tou fide, whine saboth bat choy so
here.
"It's true," nodded her Junior Commander, who had
just appeared. "Of course, one of our difficulties is that
the bakers become liable to cold and chills in their off-
duty time. We guard against these as much as possible
but they are a danger we can't altogether remove."
I remember something.
"Why are the girls allowed to
take the loaves off the hot plates when they're forbidden
to put huartermaster answered : "Because it's not such
a long job. It doesn't involve so much stooping over a
plate just removed from a temperature of between 480
and 500 degrees Fahrenheit. Would you like to see the
stores now?"'
"One minute." Turning to the eight or nine Auxiliaries
in the mess-room, I asked: "Would any of you prefer to
be in another branch of the Service ?"
They said "No" loudly and firmly-and it wasn't
because their officer and the Quartermaster were present.
It was too definite for that.
"Funny thing,
" remarked the latter confidentially as
we made our way across the bakehouse, "we have a
wireless here for them—a loud-speaker on each floor,
just to cheer them up. But they'd rather sing their own
songs, believe me."
"Especially the night-shift," added the Junior Com-
mander, "and that's odd, for you'd think girls who come
on at ten p.m., knowing they've got to stay here until six
the following morning, would like to start off with two
hours of radio."
"Oh, well, they're women," said the Quartermaster
(as though that fact explained all peculiarities of habit).
He went on: "But they're all good girls. When I think
how some of them have passed Class One trade tests in a
handful of months! Bless you, I trained seven blinking
years !"
The air in the stores struck cold after the warmth of the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
55
bakehouse, but fortunately the white-clad Auxiliaries who
were wheeling in the laden trolleys were moving at too
great a speed to feel it. A dozen or so of their colleagues,
the " bread issuers,
," presented a curious contrast for they
wore their khaki uniform plus scarves, mittens and
wellington boots and were swabbing the concrete floor with
vigour.
"The girls do all their own cleaning up both here and
in the bakehouse," said the Quartermaster, "and my
word, it's real cleaning. No finicking about here! Mind,
the bread issuers' job is a tough one. It's starving cold
in this shed most of the time-see, those big sliding doors
are nearly always open so that the vans of the various
units we supply can drive right up. The girls check the
lists and help the drivers put the bread in the vans."
I looked around the huge place. "How much bread
is here now?"'
"At a rough guess 18,000 lbs. It'll be cleared in
another hour or so and a fresh lot coming in. All today's
baking, of course.
"All today's baking!" Thoughtfully I nibbled the
piece of warm crusty bread he handed me. It was good
bread, it had been made by the A.T.S., it was going to
feed the Army.
Back in the Master Baker's office I answered his eager
questions as to what I thought of his Auxiliaries, and as
I said goodbye he whispered, "Did you hear them singing
the song they've made up about me? It's a grand one!"
On the way out I did hear it. Set to a popular tune the
words informed me that he barked and barked all day
long—but he hadn't any bite at all !
Not far from the bakehouse stands a very large building
which I feel sure the Master Baker would call "a rival
establishment." It is in reality the Army School of
Cookery, and I sincerely hope nobody ever makes the
break I made when I walked into it after several hours of
bakehouse tuition, for my first remark was, " And are you
attached to the R.A.S.C. too ?"'
"We," said the Senior Commander, "are the Army
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
Catering Corps."
She then took pity on my ignorance and explained the
manifold activities which went on inside the biggest and
most complete cookery school I had ever seen.
"Since this is an Army establishment naturally the
bulk of those who come here for courses are men, but
there are also three hundred or more A.T.S. officers and
other ranks here at any given time. There are courses
for officers who will become messing-officers in different
units, courses for sergeant cooks who will be in charge of
unit cookhouses, refresher courses for sergeant and
corporal cooks, and courses for those who wish to become
cookery instructors at the A.T.S. cookery schools up and
down the country where all below corporal cooks receive
their initial training."
"Do they share classes here with the men?"
'Sometimes, but not as a rule. Often, however, they
are taught by men instructors, although we have a per-
manent staff of A.T.S. instructors too.
They don't only
do practical cookery, you know. They have lectures on
kitchen management, dietetics, anti-waste, butchery, all
kinds of things. But I'm only a visitor. My job is going
round inspecting units, seeing the cookhouses are getting
their proper supplies, trying to help with difficulties—
and, of course, keeping an eye on what goes into the
pig-bin. But here comes the Junior Commander who is
our chief instructor here. She is going to take us round the
school."
The Junior Commander was a New Zealander, and in
pre-war days had studied domestic economy both in her
own delectable country and in England.
"Don't you long for sunshine?" I asked her.
"Every minute of every day! Yet I do believe I'll
find it awfully hard to leave here after the war. I've
kind of grown up with this place, for when I was posted
here in 1940 we were in huts and the only signs of this
building were some iron poles stuck in the ground. Now
we're so busy that even in this vast place it's like fitting a
jigsaw puzzle together to get classrooms allotted to all the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
57
different groups who require them at the same time."
She took us first to see the potential messing-officers
class, explaining as we entered that they were learning
bun, scone and cake making under the guidance of a man
who had been chef in a big London hotel.
"You see, it's very important that all messing-officers
should know the practical side. It's not a bit of good
slanging your sergeant cook in a unit over some fault you
couldn't possibly put right yourself. These officers go
through a pretty stiff training here, from the vegetable
stores to the correct way to lay a table."
In the big classroom six A.T.S. subalterns were glazing
buns, two were weighing out flour, fat and sugar, and the
ninth was frying doughnuts that looked as doughnuts
ought to look-crisp and a lovely golden brown.
"'Morning, ma'am," said the chef.
"We're just going
to make small cakes, six batches to each pupil." Turning
to his class he went on: "Which of you ladies is going
to mix the dried milk for me? Ah, but that isn't enough
to a gallon of water! Weigh it carefully, please. No,
miss"' (this to the doughnut fryer), "when you take them
out of the fat never huddle them together like that on the
tray. Now then, ladies, you've got your flour ready?
Then rub the fat in so-and so-
Eight pairs. of hands got busy: eight pairs of eyes
anxiously watched his demonstration. Frankly, 1 envied
them. 1 could have done with several lessons from that
chef myself.
"Every ounce of food eaten in this establishment is
cooked by students," said the Junior Commander, "and
then we feed several nearby units as well. We cater for
roughly a thousand people every day—more at times."
Our next call was to a huge kitchen where A.T.S.
sergeant and corporal cooks were busy putting the
finishing touches
to the midday meal which would
presently be served to five hundred of their fellow students.
Mulligatawny soup simmered gently in large cauldrons
and the long hot plates which stretched the length of the
room were covered with dishes of cottage pie-but not the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
pallid sausagy mess topped by lumpy potatoes that so
often disgraces the name of that dish. These cottage
pies were made with good fresh meat and stock,
the
potatoes were sliced and savoury with onion and nicely
browned, and two girls were actually sprinkling chopped.
parsley on them.
The Junior Commander laughed at my amazement.
"Oh, yes, everything has to be just so, and we pay, par-
ticular attention to making things look appetising.
The cooks certainly seemed to be taking a real pride
in their job. There was no bustle, no jostling of shoulders.
Everyone had their appointed task, and only occasionally
did the instructor correct or advise.
"Method," I said.
"Yes, we're very hot on that. It's so easy to get
'cookhouse panic' just before the main meal of the day.
We'll watch this dinner being served shortly, but come to
the butchery class first."
Here a staff sergeant, a man, was standing on a platform
behind a wooden block on which reposed a whole side of
beef. On the walls hung numerous diagrams of oxen,
sheep, calves and pigs, while facing the instructor was a
mixed class of men and Auxiliaries. Not only did the
staff sergeant demonstrate the correct method of cutting
and jointing the beef, but each member of the class had
then to give a demonstration in turn and there was quite a
bit of rivalry as to which pupil would perform best.
Watching, I felt that when the Auxiliaries became house-
wives themselves, they would be more than a match for
any negligent butcher who tried to fob them off with the
wrong cut.
As we moved to the door the staff sergeant waved his
enormous knife at us. "The lady hasn't seen the refrig-
erators,"' he said reproachfully.
Apparently it was a point of honour that all visitors to
the butchery must also see where the meat was kept.
It wasn't a visit I fancied but as the Auxiliaries had to
study refrigerator storage as part of their course I meekly
agreed.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
59
The staff sergeant flipped a diagram round with its
face to the wall. "Now before I come back I want you
to draw a hindquarter from memory and put in the exact
method of jointing with lines, letters at the end of them
and a key at the bottom."
The refrigerators were worth seeing after all. In them
the Auxiliaries learn the correct way of stacking meat,
and in the rooms adjoining they learn how to thaw it—
a ticklish business, as every housewife knows. The staff
sergeant very wisely explained to his pupils that if they
forgot his tuition in this matter when they returned to
their units and served tough meat in consequence they
were liable to receive the joint at their heads from their
infuriated comrades.
Having found out that two Auxiliaries had come out
top in the hindquarter test we walked into a vast dining-
hall. Sheep were separated from goats, the Auxiliaries
sitting at one end and the men at the other. They drew
their food from two service tables and I noticed the
mulligatawny was going down well. A Catering Corps
captain kept a watchful eye on the food dishes as they
came in, and I saw him send back a cottage-pie because he
didn't think it hot enough.
"Do you get many complaints ?"
He grinned.
"No, except from a few born grousers
who would complain if you gave them nectar and
ambrosia. The food really is up to first-class hotel
standard here. We have to set the pace, of course. It's
different when cooks are with their units and perhaps
have all manner of snags to overcome. Still, we feel the
courses here give them a background they don't forget in
a hurry."
Our own lunch was simple but excellently cooked and
served. We had potato soup, navarin of lamb and pan-
cakes which proved that good ones can be made with
dried eggs.
Afterwards we followed the Auxiliaries upstairs to
their recreation room. Some were chatting in little
groups, others were sewing or mending, a few were reading
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
бо
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
and two couples were playing chess.
"Will you finish the game before afternoon classes?"
I asked one pair.
"No, but we'll leave the board over in the corner and
go on with it this evening—if we're lucky. The trouble is,
chess is awfully popular and people are apt to come
along and pinch your board.''
I stared.
Somehow I hadn't imagined Auxiliaries as
chess enthusiasts.
"Did you play before you joined the A.T.S. ?"
"Goodness, no!" said one.
"I'd rather have run a
mile-sounded too grim for me. But we learn lots of
funny things in the Army. People come in on barrack-
room nights to teach us. Y'know, if anyone had told
me three years ago I'd spend my evenings stuffing ele-
phants for Christmas toys and learning chess, I'd have
told them they were nuts. Hi, Sammy, check to your
Queen !''
I thought about those chess-players quite a bit.
• MI
We reverted to our progress around the Cookery
School. We attended a lecture given by a gentle-voiced
A.T.S. sergeant-major on food values.
She made ad-
mirable use of visual training, using clear and colourful
charts and diagrams, and she not only knew her stuff from
A to Z but put it over in an interesting manner. None of
her students, as it happened, had taken the faintest
interest in kitchens, cookery or food before the war.
Most had been shop assistants or factory hands and had
been extremely indignant when told that as the Service
needed cooks then cooks they must become. That they
were on this course for sergeant cooks showed they had
dropped indignation quite a long way behind them, and I
liked the shrewdness of the questions they put to their
instructor.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
"And to think I used just to open a tin for my evening
meal," one said to me.
"There'll be none of that in the
future."
"Have you any post-war plans?"
"I want a home of my own,
," she answered promptly:
The majority of Auxiliaries of all categories will give
you that reply. For myself, I think the desire comes from
a surfeit of communal living and sometimes I wonder if
it will last when Service days are over, or if, tragically
enough, it will be given the opportunity to become reality.
There are other girls, of course; who have very definite
ideas as to post-war careers, and I spoke to several of
these in the Cookery School.
One was a woman of about
forty and I found her having a lesson in fancy cake
making from an ex-confectioner who was an artist at his
job. She was making ersatz but delicious-looking eclairs
and was so absorbed in the process that I stood beside
her quite five minutes before she even noticed me.
She told me she had looked after an invalid parent until
she was thirty, when she was left with no training for
anything and no money. So she went out as a
"companion help"' -euphemistic term!-and for the
next seven years endured the eccentricities and grumblings
of several elderly ladies who expected a great deal for
very little.
"If I'd known what I know now," she said, "I'd have
volunteered when war broke out; but I didn't realise
they'd accept somebody like me until the lady I was with
died and the Labour Exchange people suggested it. Mind
you, I didn't like it at first. It was awful sharing a hut
with women much younger than myself, and I felt kind of
frightened, if you know what I mean. Then I settled down
and found I was really happy. And look what the Army's
taught me! Why, I wouldn't have had a chance of a
training like this on my own. D'you know what I'm
going to do after the war? I'm going to have my own
little room and I'm going out cooking dinners."
For bringing happiness to that woman with the tired,
lined face, if for nothing else, I take my hat off to the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
62
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
A.T.S.
Younger women in the various classes were full of more
ambitious plans. Some wanted to open cafés or con-
fectioners' shops, some to get a job in hotel or institution,
some to go in for a Domestic Science degree. All I talked
to were enjoying the Cookery School and were keen to
take improved ideas back to their units.
As a Welsh girl said, "You learn all the little things
here that we never had time to reach in our initial training.
Besides, being a tradesman cook is something !"
We paid a visit to the vegetable store, a draughty but
spotlessly clean place presided over by an enormous
sergeant who took a great interest in his Auxiliaries.
"They don't like this bit of their training at first," he
confided, "too chilly for them in the winter after the
warm cookhouse. But as I say to them, 'You'll never
serve a decent meal unless you know how to look after
your vegetables.' They make faces and grumble a bit,
but they're good girls."
He bustled off to show two Auxiliaries how to set -
frozen cabbages on racks that they might thaw, and I said
to the Junior Commander,
"I shouldn't imagine the
vegetable store is popular?"
"Not while they're actually in it. Afterwards they
quote the sergeant's words of wisdom at me. I had a
long harangue the other day from a corporal on the
correct way to clean celery."
The sergeant came back. " I let 'em off light, too.
I allow them to peel the spuds in the cookhouse instead of
out here like the men. But mind you, ma'am, they pick
things up quicker and are more careful than the lads
are."
"Instinct, sergeant."
"M'm, maybe, but it was an instinct a whole lot of them
were lacking in before this lot came along. They'll make
good wives some day, my girls will. I'm always telling
the men, ' You take my advice and marry an A.T.' »
Upon leaving him we walked into more classrooms,
looked in at more lectures, finally came to rest in a large
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
room where a sergeant-major (male) presided over a
mixed class who were being given a practical demonstra-
tion in bun-making by one of their own number.
"I make them all get up on their hind-legs," said the
sergeant-major.
"Gives them confidence, trains them
to give clear instructions to their assistant cooks when
they go back to their units. Take this fellow who's talk-
ing now. He's home from overseas, been doing emerg-
ency cooking in slit trenches and what have you-and a
hard job it is in the field, as I know. But is he dumb when
he gets on his feet! Now the A.T.S., they're different
altogether. Think they know all the answers until I
make them demonstrate; then they start mumbling and
blushing—but come the end of the course, bless you,
they're proper public speakers! After this chap's
finished the class are going to make batches of buns.
Suppose you come back in an hour's time, ma'am, and
see our finished products?"
That sergeant-major was a delight. I accepted the
invitation with pleasure.
Further wandering brought us to the store-cupboards,
where I indulged in a little mouth-watering. Ranged
along one side was a row of ordinary dustbins transformed
by khaki paint decorated with the blue and gold of the
Army Catering Corps colours into things of beauty.
These held rice, barley and similar commodities and
above them were shelves stacked to the ceiling with tins
of various descriptions; but the part of the store which
fascinated me was the bottled fruit and vegetable cup-
board, for here were glowing cherries, soft red strawberries,
pears, apples, chutneys,
French
and runner beans,
asparagus, peas—a profusion of the fruits of the earth
which made me long for the days of peace and plenty.
"You may leave me here," I told the Junior Com-
mander.
"I can't possibly tear myself away."
She smiled. "All bottled by the students.
The Auxiliary in charge of the store beamed. "They
are lovely, aren't they ?
I've been here over a year and
I dread the thought of being posted away."
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
I couldn't have agreed with anybody more.
Reluctantly I moved on to a cookhouse. which smelt of
thyme and marjoram and sage.
"We have our own herb garden here," said the Junior
Commander, "with every herb known in England and a
few that aren't. I do try to make the girls understand the
use of herbs as flavouring."
That morning the class had been making brawn and
galantine-two things which sounded extravagant in the
sixth year of total war, but which were literally made out of
bits and pieces.
"Where we score in the Army," said the sergeant
instructor, "is in the numbers of people we always have
to cater for, because that means we have innumerable
odds and ends, plenty of bones for good stock, lots of bacon
rinds.
Take this brawn now, its main ingredient is bacon
rind simmered for five or six hours. Would you like to
taste it, ma'am?"
The brawn was delicious. If anyone had asked me I
should have said an entire pig's head had gone to its
making. The galantine was equally good and the class
grinned delightedly when I told them so.
"Not bad for their second day," said the sergeant.
"Pity you won't be here at the end of the week. They'll
be really proficient by then.
We popped our heads in at a lecture on kitchen manage-
ment and then found ourselves in the pastry cookhouse,
where Auxiliaries were turning out Cornish pasties and
sausage rolls with great success under a withering fire of
criticism from their man instructor.
•
"They don't mind though," said the Junior Com-
mander, "because they know he's the cat's pyjamas at
his job. I think he'd make the least pastry-minded girl
develop a light hand."
It was now time for our return to the bun department,
and my nose began to twitch before we reached the door.
And what a sight met our eyes as we entered the room !
Everywhere we looked we saw trays full of buns. Plain
buns, currant buns, glazed buns, Chelsea buns, Bath
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
At work on sound detection.
(British Official Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
Plotters at Command Post.
(British Oficial Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
buns ... an Arabian Night's Dream of buns. Per-
spiring but happy the class were regarding their handiwork,
but the sergeant-major was in critical humour.
"Bah!" he poked a finger at a tray, " that lot's heavy,
and the Chelsea's have got too much syrup on them, and
that other lot hasn't risen enough. Haven't I told you
Army bun dough is the thing we're proudest of in the
Service? Don't you know there's nothing you can't do
with it provided you treat it right ?
And then you go and
murder it like that ! Listen to me,
dough where you wouldn't put your baby er put your bun
It's all in
the temperature,, tell you, when you put it to set, and if
you think. . . .
But the class knew and cherished the sergeant-major's
slogan. As one man they bawled at him, " Never put
your bun dough where you wouldn't put your baby!"
IV
During my peregrinations round the school, girl after
girl had asked me, " Have you seen our room?" or
"Have you seen the German room?"
Mystified, I demanded the answer from the Junior
Commander.
"What on earth do they mean ?"'
"Ah, I'll get the keys and show you."
"Our"' room proved to be a large apartment which
had been entirely arranged by the instructor who was an
artist as well as a confectioner. On wide ledges running
round it was an exact replica of our invasion of the
Continent from the landings on the Normandy beaches
right the way through Northern France. Here were the
tanks going ashore, the ducks, the jeeps, the guns, the
soldiers. There were the prefabricated harbours. Here
were the poplar-bordered roads of France. There was a
model field-kitchen complete to the last detail. And
above each stage of invasion were stacked samples of the
foods with which our men were supplied, from compo
E
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
66
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
packs of all sizes to the tins of soup heated by inserting
a lighted cigarette end into a little hole and the parachute
food-packs such as were dropped to the men of Arnhem.
The centre of the room was occupied by an immense
table on which stood a sample of each article of domestic
equipment the British soldier needs. Until I studied that
table I had no least idea of the immense variety of things
necessary if an Army is to be well fed. Cookers of all
descriptions, from tiny things to large ones; cauldrons
and pots of all shapes and sizes, kettles and brushes and
brooms and cleansing materials . . . the list seemed
endless.
"The Auxiliaries love coming up here," said the Junior
Commander.
"They nearly all have husbands, brothers,
fathers, sweethearts or boy-friends over there and this
gives them a picture of how they are living. And look,"
she led me to a far corner, ' here is a model of the African
desert campaign with appropriate foods, and over there is
one of the Italian campaign.
I poked about that room a long time and thought what
an excellent idea
had been the artist-confectioner's.
Cooking for a unit of A.T.S. in this country without
perhaps hope of ever cooking for a unit of soldiers overseas
might be a dull job at times: an hour spent in this room
would provide a fillip to any Auxiliary in moments of
depression.
Then I remembered something, "But what did they
mean by the German room ?"
"Ah, that's our star turn! The British captured our
opposite number, the German Army School of Cookery;
in Brussels, and sent it over here for our experts to study.
So we walked along a passage-and entered Germany.
German nutrition charts covered the walls, German
food samples covered the wide ledges, German compo
packs were stacked behind them, German pamphlets
loaded the central table. With characteristic thorough-
ness each exhibit was accompanied with a detailed des-
cription of when, why, where and how it should be used
and a harsh injunction to study pamphlet number so-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
67
and-so on the particular subject. There were samples of
German bread galore (all fashioned out of plaster and
very well done too) ; samples of more varieties of dried
peas and beans than I had known existed; samples of
different flavourings; gaily coloured posters of fish with
their individual nutrition value given beneath each and
even minute instructions such as,
"Eat herring in May
they are at their best then'' ; little squares of dehydratec
cabbage (red and white), meat, potatoes and various other
articles; more samples which might have been anything
but were labelled with high-sounding names to which
probably they lived up, for there was mighty little which
was ersatz in that room except the coffee.
"Our experts say the standard is high all round,
!," said
the Junior Commander.
"Yes, their soldiers will be the last to suffer, not from
humane reasons but..." I paused before a tiled
kitchen cabinet which was decorated with a vast assort-
ment of pink and smoked hams, lots of sausages and a
selection of cheeses.
"But those are real ?"'
"Don't bet on it! See that piece of rolled smoked
ham covered with a cellophane wrapper? I lost money
on that one. D'you see, it's got that faint bronzish tinge
in the middle, just as you get when a slice has been cut
off-but it's plaster and so is everything else in the
cabinet."'
The German who created those dummy eatables de-
served full marks from his Fuehrer.
I moved to the centre table and read as much as I could
understand of the printing on the pamphlet covers.
Written in a hectoring style they yet gave the German
soldier an immense amount of valuable knowledge con-
cerning vitamins and calories and proteins. . . .
"We are having everything translated,
so that the
students can understand. They get a kick out of this
room, you know. I think it makes them feel: 'Well,
here are we doing a course safe and sound in our Army
Cookery School and the Germans have lost theirs
altogether.' "
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
68
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
I'm afraid that if 1 got a kick it was a nasty one.
That
room gave me a queer sensation which it is difficult to
explain. It made me feel the very spirit of Germany,
and even when the Junior Commander locked its door
behind us and we walked along the corridor the feeling
persisted. It did not lift until we passed a recreation room
and heard an Auxiliary singing,
"Never put your bun
where you wouldn't put your baby !"
03. 1
Dome
кала
V
But you will say, why write so much about the Army
Cookery School? I write about it because, quite apart
from the value of the practical and theoretical training it
gives Auxiliary cooks, it gives them something yet more
important: the feeling that domestic service in the Army
ranks as high as the most glamorous job offered by the
Service. They return to their units full of confidence, full
of determination to run their cookhouses with slick
efficiency, and they are far better able to cope with all the
snags which may arise.
It is no use minimising the difficulties the average
A.T.S. cook has to face. Houses requisitiened as billets
may be strangely unsuited in several ways. A stove
• which may be delightful when twelve people have to be
catered for becomes a menace when you have to prepare
hundreds of meals on it. A boiler which produces
constant hot water for a family cannot be induced to
provide anything but a lukewarm stream when scores of
girls have to wash themselves, their undies and their
stockings. Sculleries are too small with shallow sinks,
coal-houses are in the most awkward places, larders are
inadequate.
When the cookhouse is not in a house but in a hut
problems are often intensified. I have seen cooks pre-
paring the dinner with ground-sheets over their heads as
protection against the drips coming through the hut roof,
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
69
and I have seen them working with blue fingers because all
the winds that blow are whistling through ill-fitting win-
dows. When I hear soldiers reviling A.T.S. cookery or
listen to fond mothers telling me "My son in the Army
says the A.T.S. spoil all the food," I remember these
things and wonder if anyone short of a magician could
produce a tasty meal in such circumstances.
There are careless cooks and there are "'sticky" units :
on the whole I think the standard is admirable.
The Senior Commander who came round the Cookery
School with me said, "It's a funny thing, but I've always
found that the tougher the job the more my cooks try to
master it. I was with Ack-Ack for two years, through
the worst of the blitzes, and I shall never forget the
behaviour of my cooks.
Just as they finished washing up
each evening the alert would sound. The only cover
we had available for them were slit trenches-nasty damp
things they were too, and in these they'd huddle while
the raid was on, and it usually lasted nearly all night. It
was jolly cold so they wrapped themselves in everything
they possessed, from rugs to bed-socks. Sometimes
when I went round to see them I could scarcely help
laughing, they looked so comical with their tin hats
perched on their heads and an amazing variety of gear
on their bodies. When the all-clear went they were
entitled-indeed, they were supposed to go to bed. But
did they? Not a bit of it! When they thought things
were quietening down they'd scramble out and nip back
to the cookhouse so as to get coffee and cocoa and sand-
wiches ready for the men when they came off the gun-sites ;
then they'd start preparing a really good breakfast-and
even that wasn't all. During the morning, if you walked
around our camp, you kept meeting strings stretched
across the paths with cardboard notices hung on them,
" Quiet, please! Men asleep.' They kept that up not
for one night, or two, or three, but for weeks on end, and
I'm blessed if I know to this day how they did it.".
I asked her if the attitude towards cookery as a job had
altered much since the Service first started recruiting
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
7°
girls for it.
"Gracious me, yes! There was a period when we
didn't know where to turn for cooks. We had to beguile
them and wheedle them and argue with them for hours to
get them to enter the category at all. It's quite different
now. Through the past three years there has been a
gradual growth of interest in cookery. Sometimes, in-
deed, the lists are actually full up, although every day, of
course, brings fresh demands for women cooks to replace
men and release them for foreign service."
For myself I think that is perhaps the greatest achieve-
ment of the A.T.S. ; to have given back to a great company
of women a sense of pride in domestic service.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER V
THE UNSUNG
I
Ask any officer in the A.T.S. what category she thinks
works the hardest and receives the least reward and she
will reply without hesitation "the orderlies."
Ask
anybody outside the Service what category he or she thinks
is the least interesting or onerous, and the answer comes
"orderlies, I suppose. I mean, they just clean, and wash
up and dust-jobs anybody could do. Probably they're
unfitted for anything else."
It seems to me all wrong that because a girl is doing the
job women have done throughout the centuries she should
be looked down upon : it seems even worse that she should
be regarded as a case of arrested development, for the
truth is that the task of orderly in the A.T.S. is a stiff one
which calls for concentration, tact, method and various
other qualities not usually associated with half-wits.
There are seven kinds of orderly in the Service : hos-
pital, house, medical, mess, office, telephone and miscel-
laneous duties—but let us take the three kinds which
are the most ordinary, house, mess and miscellaneous
duties.
The house orderly has the billets or huts where the girls
live garnished and trim. She has to use a terrific amount
of elbow grease on tables and floors; she has to clear up
after other people (for although all Auxiliaries do their own
small jobs there is bound to be a lot of mud or dust left
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
72
behind by perhaps a hundred girls) ; she has to see to the
finishing touches which mean so much the placing of
a vase of flowers here or the straightening of a picture
there.
Not for her the excitement of working on the guns,
the rushing to and fro for lectures or courses: she stays
at home and "keeps house," a process which sometimes
makes her wonder what good she is doing in the Service
until it is explained to her that without her work the
others would soon be in very poor shape indeed. As a
result she generally becomes so house-proud that she
thunders anathema at any colleague who doesn't wipe
her feet on the door-mat.
The mess orderly gets all the kicks and none of the
ha'pence. Apart from the dreary grind of washing up
meal after meal she also serves the food-and if the least
thing is wrong then she hears all about it. Curiously
enough, so far as my observation went, this does not seem
to lead to friction between the orderlies and the cooks ;
rather does it tend to create a bond between these sisters
in adversity.
The miscellaneous orderly has perhaps the hardest job
of all, for she is anybody's girl and her duties are legion.
One moment she may be doing an urgent errand for a
General and the next chasing up the reason behind non-
delivery of the coal. Almost always she is in a hurry
and she traverses endless corridors or camp roadways
each day ; but she prefers that to the occasional periods of
inaction when she sits waiting to be called upon.
There are over 30,000 A.T.S. orderlies serving in this
country alone and many of those are in the sub-categories
described above. Perhaps they did not wish to become
orderlies when they joined the Service; perhaps they
dreamed of Ack-Ack or R.E.M.E., of transport driving
or teleprinter operating-but orderlies were needed so
orderlies they became, and to the general public they are
practically unknown.
Inside the Service they have compensations. Their
officers very genuinely appreciate their work (although
some orderlies will tell you they don't say so quite often
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
73
enough!); and if they prove bright at their job they
stand an excellent chance of promotion-Field-Marshal
Montgomery has an A.T.S. mess steward. They also
have better hopes than several other categories of seeing
overseas service and many of their number are now
abroad,
while others have waited the opportunity to
transfer into different A.T.S. trades. Some have gone
through pre-O.C.T.U. and O.C.T.U. and are now com-
missioned officers-useful ones too for they know all
there is to know about billets and messing.
II
There is, believe it or not, a placidity about orderlies
not met with elsewhere in the Service. I have found it
particularly among house and messing orderlies, to whom
I always make a point of talking when visiting any A.T.S.
establishment.
"Don't you find your job monotonous?" I asked one
who was dusting diligently.
"No. I was a cotton operative before the war and this
job is full of change after that one. Besides, I've learnt
how to keep house and that's important for I've married
since I've been in the Service, you see." She gave an
extra hard rub with the duster and added, " There's
going to be no dirt in my man's house !"
Another was not so cheerful. She thought housework
was "menial"' compared to her previous work as a
factory hand.
"But that's an old, old story nobody believes nowadays
surely ?"'
"You'd believe it all right, ma'am, if you had to put
up with the other girls. It's not what they say, it's the
way they look at you-you know, sort of what's-the-cat-
brought-in-now look. Mind, I like my job and the
Junior Commander's always saying,
Brown, stop indian way saying it cheer in.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
74
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
agination."
I'm afraid a great deal of it was, although I admit the
old social inferiority idea is hard a-dying; but I watched
that Auxiliary carefully and seldom saw her sad or
depressed.
"It's just a 'thing,' " the Junior Commander told me.
"I think some of her friends at home rather sneered at
her and she brought this grievance back with her from
leave about a year ago. She's a very good orderly, and
time and again she's told me she's perfectly content except
for these supposed looks from the others.
I've got a new
idea now. I'm bringing her to the front in our A.B.C.A.
discussion groups."
The idea proved a sound one. When I revisited the
camp several months later that orderly had quite got rid
of her inhibitions. Arguing with her fellows and finding
she could hold her own with them had cured her.
As a rule, however, I found the orderlies very much to
the forefront in all such projects as making and stuffing
Christmas toys, doing needlework of all kinds, knitting
everything from socks to jumpers, decorating black-out
curtains to make them look gay and producing ideas for
the improvement of their billets.
In my lecture-tours among A.T.S. units, too, I have
discovered that the orderlies ask a remarkable amount of
questions, rather sensible forthright ones about life in
other countries. Probably because their jobs are
in
mess, house or office they seem particularly interested in
the outside world, and certainly what you tell them stays
in their minds. When I was going round a unit only
the other day an orderly asked to speak to me and pro-
duced a grubby piece of paper.
"Please, ma'am, you came and talked to us about
Russia five months ago at Brecon and I didn't get a
chance to ask you all the questions I wanted to so I wrote
them down and kept them.
I studied the piece of paper. She wanted to know the
price of stockings in Moscow, whether the Russians used
coal or wood in their stoves, if Marshal Stalin had a
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
75
family, and if I could give her a pattern for "valinki,"
the Russian felt boots.
Not a bad bag after five long months !
Without the orderlies the Service would be in sad •
plight, for they do the essential jobs without which food
could not be served or billets lived in. As a small Scots
girl said to me, "Why, ma'am, we're the ver-ry spinal
column !"'
And how right she was.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER IV
Аск-АСК
I
"D'you remember the Secretary of State for War's speech
in the House on April 10th, 1941 ?' asked the Major.
"You mean about the A.T.S. coming under the Army
Act ?"
"Right-but what special reasons did he give for that
move ?''
"I don't remember."
He regarded me with pity. "You missed something
important there.
He said that Auxiliaries were already
discharging certain functions connected with the Air
Defences of this country and he went on to make this
significant remark,
"The House should know that such
work includes duties at searchlight and gun stations.'
They'd been testing girls out for quite a little time then.
I was one of the first to have girls posted to me, and I'm
ashamed to say now that I didn't welcome the prospect
of training them, thought they'd be a nuisance, thought
they'd upset the Battery and all that. Well, I've had them
two and a half years. I've seen them in action-we had
some pretty good snorters in the way of blitzes here, you
know, and I've seen them when we were all so stale and
edgy we'd have given our ears for sight of a Jerry plane.
I can't praise them too highly. And mind you we set a
terrific standard here. Come along and I'll show you
round. Nothing's laid on specially. Just an ordinary
routine day."
The Major had the reputation of being a bit of a mar-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
77
tinet, tremendously keen on spit and posther Battery
got a mania for paint and whitewash,
Commander had said. "Place looks like a garden in
spring. But I must say," he had added handsomely,
"it makes for efficiency."
The Battery occupied a piece of high ground on the
outskirts of one of England's largest provincial cities.
To our left were the gun-sites, and even their grassy
mounds looked as if they had been shorn with a lawn-
mower: to our right lay the camp, row upon row of
hutments which boasted clean curtains, green-painted
window-ledges and flower borders outside. The paths •
between were edged with whitewashed stones and wherever
there was a spare patch of ground orderly lines of vege-
tables sprouted.
"Of course, you're seeing it at its best this fine summer
day. Still, it's not a bad achievement for this was all
waste land. They used to tip the city's rubbish here.
We'll go to call on the A.T.S. Subaltern first. She has a
sleeping hut, but we had a change-over and are just in
process of putting up her office hut. At the moment she
holds court in this tent.
Rather stuffy in the hot weather
and got an air of the gipsy warned me-cross my hand
with silver kind of touch, but it's quite a good make-
shift."
The subaltern was a serene small person and delighted
with her temporary office. She sat behind one card-table
stacked with papers and a clerk typed at another, while a
big cupboard containing files completed the tent's furnish-
ings. "Isn't it grand?" she inquired eagerly.
"I wish
the summer would last. I shan't take kindly to a hut
after this."
"Aren't you a bit cramped ?"
"Oh, no! It's quite simple with a little method, and
ve 're rather hot on that, aren't we, sir ?'
The Major grinned.
'But you didn't think much of it
when you arrived, did you, Andy? Well, see you later.
We're doing a little tour.
Outside he said, "We're very proud of Andy. When
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
she came first she jumped whenever I spoke to her, kept
saying 'yes, sir,' "no, sir,' like a parrot, trotted every
little problem of her girls up to me. Then we had a talk.
I explained she had her job and I had mine, and I held her
entirely responsible for her Auxiliaries' work and moral
welfare. If she had any really difficult situation to cope
with she could bring it to me at once; otherwise she must
make decisions on her own. For a week or two she walked
about looking as if she had all the cares in the world ;
after that she began to perk up; now she's marvellous
with her girls."
He paused by an open window. "This is our Exhibit
A, won hispiro them, eye just peak this the for, so
I found myself looking at the cleanest kitchen I had
ever seen. The pots, lids and ladles shone like mirrors ;
the table was snowy white ; not a speck marred the freshly
black-leaded surface of the stove. Two Auxiliaries in
overalls were diligently mopping the concrete floor, and
as they caught sight of their Commanding Officer's face
they beamed
"Just finishing off, sir."
He smiled back and moved on. "Neither of those
girls had worked in a kitchen until they joined the Service.
One was in a shop and the other in a factory. It was an
effort on Andy's part to make them understand the value
of cleanliness-now they're liable to throw a mop at
anyone who defaces their precious kitchen."
Walking down the path leading to the butcher's domain
I thought: the martinet story is legend. No girls ever
smiled like that at an officer they feared.
In the butchery an enormous soldier was cutting and
jointing a side of beef, while under his watchful eye an
Auxiliary wielded a chopper on a neck of lamb.
"Careful now," he admonished in the accents of
Tyneside. "Don't hack them, hinny. There's nothing
worse than untidy chops. Puts the lads off their feed.
She's new, sir," he explained, "and a wee bit nervous,
but she'll shape grandly."
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
79
The Auxiliary blushed and chopped with renewed
vigolet me sec," said the Major. "How many girls
have you trained now ?"'
"Seven, sir, and only one a bit backward. Three of
them are tradesmen butchers now. I never thought it
was work for a girl myself, but I've changed my mind."
Like the kitchen, the butcher's shop was spotless.
Carcases dangled from their hooks, chopping blocks were
newly scrubbed, fresh sawdust strewed the floor. (On
future visits to the Battery I never could resist glancing
into it and the kitchen, and whatever hour of the day it
was I never saw them dirty or untidy.)
"Now we'll go over to the gun-sites," said the Major.
"There's a practice on this afternoon.
Naturally we're
only too thankful there hasn't been a blitz lately; but
we're all apt to grow lazy and careless in these quiet
periods and sometimes I think they are far more trying
than our sudden blazes of action, especially for the
A.T.S. They take their job frightfully seriously—we
had some wonderful examples of their team-work in our
dangerous days, and they don't suffer inactivity in the
same easy way the men do."
From a distance I could see scores of girls in khaki
battle-blouses and slacks scurrying to and fro among
the gun-sites like so many ants.
"Heard of rocket-guns,
haven't you? Here they are. They're simple enough
to operate but you need to be mighty nippy on these little
platforms, for the guns swing round-so, you see, and if
you happen to be in the way then it's just too bad. That's
another thing I find with the Auxiliaries. They remember
caution better than the men. Give them a demonstration
of danger once and they won't forget it however many
times they have to do that particular job, whereas fami-
liarity makes the men careless."
We paused beside two Auxiliaries who were crouching
at a small doorway set in one of the grassy mounds.
"They're seeing the ammunition is all in order.
They
check it over once a week. Those others are cleaning and
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
80
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
testing the guns."
"It's strange work for girls to be doing, isn't it? I
tochni chey aerations lihar arons he casily and their
"I don't quite agree,"
said the Major slowly. "I
admit the cause of their being here, the war, is terrible ;
but war is here and we are in the middle of it and I think
these young creatures feel they're really doing something
worth while. I feel also that in the future they will be
able to fight against war far more effectively than their
mothers or grandmothers. They'll know the answers,
you see. These girls have brought an enemy plane down,
seen it hurtling through the sky. They've shared dangers,
excitements, disappointments with their men-folk, they
know exactly what war means. Their conversation is a
bit technical at times, but listen to this."
We halted by another couple squatting by an am-
munition box. They were grease up to their elbows.
"Oh, not Walter Pidgeon, he looks too old. Give me
Clark Gable every time. Oh, boy, he's lovely !'
"I like that George Raft myself. Nice and sinister.
All the same, Pidgeon's my favourite. Golly-chuck
over the grease-pot, will you ?—that guy can act !'
"I say,
• "The Man Who Came to Dinner' is on at the
Plaza. D'you think we can make it on Thursday ?''
"M'm, I've got a date, but I don't think much of
him. Makes sheep's eyes and looks soft, you know. . .
Rather guiltily we retraced our steps without being
seen.
""Technical' I think you said ?"
I followed him meekly to where an officer was shouting
instructions to a mixed group of gunners and Auxiliaries.
"This is the usual drill for action stations. They have
two minutes to get into position."
As the Major spoke his junior drew out a stop-watch
"Now then, I count three-and they're off! One ...
Two….. Three.
There was a concerted rush for the gun-sites and for a
moment the air seemed full of khaki-clad figures, but
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
British Official l'hoto.
Ack-ack night action stations.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
[British Official Photo.
Searchlight Officers in training.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
8 г
there was nothing aimless in their movements. Every-
one seemed to know exactly where to make for and before
I'd really seen the rush the figures were standing motion-
less at their appointed posts.
The young man with the stop-watch sighed contentedly.
"Not so dusty, twenty seconds under time."
"And that,
said the Major, 'has to be done over and
over and over again, even though everyone knows the
drill off by heart.
If we get slack and then there's a
blitz—heaven help us! Now we'll go and see the Plotters
and the Predictors. See where a stream runs through that
dip? Well beyond, up on the hill, you see the barbed
wire fencing and that comic-looking flat building? That's
where they hang out, our brightest and best."
We made our way towards the stream, stopping to
congratulate an Auxiliary who had won a cup at the
Battery Annual Sports the previous week and to watch
three girls who were working in the carpenter's shop on
a new table for the Plotters' room.
"Could you wait a moment?" asked the Major.
"There's a fellow I want a word with."
One Auxiliary told me she had been an assistant in a
dress shop, the second that she had been in a pottery, the
third that she worked for a tobacconist.
"And now you're carpenters! How d'you like it ?"
They giggled. "Oh, well, ma'am," said one. "This
isn't our real job, just a hobby in our spare time. The
Major suggested we should have a kind of club on free
afternoons and learn other people's jobs-I mean, jobs
that might help us in Civy Street afterwards. Ada's in
the cookhouse, Joan's on Telescope Identification In-
struments and I'm a Plotter."
"And that," said Ada, "is why we're doing this table.
Miriam bribed us with seats for the new Bob Hope film.
Still, it's fun, and the sergeant who teaches us is a wonder
at his job."
Joan looked up from her planing. "It's queer how
one changes one's opinions. I'm Army Class and I was
furious when they hauled me into the A.T.S. I hated the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
82
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
Training Depot, and I couldn't get used to living with a
whole lot of other girls, and honestly I did as little as I
possibly could. When I was posted here I thought it was
the end. The men teased me, and I couldn't understand
my job properly.
I thought I'd go potty my first two
months.
Then I kind of settled down and became
interested-I really couldn't tell you why.
Now, of
course, I dread the day I'll be posted elsewhere."
"We loathed the C.O.,"
said Ada candidly. "Re-
member the green paint, Joan? You see, paint's the
breath of life to that man. It wasn't to me. He set us
was a terror! You'd no sooner slip around the corner for
clean and kind of shiny you began to take a pride in it, and
then when he dragged you into all his sports and com-
petitions and things you found yourself enjoying them
against your will.
This club of his, it's a grand idea.
Look, here's our list of members."
It was a long list.
Apparently, belonging to the club
showed a mark of distinction. Its members were roughly
fifty per cent. men, fifty per cent. women: gunners, cooks,
predictors, radiolocation operators, orderlies, instrument
operators, carpenters, plotters and people belonging to
various other categories. It had been running for almost
six months, and through it people could learn a remarkable
variety of useful things. A certain amount of time in
working hours was devoted to its activities, and as I
studied the rules which one of the Auxiliaries handed me
I took my hat off to the Major, for the prime enemy of all
Ack-Ack Batteries during periods of quietness is bore-
dom, and here-presto !—was its cure.
"See
this doll's
house ?"'
said Miriam. "The
butcher's made it for his little girl's birthday, and one of
our orderlies made this bookshelf, and another girl's
trying her hand at a chair."
The Major returned. Reluctantly I left the carpenter's
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
shop to continue our walk, but near the stream he stopped
and pointed with his cane. "Like to have a look at the
livestock ?"
We crossed to a large patch of field surrounded by
netting. Inside it gambolled the strangest selection of
dogs. One was indubitably a red setter, but the rest
were near-terriers, near-spaniels . . . near somethings.
The Major was a great believer in the canine race.
"Makes the men and girls happy if they're allowed to
keep dogs. Most of these are strays which wandered
into the camp because they sniffed the cookhouse, but
their owners wouldn't change them for the best the Kennel
Club could ofter. We had a competition last month for
the ugliest one-that little fellow with the Irish terrier
head and the Sealyham legs won it. The trouble was
they were all over the place, these animals. You couldn't
take a step without tripping over one-and their habits
weren't of the most charming.
When I said they must all
be kept in this run during working hours a moan went up
to high heaven; but they've come round to the idea now.
The Auxiliaries-five of them-take it in turn to do
kennel-maid, and the owners all take their pets out in the
evenings.
Near the "kennels" was the hen-run, and as we walked
up to the wire we saw an Auxiliary, rear-view, bending
above a row of nests.
"How many today?"' called the Major.
She turned and held up a basket full of eggs. "Twenty-
two, sir,"' she said proudly.
"Good!" He added as we turned away, "You mightn't
believe it, but that child was scared stiff of hens a few
months ago. Now, if you miss her off duty, you know
where to find her—in the hen-run."
In the funny squat building on the hill-top I was in-
troduced to the girls working on the Telescope Identi-
fication Instruments, the Height and Range Finders and
the Predictors, to the Plotters and Radiolocation Opera-
tors. They identified planes, friendly or enemy, plotted
the course of the enemy aircraft, located targets and passed
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
much vital information, including directions for gun-fire,
down to the gun-sites by telephone.
They lived in a remote little world of their own, these
girls and their soldier companións. No planes droned
through the clear summer sky, but the Plotters were busy
on their table or working
with the wall-charts; the
Telephonists sat at their switchboards with ear-phones
on; the various Instrument Operators bent over their
apparatus.
It wasn't an act laid on for our benefit;
they did this all day and every day—or all night and every
night, alert and watchful lest the enemy should arrive.
Ilooked around. Jam jars full of wild flowers decorated
the plotting-hut, the tiny mess-room, even the hut which
served as the A.T.S. cloak-room. Somebody had sten-
cilled a border of gay flowers across a wall; somebody
else had planted a row of cypresses as a wind-break
outside the huts. I wandered to the window and gazed
down at the pall of smoke which hid the nearby city. In
it men and women were working in war factories of all
descriptions, but when that work was finished they could
scurry out into busy streets, go and have a pint at the
local, look at the shops or visit the pictures-and if the
sirens sounded they could pop into a shelter. Up on this
isolated hill-top a handful of men and women also
worked, but beer and shops and pictures were far away—
and if the sirens sounded their job was intensified.
The curious part was they seemed happy-or was it
curious? As the Major had said, they were right in
the war.
They knew the answers.
"You're staring rather wistfully at that small concrete
building. Sorry, we can't take you in there. That's our
very hush-hush
compartment where the Radiolocation
people do their stuff."
I hadn't even noticed the building. I had been too
busy thinking of other things ; of the monotony of life on
the hill-top, of the constant strain of watching and waiting,
of the cut-off-from-life feeling people must experience up
here. On the way back to the camp I tried to explain my
rather muddled thoughts to the Major.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
"Ah, that's why we have all our comic clubs and
things. You've got to get the community feeling into a
Battery, otherwise you'll have people scratching each
others' faces just because they're so sick of seeing them.
We have romances too, you know, they're a great help.
At the moment everyone's agog over a budding affair
between the carpenter and one of the A.T.S. cooks. In
my selfish moments I hope it will peter out, for I don't
want to lose either of them."
"Why should you have to lose them?"
"Orders. No husband and wife can be employed in
the same establishment. It sounds hard, but it's a good
rule."'
Near the "kennels" rapturous reunions between
owners and dogs were taking place. Further up the
field a mixed cricket-match was in progress and beside
the cookhouse four Auxiliaries were playing badminton.
"Work is over for the day now ?"
"Except for those on night-shift, yes." The Major added
gently, "Work is never over in a Battery."
The Battery just described was in the heart of England,
near to a great city and a vast industrial area; but my
Ack-Ack visits took me to many isolated Batteries, both
large and small, where it was even more necessary that
Auxiliaries and gunners should make their own amuse-
ments, their own hobbies, their own philosophy of
living. Most of the girls I met came from homes in
towns. They were used to working in busy offices, shops
or factories, to home life, to bustling crowds, to a cinema
or dance-hall just around the corner. Now they were
stationed in the Orkneys or on the Pembroke coast; on
a cliff-top overlooking an angry sea or on a moor where
curlews cried plaintively. They lived under canvas or in
Nissen huts; they were subjected to all the rigours this
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
86
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
many-sided climate can provide; they had to plough
through ankle-deep mud and slither on duck-boards and
suffer the lash of wind and the sting of rain.
Amazingly they were happy. They groused, of course,
and spoke of their surroundings in anything but com-
plimentary terms; but they had my admiration, for they
built out of nothing new interests to replace those they
had lost.
Sceptics will put their contentment with their new lot
down to two reasons: the adaptability of youth and the
fact that they were physically fitter than they had ever
been before.
Undoubtedly those things counted for a
lot, but I prefer to believe the reason went deeper than
that.
I believe that almost without their knowledge the
Auxiliaries were becoming philosphers because they were
living as human beings were intended to live, close to the
earth.
The very simplicity of their existence made them
tremendously keen on the smallest pleasures. I remember
a party of A.T.S. running like hares to catch the only
bus which could take them to a small town twelve miles
away where the cinema had its bi-weekly opening and the
film showing was "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs."
They had all seen it in what was to them the dim and
distant past, but that did not lessen their enthusiasm in
the slightest.
I noticed over and over again, too, how the girls' interest
in their fellow-men was growing. To begin with an
Auxiliary would have the average townswoman's slight
contempt for country folk; within a month or two of her
arrival on a lonely station she would be full of praise for
rural kindness. Äs a Londoner said to me, "When I came
up to the north of Scotland I thought I was coming to the
end of the world. They told me I'd have to have forty-
eight hours' leave to go to the pictures and they were just
about right, but the funny thing is I don't mind a bit now.
The people are so kind to us. The old farmer and his
wife over the hill hold open house for us in our free time-
and can she make scones! And he teaches us sword-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
dancing in the kitchen of an evening. Honestly, I never
enjoyed myself so much."
At another Battery a group of A.T.S. trekked solemnly
in the wake of the local gamekeeper learning the habits of
birds, and at a third dart matches at the pub were the
fashion.
Sometimes, I admit, they found relaxation in rather
peculiar ways. On a lonely stretch of sand by Cardigan
Bay I met an Auxiliary wandering along kicking up the
sand with her toes.
She wasn't "palely loitering,"
however, for she was singing in a lusty though untuneful
voice :
"Mares eat oats and does eat oats
And little lambs eat ivy.
Kids'll eat ivy too-and do. ..."
The month was November, and patches of mist drifted
across the grey sea. I ventured the remark that it wasn't
exactly the weather for a stroll along the shore.
"Och, but it's worth it, ma'am. Coal's so awful
scarce we take it in turns to come down and collect
driftwood. I'm awful unlucky the morning but I'll find
some yet! It's a grand game. There's ten of us in
it and the one who gets the most wood wins a prize-
twenty Woodbines and a month's sweetie ration. Besides,
I like the sea fine. I come from Glasgow, you see, and 1
kind of missed the Clyde—-we used to go "doon the water'
for our holidays to Dunoon."
"You're a long way from home?" •
"Aye, and this Battery's awful dull. We never see a
Jerry. I was in a Battery near 'The Broch' (Fraserburgh)
before, and my, we saw life there! Raids nearly every
night and bombs dropping all round. When I went
home on leave my mother said, 'Were ye no' scared,
Jeannie?' 'Scared ?' says I, 'what way would I be scared
when I'm behind the guns?' Och, there's a fine bit !"
She made a sudden dive and tugged a long spar of wood
out of the sand.
I left her to her self-imposed task and walked back to
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
86
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
many-sided climate can provide; they had to plough
through ankle-deep mud and slither on duck-boards and
suffer the lash of wind and the sting of rain.
Amazingly they were happy. They groused, of course,
and spoke of their surroundings in anything but com-
plimentary terms; but they had my admiration, for they
built out of nothing new interests to replace those they
had lost.
Sceptics will put their contentment with their new lot
down to two reasons: the adaptability of youth and the
fact that they were physically fitter than they had ever
been before.
Undoubtedly those things counted for a
lot, but I prefer to believe the reason went deeper than
that. I believe that almost without their knowledge the
Auxiliaries were becoming philosphers because they were
living as human beings were intended to live, close to the
earth.
The very simplicity of their existence made them
tremendously keen on the smallest pleasures. I remember
a party of A.T.S. running like hares to catch the only
bus which could take them to a small town twelve miles
away where the cinema had its bi-weekly opening and the
film showing was "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs."
They had all seen it in what was to them the dim and
distant past, but that did not lessen their enthusiasm in
the slightest.
I noticed over and over again, too, how the girls' interest
in their fellow-men was growing. To begin with an
Auxiliary would have the average townswoman's slight
contempt for country folk; within a month or two of her
arrival on a lonely station she would be full of praise for
rural kindness. As a Londoner said to me, "When I came
up to the north of Scotland I thought I was coming to the
end of the world. They told me I'd have to have forty-
eight hours' leave to go to the pictures and they were just
about right, but the funny thing is I don't mind a bit now.
The people are so kind to us.
The old farmer and his
wife over the hill hold open house for us in our free time
and can she make scones! And he teaches us sword-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
dancing in the kitchen of an evening. Honestly, I never
enjoyed myself so much.'
At another Battery a group of A.T.S. trekked solemnly
in the wake of the local gamekeeper learning the habits of
birds, and at a third dart matches at the pub were the
fashion.
Sometimes, I admit, they found relaxation in rather
peculiar ways. On a lonely stretch of sand by Cardigan
Bay I met an Auxiliary wandering along kicking up the
sand with her toes.
She wasn't "palely loitering,
however, for she was singing in a lusty though untuneful
voice :
"Mares eat oats and does eat oats
And little lambs eat ivy.
Kids'll eat ivy too-and do. ..."
The month was November, and patches of mist drifted
across the grey sea. I ventured the remark that it wasn't
exactly the weather for a stroll along the shore.
"Och, but it's worth it, ma'am. Coal's so awful
scarce we take it in turns to come down and collect
driftwood. I'm awful unlucky the morning but I'll find
some yet! It's a grand game. There's ten of us in
it and the one who gets the most wood wins a prize-
twenty Woodbines and a month's sweetie ration. Besides,
I like the sea fine. I come from Glasgow, you see, and 1
kind of missed the Clyde—-we used to go 'doon the water'
for our holidays to Dunoon."
"You're a long way from home?" •
"Aye, and this Battery's awful dull. We never see a
Jerry. I was in a Battery near 'The Broch' (Fraserburgh)
before, and my, we saw life there! Raids nearly every
night and bombs dropping all round. When I went
home on leave my mother said, 'Were ye no' scared,
Jeannie?' 'Scared?' says I, 'what way would I be scared
when I'm behind the guns?' Och, there's a fine bit !''
She made a sudden dive and tugged a long spar of wood
out of the sand.
I left her to her self-imposed task and walked back to
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
88
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
the mess.
"Odd pleasures your girls find. I've just
been hearing about the driftwood competition."
The Junior Commander smiled.
"Oh, yes, that's
a good effort and we're grateful for it."
She nodded
towards the fireplace where a wood fire gave out darts of
blue and red flame.
"But if you looked after catering as
I do you'd prefer the Noble Army of Egg Scroungers.
They spend their free time blandishing the neighbouring
farmers with miraculous results. We have all manner of
activities here, from birds'-nesting to doll-making. You
see, our nearest town is twenty-five miles, and when you
get there it's not very exhilarating. We try to have as
many E.N.S.A. and S.E.M.A. shows as possible; but
we're a small unit so have to wait our turn. Honestly, I
think the girls enjoy their own amusements better than •
anything
At the moment they're re-
hearsing
from outside, with a very tough sergeant-
'Uncle Vanya,
major as the Doctor. It ought to be worth seeing."
"Surely Tchekov is flying a bit high ?"
"You might think so, but I've found through experience
of mixed Batteries that the average Auxiliary or gunner
really prefers good drama, music or art to rubbish. That
is, provided he or she isn't pushed up to it and told to
admire it. If you leave them alone and just throw in a
hint occasionally when appealed to you'll find they'll
automatically go for decent stuff. Oh, dear, I must go
round the messes and receive bricks about the meat."'
"What's wrong with it?"
"Nothing—if we'd had time to thaw it properly. It's
that compressed boneless beef and it needs careful treat-
cret thing to taste like bit one if it does done
complain so much about the toughness; what they object
to is the absence of bones."
I sat looking out of the window at the bleak landscape,
wondering if I could ever endure life in this tiny huddle of
huts perched above the bay. Presently my friend of the
morning hove into sight, dragging behind her a great pile
of driftwood lashed together with a rope. As she passed
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
the window I heard,
66
.. And little lambs eat ivy.
Kiddletivy too-and do. . .
Somehow I felt she was well in the running for the
Woodbines and the sweeties.
III
In an experimental gunnery Depot in eastern England
you will find a young A.T.S. Subaltern who wears a red
cap-band. She is the only woman in the Service entitled
to this emblem of the Gunnery Instructor, and she and
her detachment are among the pioneers of a certain branch
of Ack-Ack work seldom heard of by the public.
They are Kinetheodolite Operators, and when their
strange instrument was first produced in 1939 precious
few people outside the Army and only one or two in it
knew how to work the thing.
It was a combination of
camera, telescope and theodolite, and its function was to
photograph moving targets and
shell-bursts in the sky.
Its potential contribution to the success of our Ack-Ack
defences was calculated to be enormous, but it had never
been fully tested in this country and a great handicap was
that practically nobody understood its workings.
Consequently a picked group of A.T.S. were chosen to
master its intricacies under the guidance of Army scien-
tists. They were not all trained mathematicians by any
means, although they had to show a certain standard in
and keenness for that subject as their training included
lectures in such fearsome matters as optics, trigonometry
and electricity. It was not surprising that many of the
girls failed in their examinations. The surprising part
was that those who passed went on to learn how to
develop the photographs they had taken, and how to
calculate the results by trigonometry and logarithms.
By 1942 the Kine theodolite Operators were working at
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
90
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
several heavy Ack-Ack Practice Camps, where they used
their instrument to determine the accuracy of the gunnery
pupils' aim; while at the Experimental Gunnery Depot
the scope of their work had grown tremendously.
The "K.T.'s," as they are called, test every new piece
of Ack-Ack equipment, from a gun down to a tiny gadget,
and the members who work in conjunction with Army
scientists have won for themselves an affectionate nick-
name,
"the Brains Trust." These girls know a very
great deal of our secret weapons against the Luftwaffe
and take an immense pride in their skilled and difficult
job; but to meet they are extraordinarily simple and
unaffected.
Indeed, having watched them at work, I found it hard
to believe they were the same girls who argued violently
over the tea-cups about whether So-and-So should have
her hair done in curls or not. I should have fallen down
trying to learn even a fraction of their knowledge, but the
fact that they knew how to set up and dismantle a kine-
theodolite instrument; how to load the film, bring the
instrument into action and pick up and follow the target ;
how to unload and develop the film; how to evaluate it,
read angles and make corrections ; finally how to compute
and work out the results, seemed to sit lightly upon them.
"It's just a job," said one.
It may have been—to her: to me it was little short of
magic.
"That girl who was reading angles at terrific
speed: what did she do before the war?"
" Training as an art student."
" And the other who was such a wizard at trig-
onometry ?"'
" Oh, she was a County Council Debt Collector."
I didn't ask any more. I crawled away feeling old and
very, very humble.
IV
" The road goes like this," said the Education Officer,
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
91
scribbling briskly at a little map. " You get off the bus
at this bend marked X, where an A.T.S. sergeant will meet
you and take you up to the searchlight site."
It was a day of howling wind which brought with it
great gusts of sleet, and from my vantage point on the
bus-top I spied the sergeant a long way away, a small
figure in mackintosh and wellington boots.
Over her
arm hung an anti-gas cape and from one hand dangled a
second pair of boots.
"I brought these for you," she greeted me. "It's
rather rough going. I hope the boots will fit ?"
My feet are large, but those boots were fashioned for a
giantess—I put them on over my own shoes and still had
to shuffle lest I lost one. Swathed in the anti-gas cape,
I set forth with the sergeant across a species of peat-bog.
" There is a path in the summer, but it's mostly under
vater this time of the year. Have you ever been to :
earchlight site before ?'
" No."
" Oh, you'll like it! I was in an Ack-Ack Battery
before,
but a
searchlight site's much better-more
exclusive. And then we're all A.T.S. here so we feel we're
really doing the entire job on our own. We're all
volunteers for the work, you know, and the Authorities
are very decent. They do try to post friends to the same
site.''
I looked at the lowering sky, the squelching peat-bog,
the utter desolation of the scene. " Why volunteer?""
The sergeant turned a shocked face. " But it's a grand
life! I wouldn't change it for anything !"
With difficulty I extricated my right boot from the bog
which clung to it like bird-lime.
"Seéms a bit grim to me."
"Well, the walk to the bus-stop is a bit awkward, but
we only do it about once a week, if that.
Wait until you
see our camp, it's marvellous !"
The camp consisted of the searchlights and their equip-
ment and a few dejected small huts.
Inside these,
however, things were warm and cheerful. Big fires
crackled in the stoves, several easy chairs looked inviting,
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
92
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
pictures hung on the walls, and potted ferns fringed the
window-sills.
"And we've got home-made toasted buns for tea,"
said the sergeant.
"Our cook's a wonder, you must
meet her. We were at school together, back home.
The tea was excellent.
While we demolished it she told
They experimented secretly with A.T.S. on search-
lights in 1941, first to see if we were capable of doing the
different jobs; then to test whether the conditions would
get us down or be bad for our health. Everything was
O.K., so they set up training schools and called for
volunteers. There were plenty of those, I can tell you !
It's rather interesting how many of them had their homes
in places which had been blitzed—I think they sort of
wanted to have a crack back at Jerry. Of course, all
volunteers had to pass a very strict medical, and also to
prove they were quick-witted and up to the job."
"How long was your training"?
"Four months-and then there were extras. You see,
N.C.O.s not only have to train detachment commanders
and assistants, but they have also to learn each particular
operational job, so that they know all the work the girls
came, them a night I was deployee sites for ining
day and night practice runs. That was followed by a
second month of camp training, and last of all I lived
on a site for a fortnight to get experience of active service
conditions. This site," she waved a hand round the hut,
"is heaven compared to the training conditions. There
we had to learn to rough it in case of necessity. As well
as our own work, we cooked and cleaned and did all kinds
of things. We had very little heating, and as for the icy cold
water we had to wash in—ugh !'
"And still you wouldn't change?"
" Rather not! D'you know, we were actually in
action during an alert only a few days after we finished our
training? We've got a grand lot of girls here, too.
They all get on so well together. "
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
93
After tea she took me round the site in the failing light.
Dismal as the surroundings were, all the Auxiliaries were
astonishingly cheerful and all their equipment was in
apple-pie order.
"It's like an oasis in the desert," I said.
"What a lovely name for the site!" exclaimed an
Auxiliary. "Oh, Sarge, do let's call ourselves 'Oasis'."
Not only other ranks, but officers as well have to put in
a period of stiff training for searchlight operations. They
too must learn how to clean searchlight projectors and
equipment, how to work and repair both lights and
generators. They must study the mysteries of the
rudiments of electricity, learn to recognise enemy aircraft,
and practise riding a motor-cycle under any kind of
conditions. Furthermore, they, must possess detailed
knowledge of how their Auxiliaries live, so when they have
finished actual training they go, eight or so at a time, to
man an isolated site entirely alone. A male warrant
officer is in charge of the technical side, but the A.T.S.
officers have to scrub, light fires, clean huts, cook, and
generally "do" for themselves for six weeks. (Rumour
has it that they also cook, scrub and so forth for the
warrant officer as well, perhaps with an idea of softening
his heart when it comes to the judging of work tests.)
On the particular site I visited the cook was a real
character. Yorkshire-born, she had a sturdy dislike of
what she termed, "that rubbish in tins," and a fierce
determination to feed the Auxiliaries so heartily that they
positively rolled to the site after a meal.
"But how d'you manage without tins in a remote spot
like this ?" I asked.
"Fine. We draw our rations from the Supply people
at X every week. The R.A.S.C. men bring it-and they
don't half carry on about that little bit of a walk from the
main road. The first time I unpacked the stores there
were tins of this and tins of that, so I just stacked them up
in a corner, and next week I told them they could take all
that nonsense back. As for bread-how can you expect
the lasses to eat stale stuff that's been here nearly a week ?
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
94
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
And there's no goodness in that bakery stuff, either.
'Don't you bother staggering along with loads of bread
for me,' I told the R.A.S.C. corporal. 'You bring me a
sack of decent flour and some yeast, instead.'. It took a
fair time to knock it into his head, but he's learnt now.
As for storing things that might go bad, if you've been
brought up in the country like me you know a trick or two.
See this big galvanised bin ?
It's a grand refrigerator.
In the hot weather—that was three days this last summer—
I put all perishable food and milk inside it, and keep it in
the stream out at the back."
"She catches fish there, too," put in the sergeant.
The cook regarded her severely. "Tickle them, you
mean. I'd make a rare poacher, if I took to it seriously.
You'll have your supper before you go, ma'am? It's a
real good hot-pot."
Feeling slightly distended, I drew on my seven-league
boots about eight p.m., and followed the sergeant and a
bobbing lantern across the bog. The wind had dropped
and a crescent moon shivered in the sky.
The sergeant studied the sky with a practised eye, and
sniffed appreciatively. "Fine weather to-morrow, thank
goodness. If we've got time we must cut some peat and
stack it. It helps out with the coal and has such a lovely
smell."
Behind her I thought that if the Ack-Ack girls had
achieved a certain philosophy, the searchlight detachments
had assuredly solved the art of living.
"Don't you miss the bright lights and so on ?"
She shook her head in the moonlight. "Not a bit.
In fact, it's the other way. When I go home on leave, I
feel kind of stifled in a city. When this lot's over, it's me
for the wide open spaces."'
On the road, I handed over my borrowed gear, and
thanked her for her kindness. Swinging myself on to the
bus-step, I remembered something, and called out to
her: "I say, I really do think 'Oasis' is the right
name."'
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER V
"THE BRIGHT EYES OF DANGER"
I
Аск-Аск Battery Commanders have many stories to tell
of the courage and coolness of the A.T.S. on the gun-sites
during periods of danger. They have other stories,
equally heroic, which may not be told until the war is won,
but of those already known there is none finer than that
of Lance-corporal Grace Catherine Golland, now serving
with our Liberation Armies in Europe.
Grace Golland joined the A.T.S. about the middle of
1942. She was previously, like so many other recruits,
a shop-assistant, and her home was in the sadly blitzed
town of Coventry. By January, 1944, she had become
leader of a detachment of instrument operators on an
Ack-Ack gun site in the outer London defences, and had
seen a considerable amount of active service, as the
batteries with which she served had done a lot of good
work in bringing down enemy aircraft.
On January 29th there was a night raid, and the
battery went into action against the enemy bombers
flying up the Thames estuary to attack London. As usual,
Lance-corporal Golland and the five members of her
detachment were in the instrument cabin, busily putting
the guns and other instruments on target. Suddenly,
one of the raiders dropped a canister of incendiaries on and
near the gun-site, and followed it up with H.E. bombs.
Lance-corporal Golland's own account of the happen-
95
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
96
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
ing and its aftermath is direct, almost casual.
"We heard something coming down, but were too busy
to take much notice. The tactical control officer in the
control room telephoned through to say that the bombs
had fallen near us, and were we all right. I acknowledged
this, and just then picked up a fresh target. We gave the
range, and the guns started again. By this time it was
getting very hot, and the smoke and fumes made it
uncomfortable.
We were lucky not to get a direct hit,
and carried on. When the order to 'Stand Down' came
through, I found that the fires were still burning."
For her gallantry, Lance-corporal Golland was
awarded the British Empire Medal, the official citation in
the London Gazette reading :—
"By her courageous behaviour in danger and con-
sistent and unsparing devotion to duty, she has set an
inspiring example to all ranks. On January 29th, 1944,
when performing her gun-site duties, she was engulfed by
smoke and flame from some I.B.s which landed close to
her, accompanied by H.E. bombs which killed cattle in
the next field. Despite the concussion from bombs and
the heat and fumes engendered by the incendiaries,
Lance-corporal Golland remained at her post, and by
her coolness and leadership enabled her team to main-
tain their duties, thereby allowing the site to fire in
further engagements in a period of fifty-seven minutes."
Compare the official citation with Lance-corporal
• Golland's diffidently worded statement, and you get some
idea of the character and pluck of this girl of twenty-three
years old.
Now she is overseas, and with her are other Auxiliaries,
many of them who have displayed similar courage and
devotion to duty. Surely these Ack-Ack girls deserve
undying praise ?
Ask the R.A. officers in charge of the plotting-rooms on
the South Coast before the liberation of Calais and
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
97
Boulogne what they think of their A.T.S. plotters, and
they will pin you down in a corner and talk steadily at you
for hours.
"Keen as mustard on their job," said one. "Those
girls just live for the time when they are in action."
He spoke no more than the truth. Long before D Day,
shifts of A.T.S. manned those front-line plotting rooms
twenty-four hours out of the twenty-four, their job being
to chart the course of every ship, Allied or enemy, passing
our shores within a certain area. In addition, they must
keep constant check on enemy aircraft, and pass on any
information to the Ack-Ack batteries.
The plotters sit around a large table, each wearing a
telephone set with headphones and a fixed mouthpiece, so
that both hands are left free. Against one wall are the
A.T.S. switchboard operators, and the moment they
receive news of any enemy activity the plotting-room be-
comes a positive hive of industry. "Hive" is the word,
for there is no rush or panic, the Auxiliaries work as
methodically and quietly as bees. As each important
piece of information comes through, so they chart out the
enemy's course and work out his speed, while some of their
number simultaneously pass on the bearings and range to
coastal gun-sites.
These were the girls who plotted the course of the
Scharnhorst, the Gneisenau and the Prinz Eugen-and
mighty proud they are of that achievement. They also
plotted the course of the S.S. Munsterland throughout
her two hours' run before the coastal artillery finally sank
her. So pleased were they with this effort that they keep
the tracing as an "exhibit," together with some shell
splinters sent them in gratitude by a coast regiment who
were enabled, by their work behind the scenes, to engage
the enemy.
"You've got to keep on your tiptoes at our job," said
one of them.
"But, luckily, there's no chance of getting
stale, for every week we have 'quizzes' which deal with
all branches of coastal artillery work."
"Yes,"' said another, "and we keep up with the men
G
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
who man the guns. We attend gunnery lectures, to learn
just how much they depend on us for their speed and
accuracy. It's fascinating to find out how much help we
do give them-makes you feel much better about things
when you've got a fit of the blues."
"I like the weekly "speed plots' best," said a third.
"You see, the instructors give us details of the course of a
mythical ship, and we have races as to who can plot her
course the quickest.''
What the girls did not say was that more often than not
they had worked to the accompaniment of the whine,
scream and bang of German long-distance shells fired
from the French coast. The plotting-room might rock
and the earth tremble, hell might be let loose not far above
their heads—but the work went on steadily, surely.
"You had some pretty hot times, didn't you ?"
"Oh, well,"' they smiled, deprecatingly, "it's a whole
lot quieter now."
They were calm and self-possessed, and they interested
me a great deal. One of them, who has since been
posted elsewhere, has been mentioned in despatches for
gallantry. She was wounded by a bomb which fell only
five yards away from her during a coastal raid; but she
merely picked herself up, and ran to the aid of a badly
wounded Naval officer and his wife, who were near her,
and saw them safely to hospital. It was the kind of
action, somehow, that you expected from a South Coast
plotter.
You found another thing you expected : most of these
Auxiliaries had the sea in their blood. This girl came from
Holy Island,
I, that one from a Cornish coastal village:
this one's father and grandfather had been sailors, that
one's brothers were in the Navy, and if some of them didn't
hail from seafaring families, you discovered that they were
married to sailors.
Nowadays they complain a trifle about the "dullness"
Corner on simlar plas hage i don them rather - ich
standard.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
99
Since the V1's were sent to try us, hundreds of Ack-Ack
Auxiliaries have done fine work under most dangerous
conditions-and also under very depressing physical ones.
Hurried off to some new gun-site in order to combat this
fresh menace, the girls often lived under canvas and had
to put up with many minor hardships as well as with
the big risk of a direct hit.
"Oh, but it was worth it," they said, enthusiastically.
"The kick we got when we brought one down !"
It was a kick many people could have well done without ;
but I honestly believe the A.T.S. enjoyed it.
And not only the Ack-Ack girls saw "'the bright eyes of
danger' when the flying bomb attack was at its height.
At a central ordnance depot in Southern England, where
great quantities of M.T. stores lay in readiness to be sent
to the British Liberation Armies in Normandy, a flying
bomb landed in the middle of one night. The staff, apart
from the guard on duty, both soldiers and A.T.S., were
sleeping the sleep of the just after a long spell of working
overtime that the stores might be ready for shipment
overseas. As the huge fire caused by the bomb blazed
up into the dark sky, and the alarm sounded, they jerked
themselves into sudden wakefulness.
On the instant they realised what had happened. The
stores, the precious stores, were in danger !
A.T.S. officers and hundreds of Auxiliaries groped for
their battle-dresses and pulled them on over their pyjamas
—one officer completed her attire with a pair of brand new
bedroom slippers, the only footgear she could find in the
scramble, and when she viewed them in the dawn light,
she saw that their career had been short and sweet.
Running out, these girls worked side by side with the
troops throughout the night, fighting the flames and
salvaging the stores.
An Auxiliary said afterwards, "I don't think I ever had
felt real cold anger until that night. We'd sweated blood
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
100
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
to get those stores ready for shipment, and we knew too
well how terribly badly they were needed. We were all
so mad that we seemed to develop a kind of super-
human energy.
Her words were true, for the A.T.S. performed tasks
which would have been
beyond women's ability at any
other time. Groups of
them shoved loaded railway
trucks and vans to safety. Others dragged heavy cartons
and packs away from the fire. Many of them seized
buckets and formed a sort of human hosepipe, working
with remarkable speed and calmness. As a soldier said :
"They were grand. Their faces were as black as the ace
of spades, but they kept going and kept cheery."'
And as they toiled—trust the A.T.S.—they sang, "This
is the Army, Mr. Brown !''
In the cookhouse, the A.T.S. staff were minus light,
power and water, but somehow they managed to produce
enormous quantities of tea and plenty of sandwiches for
everyone when morning came, and the weary fire-fighters
realised that their job was done, and practically all the
stores were saved. Having swallowed a meal, they rolled
into bed, dirty as they were, but after snatching a couple
of hours' sleep, they reported for ordinary duty at the
normal time.
Not all the flying bombs Germany could
muster could be allowed to hinder supplies going to
Normandy !
In his official report of the incident, the Commandant
of the depot said: "Our loss in stores was insignificant,
owing to the way in which everyone helped. If not
actually in danger of their lives the A.T.S. were in danger
of serious injury, and if ever there was an example of
team spirit at its best, this was it. Next day production
went on as if nothing had happened, our programme was
maintained, stores were dealt with as they arrived-
preserved, cartonned, packed, cased and loaded for
Normandy."
One phrase stands out in that announcement: "If ever
there was an example of team spirit at its best, this was it."
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
IOI
IV
At the time of the Baedecker raids on Exeter, two
companies of A.T.S. were billeted in hostels in the city,
while other were in a hutted camp. During the first
raid, of May 1st, a thousand-pound bomb fell just beside
the latter, with the result that so many uniforms were
damaged by blast that, in the morning, the girls appeared
in a strange variety of costumes to eat a breakfast pre-
pared by pyjama-clad cooks.
"Nobody," remarked one of their officers, drily, "was
late for duty."
But it was in the May 4th, and far worse raid, that the
A.T.S. girls really showed their mettle. Their hostels
were exceedingly badly knocked about-afterwards they
were pronounced unfit for habitation, and owing to the
fierceness of the raid, the officers were unable to contact
the other ranks. Quite undeterred, the N.C.O.s and
Auxiliaries held a council of war on their own. It was all
too evident that the enemy were not only dropping incen-
diaries and H.E., but were dive-bombing and machine-
gunning as well; and the A.T.S. decided it was up to them
to help Exeter as much as possible. Few of them had been
through a raid before; most were in their late 'teens or
early twenties-those things simply didn't count. There
was a job to do and they had to do it.
Large numbers of them offered their services to the
N.F.S., and spent the night running messages, a gruelling
task, as roads were either impassable or littered with
rubble, and the booming of our Ack-Ack guns alternated
with the crash of falling bombs. Three of these girls,
all of them under twenty-one, hauled hoses for several
hours for the chief fireman, and were immensely pleased
when he gave them a note to their officer, explaining
matters, lest they received a reprimand for being away from
billets !
Another group of Auxiliaries were told that a hospital
and an infirmary had been badly hit. Entirely on their
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
xam
102
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
own initiative, they dashed down to the buildings and
helped in the evacuation of the inmates, many of whom
were old and bedridden. Not content, the girls showed
remarkable thoughtfulness, because they realised how
miserable and shaken the elderly folk must be and whisked
them off to one of their less-damaged hostels. Wrapping
their patients in rugs, greatcoats anything that came
handy-they then organised a "begging"
expedition,
going from house to house asking for provisions so that
they might prepare hot drinks and food for their homeless
friends.
Individual acts of bravery were numerous. One A.T.S.
corporal joined forces with an Army warrant officer and
climbed with him on to a blazing roof to try to put out the
fire. As they were hard at it, the roof began to give way
under them, and they crashed with it to the top floor.
Fortunately they escaped with bumps and bruises, and
undaunted by the experience, found another way back to
the roof. It is worth recording that the A.T.S. officers
would have known nothing of this incident had not the
warrant officer reported it to his Colonel.
Three girls, one of whom had only been in the A.T.S.
six weeks, were doing guard on church property. They
stayed on the roof until the raid became intense, then came
down into the building itself. A few minutes later it
received a direct hit, the bomb falling a mere ten yards
from the Auxiliaries and causing a heavy door and showers
of glass splinters from the windows to fall on top of them.
Wriggling themselves free, they shook the glass from hair
and clothing, and decided they had better continue fire-
watching outside the ruins. Most people would have
had enough for one night; but not the A.T.S. When
volunteers were called for to quench the fire on a blazing -
roof-top, the three calmly formed themselves into a
stirrup-pump team, and pumped steadily for almost two
hours. This episode had a violent anti-climax, for when
the overworked fire brigade arrived at last, the men did
not realise anyone was still on the roof, and turned their
hoses full on the poor Auxiliaries !
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
103
One of the A.T.S. sergeant-majors, a former hairdresser,
heard of a particularly bad incident and mustered a rescue
squad of her girls. With their bare hands they dug
in rubble, extricating the dead and dying and carrying
them away. They also rendered first-aid to the seriously
injured, and when they heard children's screams coming
from a burning house they fought their way into it regard-
less of danger in a vain attempt to find them.
The same sergeant-major organised a bucket chain with
the aid of fifty A.T.S. cooks, clerks and orderlies when fire
broke out in an empty house opposite her hostel, thus
saving all the other houses in the street, while a lance-
corporaleir moised the miss helpid to dis vic ins
morning to her sadly damaged kitchen, managed some-
how to get a fire going, rummaged around salvaging
provisions, and cooked a good breakfast for her company.
Another cook, a corporal, found an open grate the sole
usable article left in her kitchen, so she practised emergency
cooking in real earnest. With bricks taken from bombed-
out houses, cement made out of garden earth and water,
and several flattened tins, she and her three assistant cooks
built a most elegant field kitchen. With this and the
open grate they turned out an excellent meal of roast beef
and potatoes for sixty people.
Despite all these activities the A.T.S. suffered only two
casualties—both of whom carried on with their fire-fighting
until their injuries were discovered. One girl was filling
a fire-bucket at her hostel sink when the building got a
direct hit and the whole kitchen fell in on her, injuring her
leg. The other was a sergeant who was thrown to the
ground by blast and received severe bruises in both eyes.
Strangely enough the A.T.S. were reluctant to leave
Exeter after the raids, so reluctant that one party from a
damaged hostel sneaked back to clean it up in the hope
that they would then be allowed to stay there. They
shovelled the plaster away, knocked the broken panes out
of the windows, mopped up the mess where incendiaries
had been attacked with stirrup-pumps, and cleaned the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
104
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
rooms. Great was their disappointment when the
premises were condemned as uninhabitable.
"We'll go back," they said, "just as soon as they can
find us a billet."
They did go back eventually, these Auxiliaries who had
won high praise from Exeter's citizens, and with them they
took several dogs who had attached themselves to the
strength during the raids, and a black-and-white cat
named "Blast,
," because a bomb simply blew him into
their doorway.
"We like Exeter," they said, comfortably.
Exeter gladly returned the compliment: it liked the
A. T.S.
At Easter, 1941, a number of A.T.S. cooks were attached
to a heavy Ack-Ack battery on the outskirts of Belfast,
and whenever the alert sounded the girls used to report to
the cookhouse in order to brew cocoa for the gun-teams.
One night, while they were busy on this job, a shower of
incendiaries dropped on the men's sleeping quarters next
door and set them ablaze. Naturally the gunners were
all at their action stations, so the A.T.S. corporal cook and
her two assistants tackled the incendiaries first with sand-
bags and, when the supply of these ran out, with the lids of
swill bins. They had to work under a positive hail of
H.E.s and land mines which were coming down all round—
but they got the fires under control and, most important of
all, saved their cookhouse.
Other cooks, working for one of the Ulster regiments,
were not so fortunate, as their cookhouse suffered a direct
hit and was completely destroyed, while to make matters
worse, the cooks themselves were bombed our of their
billest during the same raid. Cold and bedraggled, they
turned up for duty next morning to find nothing save a
heap of rubble. They did, however, manage to serve the
men with tea from a temporary canteen, and thereafter
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
105
for several months worked under extreme difficulties,
using trench fires and other makeshifts.
"Och, and they didn't complain either," said an
Ulsterman.
"Mind, I'd always thought myself these
little bits of English girls were no use at all, at all ; but I'd
fly in the face of anyone who talked them down ever since
that Easter Tuesday."
VI
One small group of A.T.S. girls face daily another kind
of danger which has nothing to do with enemy action.
Their job is to repair thousands of rounds of ammunition
sent back from Army units all over the world to be re-
conditioned and reissued to the troops.
It is a job which has never before been done by women.
The men, who were replaced by the first seventeen
"pioneer"' Auxiliaries, were fully trained to the work, but
not one of the girls had so much as handled ammunition
before she was posted to the depot. Their lance-corporal
was an Irishwoman, daughter of a Regular Army officer,
and among the auxiliaries were the manageress of a green-
grocer's shop, several shop assistants, a few factory hands,
one or two clerks and a bottle-washer.
Wearing slacks and denim overalls, the ammunition
examiners unpack the shells, take each round to pieces, fit
new parts, reassemble, grease, and finally paint the
outsides of the shells. All ammunition thus repaired has
then to be packed in boxes with detailed lists stencilled
on them. By a date late in 1942, these "pioneers" had
already saved the country hundreds and thousands of
pounds and salvaged thousands of rounds of ammunition.
One of their earliest jobs was a consignment of some
thousands of rounds which had been badly damaged when
the ship in which it was travelling went on fire, and the
magazines had to be flooded. They made every shell
serviceable once more, and the consignment was soon on
its way to some theatre of war.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
106
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
To begin with, some of them found the shells heavy to
handle-for they had to deal with such varying types as
3.7 howitzers, two-pounders, smoke shells and anti-tank
shells; but very soon they discovered that a knack of
balancing was more useful than sheer physical strength,
and in a short time they managed this part of the work with
ease.
They also learnt to fit fuses to new shells which were
delivered straight from the factory, and their output per
man-hour has consistently kept as high as that of the
soldiers they replaced.
The work is dirty and greasy as well as requiring constant
watchfulness, but the girls call it "a fine job," and the
visitor can hear them before she sees them, because they
sing the livelong day. The "choir" is led by an Auxiliary
who was a chocolate-packer before the war, and while
Pistol Packing Mamma and Pass the Ammunition
are natural favourites, Loch Lomond and the songs of
Harry Lauder are good runners-up-there are four Scots
lassies among the ammunition examiners, and to listen to
one of them crooning Annie Laurie to a howitzer shell
is an education in itself.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER VI
"THE BACK ROOM GIRLS"
I
THERe are many types of " back room girls' in the A.T.S.,
but the title was given primarily to the Auxiliaries-well
over five hundred of them-who work in Second Echelon,
A.T.S., and they own yet a third name which I think is the
nicest of all: " The Foster-mothers of the British
Liberation Armies."
They know all the answers, not to questions concerning
guns or tanks, landing-packs or "'recce"' cars; but to
questions concerning the joys and sorrows, the welfare
and next-of-kin of that grandest of men, Mr. Thomas
Atkins.
Suppose news is wanted of a soldier who is on the danger-
list of some hospital-Second Echelon will supply all
details. Or a high official requires the latest casualty
figures-Second Echelon will produce them. A front-
line soldier has to be found a new job because he is
medically down-graded-Second Echelon will forward a
neat little card with his record, his previous employment,
his capabilities and his medical category typed upon it.
For Second Echelon has charge of those most precious
things, the documents of the soldier in the field.
"Not that the average person believes they're precious,"
said an Auxiliary.
"I didn't myself, until I worked here.
I thought this outfit was just another piece of Army
red-tape. But soldiers must have documents; without
107
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
108
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
them they'd get lost, simply have no entity. I work in
P.I.M. branch, that's Provision of Information Mis-
cellaneous, and we have to keep tabs on all B.L.A.
personnel, so you can imagine it's a pretty hefty job !
Our Junior Commander is the first woman ever to replace
an Army officer in any Echelon formation, so we've got a
bit of a reputation to keep up."
"What sort of ' tabs,' exactly ?"
"Well, here's a request for details of Private Smith. It
gives his number and regiment, that's all. By tomorrow
morning I'll be able to tell you an awful lot about Private
Smith; precisely where he's stationed, when he em-
barked, where he was in this country from enlistment
onwards, what he did in civil life, how old he is, where he
was born, if he's married, if he has any children. I
expect I'll be able to add to that, too-how many teeth he
has, and if he's got an appendix scar. All that sort of
thing."
"It's funny,"' she went on, "how you build up a
mental picture of Private Smith while you're working on
his history. We have a kind of game here, telling each
other what we think So-and-So must be like. Frightful
blow the other day. I'd had lots of requests for informa-
tion about a man, and honestly he sounded as if he was
like Adonis. Then he won a decoration, and I saw his
photograph in the papers, and he was bald, with a snub
"It must be interesting work ?"
*"Oh, rather. I mean, we're dealing with people : it's
far more thrilling than the job most A.T.S. clerks do. We
get fearfully excited when any of our particular pets get
into the news because of some gallant action, and we get
equally depressed if one of our lads gets sent to the glass-
house. I met a woman the other day when I was on
leave, the wife of one of the boys I look after. She'd have
had seven fits if I'd rattled off all my knowledge of her
husband !"
Another branch of Echelon has a sadder task, for it is
their job to inform the next-of-kin if a soldier is wounded,
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
109
missing, or killed. Sometimes news comes through that a
man is wounded, but no details of which hospital he is in
are yet available, and in these cases the Auxiliaries have to
use both judgment and discretion as to the notification to
be sent to his relatives.
"It's rather difficult," said one.
"We don't want them
to worry unnecessarily, to think their husband or son is
terribly ill when perhaps he is only slightly wounded. On
the other hand, we must let them know at once that he is in
hospital. I know sometimes the relatives think us vague
and callous, because we can't give accurate details right
away. We can't expect them to realise the difficulties
which arise when there is a push on and men from difierent
units get all mixed up; but some of their inquiries-well,
they make you wonder how you'd behave if such a thing
happened to one of your own people."
"I dread the 'missing, believed killed' most," said
another Auxiliary.
"There's nothing definite to go on,
and there's always the far hope that the man is alive. It's
a hope that grows, too, I've noticed, as time passes and no
fresh news comes through. In certain cases, of course, he
turns up safe and sound, and we can write and tell his
people. That's a real joy-even if we do have to use
official phrases."
One might think that girls employed continually on the
work of reporting casualties might grow case-hardened
to human suffering, The opposite is true. The longer
an Auxiliary serves in this department of Second Echelon
the more she feels for the relatives who wait so anxiously
for news.
In a third section of Echelon one A.T.S. clerk has been
very busy indeed since D Day. Her job is in E.P.W.-
Enemy Prisoners of War-and she will tell you that she
enjoys working overtime, because that means things are
moving in our favour, and several thousand more Ger-
mans are knocked out of the war.
So far she is the only
Auxiliary clerk in this branch and in her leisure hours she
is busily learning German from her soldier colleagues.
E.P. W. branch guards many secrets which Dr. Goebbels
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
1I0
would dearly like to have known.
In its files are details of
the numbers of prisoners taken in each engagement, all
particulars of individuals, and lists of the possessions
found on each man at the time of capture. Another set
of files contains documents found in enemy offices or on
enemy personnel, and attached to each one is not only a
direct translation into English, but also a summary of the
contents.
Sales assistants, insurance clerks, concert artists, youth
club workers, girls who joined up straight from school—
all these work in Second Echelon; and the Senior Com-
mander in charge of them was serving with the A.T.S. as a
cook before the war, rose to the rank of sergeant, and went
to France in 1940 with the B.E.F.
Il
Occasionally you may meet an Auxiliary wearing a
five-starred dark crimson badge on her arm. Most
probably you take her for an orderly attached to the
R.A.M.C., but she is a little more than that, she is one of
the blood transfusion orderlies, and if you question her
you will find she is extremely proud of belonging to the
only distinct and specialised transfusion service of any
Army, Allied or enemy, in the world.
Six months before the outbreak of war an Army blood
depot started work somewhere in the south-west of
England. Then it possessed a staff of half a dozen;
now, nearly three hundred and fifty people work in it and
ninety per cent. of these are members of the A.T.S.
The girls assemble all the complicated rubber and glass
apparatus required for the blood-taking and blood-
giving sets, sometimes even blowing their own glass tubes.
They test for bacteria with microscopes and they sterilise
and bottle the fluid plasma which may mean new life to
wounded men, to air-raid casualties, perhaps to civilian
hospital cases.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
IlI
Practically none of the Auxiliaries had any scientific or
medical training or knowledge, but they do their job
carefully and well, clad in white overalls and face-masks,
and they have developed a sound understanding of
chemical substances.
The laboratory girls look after the "separator," the
machine which separates the fluid plasma from the red
corpuscles. Then they filter the fluid plasma through
steam-sterilised pads and send it to the hygienic "out-of-
bounds' room where more Auxiliaries bottle it. At first
difficulty was experienced with the plasma clotting, but a
method has now been devised which stops this.
In the adjoining Bacteriological Department, the blood
is subjected to certain tests, and here a nineteen-year-old
A.T.S. corporal helps with highly skilled research work.
Formerly an operator in a stocking factory, she is anxious
to become a permanent laboratory assistant after the war.
Other auxiliaries are kept busy preparing " crystalloids,''
made from saline or glucose. For the six to eight thousand
bottles which are dispatched each week they have to distil
about a thousand litres of water a day, and the bulk of
the "crystalloids are sent to the United States Forces.
Then there are the ""needle sharpeners" ; the girls who
twirl the needles used for injecting purposes on oily stones
until they are exactly right. This is a job more difficult
than it appears, as it needs firm fingers and a high degree
of precision; but the really adept Auxiliary manages to do
over three hundred a day.
Not very far away from the main depot is the "shadow
factory," and it can carry on work entirely independently
if necessary. Here is housed the £20,000 dried plasma
plant which was presented to the Transfusion Service by
the Silver Thimble Fund. An Officer of the Royal
Engineers is in charge of this, and he is assisted by A.T.S.
staff who are very keen on learning the engineering side.
The plant produces an average of twelve hundred pints of
dried plasma a week, and has never stopped running since
its installation.
But there is another side to the Transfusion Service,
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
112
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
possesses fifteen "bleeding teams," each consisting of a
medical officer, four V.A.D.s and three A.T.S., two of
whom are drivers and the third an orderly.
They lead a strenuous life, as "provincial bleeds" are
arranged for eight to twelve teams every single day, and
more often than not the drivers have an awkward time
manœuvring the vans loaded with all their equipment up
and down narrow country roads.
"But we haven't been beaten yet,"' said one. "And
we've undertaken 'provincial bleeds' in some odd places.
Normally we requisition a hall, but once we used a local
churchyard in a Cotswold village. The only thing we
can't take with us is running water, so we have to make
sure of that requirement wherever we go. Of course, we
drivers don't just sit about when we reach our destination.
One of us welcomes the donors-some of them are a bit
nervy and agitated; and the other lays on tea for those
who have been 'bled.' The orderly, poor dear, acts as
sort of head cook and bottlewasher.
She does a bit of
everything, and usually helps the M.O."'
The main depot sends abroad to the different theatres of
war all transfusion material and equipment which cannot
be obtained on the spot, as well as supplying civilian
hospitals and R.A.F. stations in the west of England and
a large proportion of the United States Forces. Its
clerical staff of A.T.S. is kept particularly busy, as records
of over a quarter of a million donors have to be filed for
- reference.
Other girls are kept hard at it, looking after medical and
linen supplies, and washing thousands of bottles and
hundreds of miles of rubber tubing; while the cooks and
orderlies, in addition to feeding personnel, have to provide
packed meals for the "'bleeding teams."
Packing is another big item in the depot. Soldiers do
the heavy lifting, but the Auxiliaries pack about twenty
tons of material and equipment a week for overseas
forces, and also make up smaller packages which are sent
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
113
by air to stations in this country and in Northern Europe.
The packers are very proud of a new gadget, a special
parachute set in a padded basket, which can be dropped
from practially any height without damage to the plasma.
So important is this "back room" work that a new
A.T.S. trade has come into being, that of "Transfusion
Technician." In order to earn the title, the girls have to
attend lectures on the various chemical processes used and
sit examinations in subjects dealing with the composition
of the blood, the making of both fluid and dried plasma,
and the assembling of the giving and receiving sets.
III
In June, 1942, five Auxiliaries reported for duty at a room
in the War Office. In civilian life they had been either
professional or keen amateur photographers, and they
were fresh from a further training period in the Post Ofice
Research station. Their new job was to help with the
Microgram Service, an advanced and perfected form of
micro-photography which is now used for the sending of
official documents.
Nearly all such documents used to be transmitted by rail
or sea, very unsatisfactory methods, as they either took
months to reach their desination or were lost by enemy
action at sea. Thanks to the Microgram, their delivery
has been speeded up to a remarkable degree, and while
formerly this service operated mainly from overseas to
Britain, it is now being quickly developed in the opposite
direction.
The system works in the following manner. The
Microgram units with the overseas Armies make micro-
scopic negatives of the documents on lengths of film—
sometimes a hundred feet of film bears the negatives of
sixteen hundred documents. If possible, the films are
developed before being sent home by air, but in many
cases facilities are not available, and the negatives have
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
to be forwarded as they are, in a tiny metal container
about the size of a two-ounce tobacco tin.
On the arrival of the containers in this country the
A.T.S. girls begin to play their part. They unpack the
films carefully and, if they are undeveloped, develop and
dry them with chamois cloths on a revolving drum. They
then put them through a micro-printer, which makes
enlarged copies of the documents and also fixes, washes
and dries the prints at such speed that a thousand docu-
ments an hour are turned out.
"I rather fancied my photographic knowledge until I
took on this job,"' said an operator, "but, believe me,
I knew less than nothing! This machine is extremely
complicated, and took a lot of study before I got the hang
of it, and what they didn't teach us about photographic
papers and chemicals at the Research Station wasn't
worth knowing !"'
"Don't you find it rather a monotonous job ?"
"Heavens, no! There's a fresh twist to it every day.
Besides, just think of the training I'm getting. I'll be
able to set up as a Microgram expert on my own after the
war.
She had something there.
IV
If you see an Auxiliary wearing a flash on which a sword
is shown against a black background topped with blue and
a multi-coloured strip you will know she belongs to
S.H.A.E.F., the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied
Expeditionary Forces. Most likely, however, you will
not realise that this flash was designed by an A.T.S.
corporal who works in the H.Q. topographical office with
three British and three American soldiers as colleagues.
She assembles maps in sections for the use of high-ranking
officers and did some good work on those used at the
Quebec Conference.
It is a tricky job, as much informa-
tion has to be transferred to each map and the layout of
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
115
forces and features of the countryside carefully filled in ;
but the corporal found time to design the flash which she
herself wears, and she holds the cherished original painting
of it that General Eisenhower autographed for her.,
She made the flash as a symbol of the Allied aims.
The sword is the sword of liberation, and the black back-
ground represents Nazi oppression.
The blue stands for
the skies of peace and the multi-coloured strip is a rain-
bow fashioned from the Allied colours.
There is, of course, a certain glamour about working
in S.H.A.E.F., the actual heart which pumps the blood
through the Allied arteries; but the jobs there are hard
and exacting, and the five hundred A.T.S. officers and
Auxiliaries who wear the S.H.A.E.F. flash have all been
most carefully picked, for in addition to being efficient
they must possess an acute sense of security.
The A.T.S. in S.H.A.E.F. form part of a highly
organised Super-Combined Operations team, working
alongside the Royal Navy and the Wrens, the United
States Army and the W.A.C.S., the British Army, the
R.A.F. and the W.A.A.F. With the other women's
Services, they share barrack-rooms, recreation rooms and
mess-rooms in a camp which is run superbly on American
lines. W.A.C.S. run the kitchen, the laundry, and the
"post exchange" which takes the place of the N.A.A.F.I.,
and sells American cigarettes, toilet articles and so forth.
One A.T.S. officer is personal assistant to the Chief of
Staff, another helps his deputy, and several more act as
Staff officers in the Intelligence and Civil Affairs divisions.
One Auxiliary works in the Publicity and Psychological
Warfare department, and two more are attached to the
European and Allied Contacts section.
Forty-six A.T.S. are members of a large mixed M.T.
company which is responsible for a shuttle car service.
This is a gruelling job, for the company pays no heed to
regular hours, and girls are often on duty for extremely
long periods during "rushes"; but to lighten matters,
the A.T.S. girls have invented a game of counting scalps-
the two which win highest marks are General Eisenhower
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
116
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
and Field-Marshal Montgomery, for sometimes the
leaders' personal drivers are not available, and then an
Auxiliary may have the terrific thrill of driving one of the
great men.
But it is in the S.H.A.E.F. Signal Unit that the A.T.S.
really come into their own, and the hundreds of girls who
work there feel they are at the very nerve-centre of the
invading Armies.
Six of their cypher officers help to
deal with what is known as " Top Secret Traffic," and
the rest, together with Wrens and W.A.A.F., man one
of the biggest switchboards in the world. It was nine
A.T.S. operators who put out all over the globe General
Eisenhower's first D Day communiqué regarding the
Allied landings in France and that is an event they will
never forget.
They will not forget either that they were among the
first to hear of these landings, for very early on D Day
every girl working in S.H.A.E.F. received a copy of the
personal message from General Eisenhower which was
issued to all men taking part in the invasion.
Some of the A.T.S. have followed S.H.A.E.F. overseas ;
others are eagerly awaiting the summons to go.
"We've got something to remember for the rest of
our lives,"
said one.
"Think of the tales we'll be able
to tell our grandchildren ?"
"Oh, but you're in Signals,
" said another. "We
M.T.s have the best job. D'you know what my bag is
up to date? The C.-in-C., two Field-Marshals, one
Admiral, two Air Marshals and a whole long list of lesser
celebrities. I've got so high-hat I just don't count anyone
below the rank of Major-General.
Ileft them wrangling happily as to the merits of their
particular jobs. In their hearts they knew no real rivalry—
they all wore the S.H.A.E.F. flash, that was the only
thing which counted.
V
On the day the news of the Dieppe raid came through
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Packad
wome
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
117
an Those are our lads, she said exciterless.
"Goodness,
I could tell you every little bit of their equipment, from
mugs to portable oil-stoves, from fire-fighting appliances
to mobile hospitals. You see, we prepared and packed
them all."
-Since that day she has had many proud moments when
she hears or reads of Allied landings, because for every
one of these she and her companions at a Central Ordnance
Depot have seen to it that the Forces employed have all
they need.
she said.
And then we've refitted them when they come back,"
especially in what we call 'domestic issue,' the personal
things like knives and spoons and blankets which each
soldier takes with him.
Going around the stores where these Auxiliaries worked
I realised for the first time what an immense variety of
equipment soldiers do need. In one shed, beds and
bedding were piled up to the ceiling, in another were
stacks of tool-chests, in a third a positive army of bicycles,
in a fourth thousands and thousands of saucepans and
cook-stoves.
The sergeant in charge smiled. "Lots of people are
astonished when they see our stores. So many of them
seem to think a soldier just needs a rifle and ammunition
to go into a raid with-we know better. He simply can't
live without hundreds of odd things that don't seem to
have any direct connection with war. I wouldn't change
this job for a lot. We've been responsible for kitting
up the troops for raids from Burma to Norway. Every
time news of one comes through we chalk it up on the
wall. "
This "back room"' job might seem dull to some ; but
not to the girls who do it. Busy as they are, they still
find time to tuck little good-luck messages in beside the
contents lists of packs, and they have their reward when
a soldier writes how grateful he is that everything was in
order.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
118
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
VI
In a remote district of Scotland a group of A.T.S. girls
are working with Wrens and W.A.A.F. at a Combined
Operations Centre where Commandos are trained.
"The poor things,"' said an Auxiliary cook. "Before
we came they were living on wee bits of birds and any fish
they could catch, and a sort of dough they had made
themselves and called bread. Why, they even ate grass,
"Get away with you, Cookie," laughed another.
"They were only pulling your leg."
"No, they weren't,"
exclaimed the cook. "Talk about
toughening! The poor lads were fair starved. Anyway,
they don't go hungry now. They have a decent meal
whatever time they come home from an exercise."
"Oh, Cookie spoils them—and don't we know it, as
orderlies. She'll root us out of our beds at two in the
morning if her precious boys come roaring in wanting
something to eat."
"My God," said an Auxiliary who had just walked into
the kitchen.
"Anybody know if it ever stops raining in
Scotland? I've been here three months and I've never
seen the coastline yet."
The cook bristled.
"'It's a better climate nor you'll
get in that England of yours. Fine and healthy, and it
makes your hair curl !"
"You can keep it, chum. Pity your people don't build
some more railways."
"You've got a pair of feet, haven't you? Come on
now, there's no time for talking for the lads will be back
in half an hour, hungry as hunters."
While the orderlies set tables and the cooks prepared
masses of bacon and eggs I wandered round the Quarter-
master's stores. Here Auxiliaries looked after a frighten-
ing selection of ammunition and equipment used in
operational training.
"What's that?" I pointed to a fearsome object.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
119
"A smoke-bomb," said the A.T.S. Corporal. "And
how do you like our line in knives—pretty little things,
aren't they ?"
"M'm, they certainly look useful. I say, what did you
do before the war?''
"I was a typist in an insurance office."
It seemed a queer change to come from that decorous
existence to a store bristling with the accoutrements of
modern warfare, but I was growing used to meeting
A.T.S. whose present job was utterly at variance with
their former one.
"And do you like being skied up here?"
"I hated it to begin with, but this summer I've taken
to swimming in the loch. It's a bit icy, but it keeps you fit."
I noticed that all the Auxiliaries in this camp had caught
the desire for physical fitness from the Commandos with
whom they worked. They swam and ran and held jumping
competitions and they looked, and were, about as tough
as the men-folk.
In the Camp Post Office two Auxiliaries were answering
a variety of odd questions from a batch of men who had
just arrived.
"It's queer," said one afterwards, "but we have the
greatest difficulty in explaining to the new boys that this
is a genuine post office. They think it's some sort of
Heath Robinson arrangement and we have to din into
their heads the information that they can post letters,
buy stamps, register letters or parcels, send telegrams, in
fact do everything they would do in a proper civilian
post office."
"Yes," said her companion, "but then most of them
think they've come to Mars. I don't blame them either.
I thought so myself when I arrived. And to think that
six months ago I didn't know what a Scotch mist was !
Oh, well . . .
She began to sing under her breath :
" It isn't the Wrens who get the men,
The A.T.S. are here again ..."
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
120
Certainly the view from the post office window was
depressing. A grey moor stretched to a greyer sea, and
behind the moor reared the dark smudgy shapes of
mountains. The mist was wet and penetrating and the
ground underfoot so soggy that Wellington boots were a
necessity.
"And it's mostly like this," said the singing Auxiliary.
"When we get a fine day, mind you, it's sheer heaven-
but you see those red rings round certain days on that
wall calendar? Well, those were the days we actually
saw the sun. And it's July, mind you."
I walked out and across to the officers' mess where an
A.T.S. sergeant bustled busily round seeing that the long
tables were in order.
"We cater for three hundred here-Navy, Army and
Air Force. I really think they eat twice as much as men
do in any other camp. But they're grand lads, just like
kids.
They're so pleased with the least thing you do for
them."
She had looked after two children as their "nanny"
before the war. Now she had increased the number of
her charges, but she remained as watchful, as careful
as ever.
Going back to the cookhouse I saw the Commandos
swinging across the moor. They were plastered in mud
and laden like Christmas trees with all their equipment.
From the post office came the Auxiliary's voice lifted in
song and the men took up the refrain to the tune of
"Mademoiselle from Armentieres" —
"It isn't the Wrens who get the men,
The A.T.S. are here again . .
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER IX
PRELUDE TO INVASION
I
In the long months before D Day people thought precious
little about the A.T.S. It was natural that all their hopes
and fears should be centred round the soldiers, all their
conversation round the possible date of the invasion that
must come.
But it was during those months that the
A.T.S. carried out possibly the finest job of its career in
feeding and equipping the men and preparing their
armour, their vehicles, every least thing they required
• to take across the Channel.
— In every Headquarters where the final plans for the
Liberation of Europe were perfected were A.T.S. clerks,
signallers and drivers-and some of the first-named had
worked so long and so closely on certain blue-prints that
when they themselves were drafted over to the Continent
and reached the coast of France they immediately
recognised one of the huge prefabricated harbours.
Auxiliaries in the great Ordnance Depots knew a bigger
"Number One Priority rush than they had ever known,
and for months on end willingly sacrificed their free time
and their social life so that the Army might be ready.
One especially interesting job they did was to help
with the "waterproofing" of tanks so that these might
"wade" from the landing-craft to the beaches. It was
Auxiliaries, working in mobile teams, who unpacked all
the stores for this very secret new equipment, stacked
121
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
122
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
them in certain order so that the men who were fitting
the kit might know exactly where to find everything,
measured off required lengths of the different components
and assembled complete kits for ten tanks or lorries
before packing them up carefully in crates stencilled with
the names of the vehicles for which they were to be used.
So "hush-hush" was the waterproofing kit that none
of the A.T.S. storewomen knew exactly how it was fitted
on to any vehicle. What they did know—-and remember—
was that if they forgot or inaccurately measured one
single item then the vehicle would not "wade" ashore.
To these Auxiliaries life meant just one thing for many
months-waterproofing kit; and they are now enormously
proud of the Army's nickname for them-"the waders."
But all over the country storewomen in the many
different Depots were working for invasion; unloading
and taking on charge stores which came straight from the
factories, maintaining and arranging them while they
stayed in the Depots, choosing them, labelling them,
checking them and at last packing them to be sent off
to the troops.
In one R.A.O.C. Depot, Auxiliaries worked in a store-
house divided into four sections, each holding stores of a
particular type. Apart from the trained team of girls
employed in every section a "flying squad"' of expert
Auxiliaries was mobilised in order to speed up production.
They knew the whole store backwards and could be sent
from section to section as the work demanded.
From this Depot the A.T.S. packed and despatched
every possible sort of communication equipment; from
helioscopes to wireless sets, from field telephones to
telescopes, from compasses to searchlight and radio-
location apparatus, together with all necessary spare
parts and tools, so that the men at the other end might
be able to lay hands on each necessary article without
delay.
"We supplied the Commandos with their watches, too,"
said an Auxiliary. "Wonderful watches, they time their
attacks by them, and as men's lives and perhaps the
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
123
success or failure of the whole attack rested on them we
had to be awfully careful with their packing."
Altogether 25,000 items of communication equipment
were sent out by Auxiliaries from this Depot, and every-
thing had to be checked and double-checked to ensure
that not the slightest error was made. The girls knew
only too well that the stores they examined and packed
would not be opened until they reached the actual battle
zone, where a faulty connection in a field telephone or
even a tiny screw packed in a wrong container might
mean delay and perhaps unnecessary loss of life. So hour
after hour they worked like beavers, dealing with the
stores which flowed into the Depot from all parts of the
Empire and from the United States as well-and apart
from their actual work they had to be able to identify
every one of the 25,000 items under their charge, for
one day they might be sorting and packing miles of
cable (they had 300 different types in stock !), the next
signal flags, the third containers of distilled
water for
accumulators, the fourth the light wireless sets the troops
can carry into action on their backs, the fifth pigeon
parachutes in which the birds in their cages float down
from the 'plane to land in some prearranged place.
Besides the storekeepers there are the A.T.S. truck and
crane drivers-the crane here is driven by a girl of
twenty-one, an ex-post office assistant who has been in
the Depot over two years and likes her clumsy vehicle
•so much she says she wouldn't change her job for any
other in the Service, while a girl a year older drives a
two-ton truck and declares she "would hate to be off it."
So they hustled on with their job, all these girls drawn
from all parts fo the country and from all sorts of occupa-
tions; shop assistants, bus conductresses, dressmakers,
factory hands, preparing for the day when the men would
go "over there.
At a Central Ordnance Depot in Southern England I
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
124
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
asked an Auxiliary what she did.
" Oh, I'm a " Dilly ' driver."
" What is that ?"
"I tow the guns and heavy stuft from one workshop
to another."'
That girl was what is known as a "burler and mender"
in civilian life. She worked in a cloth factory and looked
for flaws in the material as it came off the loom. She
had never driven any motor vehicle, but was trained at
the Depot and seemed to tow her sinister loads along in
the most carefree manner.
Another Auxiliary here working hard for D Day was
a twenty-two year old girl who had trained for eight
months for her job of computing the life and future use
of guns. Using mathematical calculations she checked
the measurements of the armament inspectors and actually
had the final word as to whether a particular gun was fit
for overseas service or not. The accuracy of her calcula-
tions was amazing-it had to be, for human life might
depend on her decision.
In the shops Auxiliaries were enormously busy. Some
were bending over turning lathe or driller, making the
most delicate adjustments and modifications in gun parts.
Others were expert acetylene welders working on gun and
vehicle parts. Others again were making and fitting
canvas covers on the guns before they were sent to the
ports from which they would be shipped abroad.
One Auxiliary, doing joinery and carpentry, had a
particularly interesting history, for she was the first
woman to pass the Army tests in this trade. When she
joined the A.T.S. she stated her hopes of being allowed to
do so because she and her sister had run a chicken farm
and with the help of their father, an ex-joiner, had made
all their own hen houses! No Auxiliary previously had
trained for joinery and carpentry, but this one put her
case so well and showed such aptitude for the work that
in the end she had her way, thus becoming an A.T.S.
pioneer.
Side by side with the men of the R.A.O.C. the Auxiliaries
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
125
worked all through the winter of 1943-44, all through the
spring before D Day when the very air hummed with
rumours and everybody's nerves were stretched taut.
You found them everywhere, in office, store or workshop,
or driving trucks or cranes.
Here were skilled mechanics
handling radiolocation and wireless assembly or repairing
sets ; there were girls seeing to the preservation of equip-
ment; in a far shed a third group gave expert examination
to stores which had been returned after suffering damage
in action and passed them on to yet another group who
would recondition them. And in the background, work-
ing as hard as their companions employed on maintenance,
was a positive army of cooks, orderlies, typists, clerks,
telephonists and teleprinter operators.
During those pre-invasion months men in key positions
at the Depot were being continually replaced by Auxiliaries,
who proved by their eagerness and ability that they
could be relied upon to carry on the high tradition of
the R.A.O.C., the Corps whose job it is to supply the
Armies with all the weapons of modern warfare.
As with the Auxiliaries so with their officers. To ease
the situation caused by the necessity for drafting hundreds
of R.A.O.C. officers overseas, A.T.S. officers gradually
took their places in the huge Ordnance Depots in this
country both in administrative and technical jobs. Their
numbers are growing daily now, because 290 have been-
called for and the majority are still in training, but even
before D Day twenty-five of them had started work.
Sixteen of them were convoy officers responsible for
kitting, maintenance, collection and delivery of vehicles ;
one was the War Office liaison officer at a small arms
Depot deciding priority of issues; two controlled large
staffs-mostly of women-working on Issues Control at
a Motor Transport Depot, and one was appointed Staff
Officer to the Controller of Ordnance Services in order
to administer and co-ordinate the work of her colleagues
in the various depots.
One Junior Commander, a Staff Officer whose job is
arranging for the distribution of ammunition, weapons
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
126
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
and armoured vehicles in Western Command, was-and
still is—in popular demand during her spare time. The
Auxiliaries doing their gruelling tasks in the Ordnance
Depots were especially anxious for news of the actual
ways in which the weapons and armour they looked
after and packed were used in action. So the Junior
Commander duly visited them, bringing with her little
Bren and tommy sans and grenades. With these, after
a preparatory talk on the history of tanks, she demon-
strated their uses and battle action; the range and fire
of different guns and their mechanical fitting and opera-
tion, and a general description of modern battle tactics.
Her lectures were immensely popular-and not only
among Auxiliaries, for this young woman of twenty-nine
had acquired an expert knowledge of the making and
mechanical action of armaments since her training at
the A.T.S. Staff College, where she not only attended
manœuvres but rode in various types of tanks under.
the tutelage of members of the Guards' Armoured Brigades
Curiously enough, she was a Domestic Science teache
before the war !
III
In the spring and early summer of 1944 barbed wire
entanglements surrounded the woods of one of England's
most famous beauty spots. Had you been able to pass
the barbed wire you would have found thousands and
thousands of lorries, trucks, gun-carriers and jeeps
"parked"' under the trees which formed an excellent
camouflage, for this was a highly important R.A.O.C.
Vehicle Reserve Depot and, as the Company of A.T.S.
who worked there would have told you, "We're supplying
and is not armoured, everything that goes on four wheels
They might also have told you (but they did not) that
they had not always known the comparative comfort of
•
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
127
an inspection shed with a corrugated roof and a concrete
floor, or of properly made roadways. When the Depot
was first opened those girls worked out-doors whatever
the weather and the ruts churned by incoming and out-
going vehicles in the soft woodland earth were so deep
that the Auxiliaries literally waded ankle-deep from job
to job.
Even with improvements work at the Depot was tough,
for there is a tremendous amount to be done to each
vehicle between the time it is driven in at the gates and
driven out again. First the Auxiliaries must drive the
vehicle to the maintenance park and place it over an
inspection pit. Scrambling into the pit they then make
sure that every screw and nut is in place, choose the right
type of grease, check the oil levels and see that the
batteries are in order. Then the vehicle has to be pre-
served-sprayed all over the outside and the metal parts
all covered with anti-rust preservative so that it may
stand up to field conditions whatever the climate.
The
same girls responsible for the preserving also stencil on
the white star of the Liberation Armies before the vehicle
is moved on to the kitting department, where it is supplied
with various equipment and also with tools— not only the
maker's tools such as would be supplied to any civilian
motorist, but the "War Department Issues"
required
by soldiers in the field.
Next comes "outdoor kitting,"
a section in charge of
an A.T.S. sergeant who has a mixed team of girls and
men, the men doing all the heavy lifting, for this job
includes the fitting of various attachments to the vehicles.
Five are kitted at a time and this process takes on an
average thirty-five minutes, after which A.T.s. drivers
drive them to the "release" park and return with a fresh
batch.
As can be imagined, the rush at this Depot before
D Day was terrific, and nobody looking at these Auxiliaries
wriggling under trucks in their oil-stained dungarees, their
faces and hands thick with mud and grease, would have
believed they were the same girls who provided the drivers
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
128
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
for the film "The Gentle Sex"! Yet if you saw them in
their rare leisure moments, trim in their Service dress,
you realised with astonishment that they were every bit
as feminine as the girls you had seen on the screen.
Their officer, a Junior Commander, was one of the first
A.T.S. to train as a technical R.A.O.C. officer, and she
had a mighty comprehensive job, as she was responsible
for all the technical work and had to see that every
single vehicle was passed out in perfect order and
absolutely on time. Her office was a picturesque log
cabin next door to the maintenance sheds, but it was
seldom she could be found there as almost all her time
was spent supervising the work in sheds or "car parks."
Iv
Another important pre-D Day job-and one which was
The girls there handled more than 5,000 different items
of equipment,
from knuckle-dusters to tommy-guns,
from Piat anti-tank guns
to Commando knives, and
packed thousands of these in camouflaged beach landing-
kits so skilfully that however roughly handled the kits
might be their contents would arrive safe and sound.
In the selection and packing stores the girls chose and
packed tiny pistol springs, revolvers, rifles, machine-gun
parts—an extremely dirty job as each knife, bayonet or
small metal part had to be dipped in greasy anti-rust
solution and then wrapped up separately.
But trust the
A.T.S. ! This slimy black liquid was kept in a large tank•
and the Auxiliaries found it extremely useful as a mirror
with the aid of which hair might be kept tidy and even
noses powdered.
One girl worked in the Pistol Cage—she used to work
in a furniture shop-among the more valtable small
weapons, others stencilled code signs on the landing kits,
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
The motor transport store.
[British Oficial Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
Ack-ack girls with a mobile 3.7.
[British Official Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
120
two or three manned cranes and some whizzed around
the Depot at breakneck speed on electric trucks, with
strings of laden trailers behind them.
When the rush was at its height the Auxiliaries scorned
any feminine privileges. Learning that the men were
being called back for night work in order to pack rifles
and revolvers they turned up in a body and refused to
down tools.
Tough girls, maybe; but a grand lot. Undeterred by
grease, by long hours, by uncomfortable conditions, they
worked like Trojans, and at every meal-break in the
canteen they organised dances and sing-songs "just to
help things along," as one of them said.
V
Thousands of gallons of petrol and oil and millions of
spare parts of the equipment necessary for dealing with
these commodities had to be issued to our invading
Armies, and at a petrol Depot in Eastern Command a
group of A.T.S. girls dealt with this work.
If you attended the Army Equipment Exhibition held
in Oxford Street, London, in 1943, you may have watched
a sergeant A.T.S. giving demonstrations of the use of
various machines and different types of containers. She
was the girl responsible at this Depot for all the clerical
work connected with the issue of petrol, oil and lubricants
to our Home Commands, and a most exacting job it
was, for thousands of gallons a day had to be supplied
to units.
Thousands more gallons had to be sent direct to the
ports of embarkation, and Auxiliaries had to check each
gallon on arrival at and departure from the Depot, while
others unpacked all kinds of machinery as it came in
from the factories, checked it and then repacked it.
Even after the camp men had transferred the petrol and
oil by truck from the nearest railway station and checked
I
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
the quantities in so doing, the girls had to re-check the
truck-loads as they passed in at the Depot gates.
In the sheds the Auxiliaries unpacked and checked
spare parts, working at lightning speed because the Army
could not wait and each day brought yet more urgent
requests for them to fulfil ; and outside more Auxiliaries
drove an American invention called a "Yo-Yo," a small
mobile lifting machine which was extremely useful for
the loading and unloading of trucks.
They did not
complain as they were told to work faster, ever faster.
Instead they sang as they worked— were they not helping
to move the troops towards the greatest invasion of ali
time ?
VI
In the R.E.M.E. workshops at this period large numbers
of A.T.S. girls were tremendously busy on a variety of
tasks.
They were especially proud of the fact that since
October 1942 they had been entitled to wear the R.E.M.E.
shoulder flashes ; the lightning zig-zag of the electrician,
the hammer and tongs of the vehicle mechanic, or the
horse's bit and chain of the coach trimmer, and in the
months before D Day they felt, in their own words, that
they were "really getting down to it."
They certainly were. Perhaps in civilian life they had
been hairdressers, clerks or shop assistants. Now they
wore greasy dungarees and spent their days, rain or
shine, taking motor-cycles to pieces and building them
up again; stripping the engines of vehicles from water
tankers to light cars, replacing brake-linings, ensuring
that the dynamos were in running order ; doing electrical
wiring and stripping and repairing magdynamos; mending
torn hoods and canopies.
At one Depot was a girl who "knew cars and motor-
cycles inside out' (she has post-war political ambitions),
and another who worked as a welder and said, "I love
it,'' while a third engaged in electrical repairs talked
easily in technical terms that would have been totally
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S, OTHER ARMY
131
incomprehensible to her a year before.
In another Depot were the A.T.S. ""instrument shop"
girls, doing repairs to range-finders, telescopes and optical
instruments of various kinds. They had to clean the
lenses, check over and repair the mechanical parts and
fit new cross-wire sights made out of spider's webs.
This last job called for exceptionally delicate handling.
First the webs had to be collected, and this was done
by taking the spider (a collection was always available),
and dropping it from one hand to the other. As it dropped
it spun the fine web, and these had to be attached to metal
frames, smeared with shellac and then stored away.
When optical instruments required new cross-wire sights
the expert Auxiliaries took the frail web from storage and
made a new sight by fixing it to a diaphragm between the
eye-piece and the object glass.
This was precision work which needed a steady hand
and the lightest possible touch and sometimes, when a
particularly fine cross-wire was required, the Auxiliary
had to split one of the strands of web in two under the
microscope.
A further job undertaken by R.E.M.E. Auxiliaries also
called for nimble fingers.
This was the dismantling,
cleaning, repairing and modifying in design of 3,000
portable wireless sets. Each one had to be carefully
examined for flaws and soldering had to be done where
needed. The apparatus was so delicate that the slightest
touch or undue pressure would break it, and it says much
for the work of the A. T.s. that only .406 accidents occurred
to the whole batch of sets.
In R.E.M.E. as in R.A.O.C., A.T.S. officers were in
charge of different departments at different Depots,
several of them working as Radio Maintenance Officers,
which meant they were responsible for the maintenance,
repair and calibration of the Army's secret Radiolocation
equipment; but they were also in charge of other branches
of electrical and mechanical engineering by 1944, and
their number is steadily increasing now, when they can
relieve so many male officers for overseas service.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
132
VII
A finishing touch to the aid given by the A.T.S. to
invasion preparations was that they kept the convoys
moving.
Down in the West Country, on a wide main
road leading to embarkation Depots and ports, two
Lancashire Auxiliaries took over the job of "petrol
issuers" at what had been an ordinary civilian garage.
Before taking the pool petrol tanks on charge they had
to check them for quantity with a dipper, and they then
had to take records of all intakes and issues of petrol and
oil.
They started their duty each morning at eight o'clock
and had six pumps to man. All day long the British and
Allied convoys rumbled past, and the girls served all
manner of vehicles-jeeps, gun-carriers, staff cars and
tank carriers. A big convoy took on an average two
whole hours to fill up, and on a record day they issued
4,000 gallons of petrol and oil to the Amy, the R.A.F.,
and U.S.A. transport. The last-named drew Diesel oil
for their biggest vehicles, and at first their drivers were
greatly astonished to find girls supplying this.
" But they soon got over that,
said one of the
Auxiliaries happily. "D'you know what one said to me?
He said, ' I guess you're just another guy doing a good
job of work.' "
That phrase, I think, was the one above all others which
the Auxiliaries helping to prepare for D Day would have
liked used to describe them.
doing a good job of work."
They were "just other guys
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER X •
THE MERCURY GIRLS
THE Mercury Girls are attached to the Royal Corps of
Signals and while this branch of the Army has employed
women since very early in the war the scope of work
open to A.T.S. Signal Companies has grown enormously
with the new fronts opened up and the urgent need for
men to operate Signal stations overseas, so from small
beginnings as switchboard and teleprinter operators the
Auxiliaries can now become Operators Special who train
as wireless operators and are then employed on special
secret duties of much importance, Cipher Operators who
encipher and decipher secret messages, Operators Wireless
and Line who send and receive wireless messages, and
Operators Wireless and Keyboard who transmit and
receive "automatic" Morse messages seven times more
quickly than can be done by hand.
(It is perhaps superfluous to add that the Wireless and
Line girls are known as "Owls" and the Wireless and
Keyboard as "Owks.")
The Owls and the Owks have to undergo a fourteen
weeks' training at the Headquarters of the Royal Signals
Mixed Training Battalion, and many Auxiliaries who are
already serving as switchboard or teleprinter operators
eagerly volunteered for the new course when it was
announced. There are also, however, many new recruits
to the Service who possess some training or technical
knowledge of wireless who are admitted as well.
133
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
134
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
The training is a concentrated and complicated one.
First they must learn the Morse Code and how to
manipulate the key when sending signals. A curious
point is that the Auxiliaries never actually see the Morse
alphabet written out in a series of dots and dashes. They
learn it entirely by ear, sitting with their headphones on
and listening to the signals sent by the Instructor on his
key. Presently they get to the stage of answering the
same signal on their own keys, loudly chanting an
imitation of the sound as they do so: "da" for dash,
"di" for dot-and they work with a will for they know
that by the end of the course they must be capable of
sending out sixteen words a minute.
They next learn how to operate "pretend" wireless
sets, and learn the very strict rules which govern all
wireless traffic, such as the one that forbids any station
to speak out of turn lest it cause confusion on the ether.
During this part of training they learn too to operate
and adjust line instruments like the Fullerphone, a
standard telegraph instrument employed if secrecy is
necessary.
Now they have reached the stage when they may
practise on the "spider's web," for the whole training
establishment is linked by what is known as a "spider's
web'' network of signal lines. Therefore the Auxiliaries
form into little groups which are scattered all over the
house, and they then send Morse messages to each other.
Eventually one girl in each group is made the control
station through which all signal traffic has to pass, and
her job is to hold up some messages and speed up the
important ones so that any jam on the air is avoided.
When she comes to working on her own the Auxiliary
will find various kinds of interference on the ether, so
during training the instructor and the other groups of
A.T.S. trainees do the "interfering" by putting unwanted
signals received on wireless sets on the line. The instructor
also listens in on a "snoop set" and gives advice or
correction when required.
Once the Auxiliary is fully conversant with this drill of
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
135
passing and receiving she goes to work on a real wireless
set, and all her teaching is aimed at making her so
familiar with the set that its operation becomes automatic.
When this has been achieved she is able to give more of
her attention to important things like the writing of the
actual message and the technique of radio-telephony.
Very often work is done out of doors and the groups
of Auxiliaries operate just as the men of the Royal Signal
Corps have to do in the field.
The training at the Signal "school" is—as is so
frequently the wise way of the Army-co-educational;
but as a rule the Auxiliaries are taught by a male instructor,
while often a class of men is taken by an A.T.S. instructor
Only one difference between tuition for men and girls
exists : the former do a longer course of twenty-one weeks
as they have to learn the full workings of their wireless
sets and how to repair them. The girls learn only how to
locate external faults, change valves and
recharge
batteries, and how to test various parts of a line or an
instrument.
Then voice production must be studied, for it is
necessary to be able to use a microphone correctly, and
visual instruction is also used as the walls of the school
landing are hung with a set of comic cartoons showing
every stage of the passing of a message from which
a great deal of serious knowledge may be gained in a
very pleasant way. One drawing indeed points a most
important moral: it is a warning to any trainee of the
dire fate which may befall her should she fail to qualify
in her tests. If this should happen then she runs the
risk of becoming what signals call a "check," an over-
worked and harassed messenger.
Potential Owls and Owks need quick intelligence, a
strong gift for accuracy and a scientific brain, and those
wise birds who learnt Morse with the Girl Guides or
drove their families frantic in the peace-time evenings by
their overwhelming interest in the home wireless set now
reap their reward.
There are several A.T.S. training schools for Owls and
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
136
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
Owks scattered throughout the country, but the one of
which I write is the only mixed training unit, and if the
Auxiliary trainee is bright at her job she stands a grand
chance of becoming an instructor for, with more and
more men being drafted to the Armies abroad, the entire
instructional staff will soon be composed of A.T.S.
members. Those who qualify for instructors are sent
on to a further course of training as N.C.O.s, and as in
one particular month almost two years ago the Signals
Mixed Training Battalion required to produce no fewer
than eighty A.T.S. technical instructors in one month it
may be seen there is plenty of opportunity for the Owl
or Owk who sets her heart on quick promotion.
According to one of the officers at the school, the
Auxiliaries bring a high degree of imagination to bear
on their work as instructors.
"They invent Army names,
give strange reasons for being unable to connect sub-
scribers, or pretend to be impatient staff officers- all on
the spur of the moment." By these means, of course,
they test the pupil's ability to think fast, be resourceful,
unflurried and always polite. (That last, I feel, must
sometimes be the Owl's or Owk's hardest job of all !)
II
Day and night, up and down this country and in
several places behind our Army lines on the different.
fronts, the Owls and Owks are transmitting and receiving
vital messages. They have to be always on the alert
to detect the infinitesimal differences in the Morse dots
and dashes; they have to separate messages from Allied
and enemy services; they have to remain calm and
unflustered when a rush is on and Morse messages pour
in through their headphones, or when messages from
other stations confuse the one they know to be important,
or when the poop-poop-poop of the Morse merges with
the background atmospherics into an indecipherable
noise.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
137
Some of these girls kept in touch to the very last
moment with the men on Dunkirk beaches, some of them
received the final tragic messages from Singapore, some
had the unforgettable thrill of receiving the first urgent
dramatic messages from the landing forces on D Day.
They work in Gun Operation Rooms in Ack-Ack
Command, in signals offices at Headquarters Formations,
in remote places and in crowded cities, and wherever they
work they remember the slogan of the signal school,
"Practise what is preached, and preach as little as possible."
Only the other day I was privileged to watch the Owls
and the Owks at their job in the very nerve centre of our
Armies, the War Office Signal Office. They work deep
underground not far from Whitehall, in rooms air-
conditioned and lit by daylight lighting, and their office
handles all communications between the War Office and
Army units either at home or overseas except letters and
despatches which are dealt with elsewhere.
An average
of 30,000 messages a week pass through here, including
all important operational communications, with the result
that an Owl or an Owk thinks no more of sending a
message to New Delhi or Moscow than you or I would
think of sending an ordinary telegram to Edinburgh.
We went first into a long room where Auxiliaries sat
in lines before two rows of teleprinters. These were
connected with the huge network of teleprinter lines
which cover Great Britain-and next time you want to
make a Trunk telephone call remember
War Office
Signals, for many of their teleprinter lines are G.P.O.
wires.
At the far end of the room was an enormous
switchboard. Everything was very quiet, very orderly.
Teleprinters tapped and tapes ticked, and A.T.S.
messengers moved to and fro. It was hard to believe
that one was watching the transmission and receiving of
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
138
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
messages of vital importance, but the longer one stayed
in the room the more one became aware of a queer
alertness in its atmosphere.
"You can talk to the girls if you like," said the Signal-
master, a captain, so rather hesitantly I approached the
nearest.
She had worked here for two years. Yes, she liked it,
" Makes you feel you're at the centre of things." The
only thing was she never knew what the weather was like
in the outside world until her shift was over. She
answered my questions courteously and was very pleasant
to me; but her eyes were kept steadfastly on her teleprinter
and I had the feeling she was talking to me with one side
of her mind while the other side stayed on her job.
had that feeling when I spoke to any of the Auxiliaries in
War Office Signals; they knew they couldn't quite relax
until work was done.
" Each of these teleprinters,"' said the Signalmaster,
"is connected with its fellow somewhere else. Look,
I'll show you how it works.'' He walked over to the
switchboard and connected two teleprinters in the room
which happened to be idle at the moment; then entered
into a long and detailed explanation. I am ashamed to
say that most of it was Greek to my untutored mind,
and out of the corner of my eye I caught a small superior
smile from the Auxiliary next to me.
I said to her, "Didn't you find all this terribly muddling
at first ?"
"Not really. Of course, we took it step by step. It's
terrifically interesting when you understand it."
"I'm sure it is. By the way, were you in a job some-
thing like this before you joined the A.T.S. ?'
She looked a little shocked. "Oh, no, ma'am. I was
a hairdresser."?
Meekly I turned back to the Signalmaster and tried to
absorb his remarks with some degree of intelligence.
He was explaining how it is impossible as yet to work
teleprinters by wireless over long distances.
"We use
wireless telegraph circuits for communications with troops
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
139
further afield, and the important far-off theatres of war
are served by high-speed automatic wireless-I'll take
you to see that shortly. But with our teleprinters do you
know we were working them by wireless to Normandy
a few hours after the first landings? "
As I passed her the ex-hairdresser murmured, "You'll
love the auto-wireless office. My, I'd like to work there !"
Our next visit, however, was to the "routing" room,
where dozens of Auxiliaries and Signalmen were handling
messages which had been sent down for transmission from
the Cipher Office. Each message was timed and registered
by a signals clerk, who knew the various routes by which
it might go and also what to do if the normal service to
be employed was congested or temporarily out of order,
and it was his or her job to send it on the next stage of
its journey to one of the teleprinter rooms or to the auto-
wireless room. Here, again, there was a complete absence
of fuss, and despite the sheaves of messages which seemed
to be passing to and fro everybody seemed to know
exactly their own part of the work.
"Now you must see the pneumatic tubes," said the
Signalmaster.
"We use them for inter-office work instead
of messengers."'
The tubes were fascinating. They were run on exactly
the same principle as the tubes by means of which certain
shops whiz one's change and receipt up and down
between counting-house and counter, only in shops they
do not lock the tubes and in War Office Signals they do,
lest some highly secret message go astray or fall into the
wrong hands.
Swiftly the Auxiliaries inserted the rolled messages into
the tubes, snapped the locks shut with Yale keys and sent
the tubes whizzing through the pipes which carried them
to their destination, while other girls caught the tubes
continually tumbling out of the pipes, unlocked them,
took out the messages and pushed them through a hatch
to the "routing" room.
"Now we'll go and see the teleprinters working to
the nearer parts of France," said the Signalmaster.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
140
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
To my uninitiated eye there seemed remarkably little
difference between the appearance of this room and the
Home Stations teleprinter room, but when we at length
moved on to the high-speed auto-wireless room I knew a
real thrill of excitement.
Here we were at the end of the wireless chain linking
the General Staff in this country with all the numerous
theatres of war. All outgoing messages were again
timed and registered as the tubes decanted them into
this room and were then handed to the A.T.S. operators
who were working the keyboards of perforating machines
very similar to those used in newspaper offices. These
machines reproduced the messages on a tape perforated
with holes so arranged that the intervals between them
represented the dots and dashes of the Morse code, and
this tape was then fed into Wheatstone transmitters
which were directly connected with a high-power wireless
station in the country, through which the messages were
transmitted at the rate of about a hundred words a
minute to their distant destinations, where they were
picked up by Mobile Royal Signal Stations and re-
perforated by machines which produced exact replicas
of the original tapes punched so short a time previously
by the A.T.S. operators in London. Then the tapes were
fed into printing machines which produced the messages
in printed characters-still, of course, in cipher-at the
rate of about eighty words a minute. Finally, the
messages passed through the Army Signals Ofice to the
Cipher Office and the deciphered versions delivered under
secret covers.
All this and more the Signalmaster told me as we
watched the girls in the auto-wireless room at work. He
also, most kindly, gave me a typewritten copy of his
speech, which I have quoted above practically verbatim,
it being quite beyond my powers to understand such
wonders fully myself. Indeed, to me that auto-wireless
room savoured of magic. It seemed incredible that the
meaningless jumble of cipher which the Auxiliary just
in front of me was tapping out on her perforating machine
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
I4I
should be being deciphered somewhere in, say, Italy,
within a very few minutes. Yet it was true, and without
these supernatural devices the modern Army could not
hope to get along.
"Sometimes we get errors," said the Signalmaster.
"This girl is looking for an error which occurred in an
incoming message."
She was bent above her desk, yard after yard of per-
forated tape passing swiftly through her hands. Personally,
I couldn't see any difference in the spaces between the
holes, but she read the stuff as I would read my A BC.
Presently she straightened and said "Ah !" in a satisfied
voice.
"Show me," said the Signalmaster, and she passed
the piece of tape up to him.
"Oh, yes," he nodded ; then turned to me. "We get
remarkably few mistakes but the system is not infallible."
I asked the Auxiliary, "Does it take you very long to
find one if it does occur? "
"Oh, yes, sometimes when we have to go through an
awful lot of tape before we find it. It's a wearisome job,
too, very trying to the eyes. Oh, but the thrill you get
when you find the error is worth all your trouble !"
"How long have you been down here?"
"Eighteen months. It's great fun when you get used
to it, though I miss the fresh air because I was brought
up on a farm in the country. Still, I like the feeling that
I'm sending fearfully important messages to the different
Army Commanders."
I glanced up above her head to a glass sign which
hung from the ceiling. On it was printed "New Delhi,"
and all up and down the vast room hung similar signs,
"S.H.A.E.F.," 'Brussels," "Italy," "Cairo," "Wash-
ington," "Chungking"
"Yes," I said slowly, "I'm sure you like the feeling."
At that moment I would have given all I possessed to
be twenty years younger and working in War Office
Signals.
The Chief Signalmaster beckoned me. "There's a High
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
142
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
Priority outgoing message coming through. Immediately
it is received from Cipher it is shown to a Signalmaster,
who switches on red lights in the Signal Office and in here,
(or the teleprinter room if it's going by teleprinter). These
warn everybody of what's happening. Now the per-
forators and transmitters must be cleared of other traffic
—that's all got to wait until this 'hot' message has been
cleared to its destination and acknowledged."
"And if it's an incoming Priority," the A.T.S. sergeant
told me, "the first combination of letters on the printing
machine show the Superintendent here the degree of
Priority. If it is very high he switches on white lights
in his own room and in the Signals Office, and personally
supervises its reception and its delivery to the Signal
Office. He doesn't switch the lights off again until the
message is safely in the pneumatic tube on its way to be
deciphered."
As we walked up the long room again the Chief Signal-
master told me that Owls and Owks were working over-
"I think they man one of the Middle East Signal
Stations, too, don't they?" he asked the sergeant.
"I think so, sir." Then she added with a broad grin,
"If they're not doing so yet they'll be doing so jolly
soon !"
I stood and chatted to her for a time. She was small
and very spry, and she had been in War Office Signals
since the dark days when nothing went right and Rommel
menaced Alexandria.
"You must have known some hectic times down here?''
"Ah, we've had our days-and nights ; but it's a queer
thing, you know. It must be because we're below ground,
sort of shut off from the rest of life, but even before
D Day when everything in the place was buzzing we
never got that sense of urgent speed we'd have got if
we'd been working in an ordinary office. Just as well,
I dare say."
"And the girls don't find it a strain working here?"
She shook her head. "Sometimes they moan about
living like troglodytes, but that's just a bit of a grouse.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
143
In reality they're fearfully proud of being here-and so
they ought to be. Don't forget we're allowed to wear
'Jimmy•
"Who or what on earth is 'Jimmy'? "
She laughed, and pointed to the Royal Signal Corps
"Hermes"' badge on her jacket. "We call him 'Jimmy'
and we wouldn't give him up for all the tea in China.
Mind you, the night shift's trying-ten hours; but that
only comes one week in every three. The morning shift
is only six hours, from eight till two, and the afternoon
eight, from two till ten."
"Do you go back to your billets for meals while you're
on duty ?''
"No, they're too far away and, besides, it would be
a drag for the girls, waiting about for transport and so
on. But we've got a nice little canteen and rest-room
all to ourselves upstairs. You'll see it on the way out.
And as well as our main meal on shift we take it in turns
to go up for a short break, when we can have tea or cocoa
and buns."
An Auxiliary messenger whisked past us carrying a
sheaf of messages. The underground offices were warm
and, like most of the girls, she had discarded her tunic
and wore a thin khaki sweater over her blouse and skirt.
On the left breast of the sweater I caught sight of a design
with the letters D.R. entwined above it. "Do you have
Auxiliary Despatch Riders here ?"
"Goodness no, ma'am! That only means she's got a
boy friend who's one."
The Chief Signalmaster cut in, "Ah, but you ought to
see the inside of their tunics! On the left side, just above
the heart—that's the place they carry the boy friend's
insignia."
So romance blossomed even in this hidden office far
below the earth's surface.
But as I made my way upstairs I thought, "I bet they'd
rather give up all the badges of all the boy friends rather
than give up 'Jimmy.'"
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER XI
AND STILL THEY DRIVE
In the very early days of the A.T.S. before the outbreak
of war, the driving of motor vehicles of various descriptions
from ambulances to staff cars was one of the few Army
employments open to its members. To the public, driving
seemed-heaven knows why !—an infinitely more suitable
job for women if they had to go chasing off on this wild-cat
scheme of helping the Army in a war that might never
arise than the job of cook, or orderly, or even clerk.
"So-and-so's used to driving her own car," they said
complacently, or "Such-and-such has always driven her
father to his office," and left it at that.
It never occurred to them that spinning along a pleasant
English road studded with garages, petrol pumps, A.A.
men, R.A.C. men and police was a very different matter
from driving a two-ton truck in the blackout, or riding a
motor-cycle across the North of Scotland in a blizzard.
Perhaps their ignorance of what the M.T. driver in the
A. T.S. might be called upon to do was all to the good—it
saved endless ructions.
So the M.T. drivers began their job. Over six years
later they're still at it and going strong, although probably
they are the most consistently hard-worked women in the
Service. They've driven through blitzes, they've driven
slap into German convoys, they've driven across the
African desert, they've driven in Italy, they've driven
144
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
The Kine-Theodolite operators.
[British Oficial Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
Field wireless operators in training.
[British Official Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
I45
along the famous "Red Ball" road of Northern France
in the wake of our advancing Armies.
And now they are even driving towards Berlin-for you
can't stop an M.T. driver once she's got her head.
And in the past five years they've driven a whole lot
of things besides ambulances and staff cars-they've
driven everything non-armoured that goes on wheels and
is used by the British Army ; trucks, lorries, jeeps, they're
all the same to the M.T. driver.
She's used to all weathers, too. After all, she drove
both in England and France in that first icy winter of the
war, she drove in Egypt and Kenya under the hot tropic
sun, she drove through the warm breathless days of 1944
when D Day showed on the horizon, she drove on the
"Red Ball"'
in the pelting autumn rain, she drove through
the snowdrifts of the 1944-45 winter. If you asked her
to drive you to the North Pole she'd probably give a
cheery grin and set out without a murmur, for that's the
sort of girl she is ; she takes it all and says nothing after
the manner of Brer Rabbit.
Like Brer Rabbit, too, she "lies low." The most
difficult thing in the world is to drag from one of the
M.T. drivers any sort of information concerning her
manifold experiences.
"Oh, well," she'll say deprecat-
ingly, "we did drive from Inverness to London in so
many hours-but it was nothing really ..." and then
she'll change the subject and leave you flat.
"It's just a job,"
is her favourite phrase, and she uses
it whatever risks and hardships her journey may have
entailed; but I've at last discovered the way to make
her open up. Ask her if she remembers Mary Smith
who drove in the same convoy with her from Glasgow
to Cardiff in 1940 and she'll beam at you. "Oh, Mary
Smith, she was simply grand. D'you know what she
....?" Having got that story you go on to Mary
Smith and ask her if she remembers Joan Brown (who
is the first girl you were talking to), and you'll hear
things the redoubtable Miss Brown would rather die
than tell you herself. Maybe it's a Machiavellian method,
K
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
146
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
but it's the only way you'll ever get any information out
of M.T. drivers.
II
Perhaps the finest concerted effort of the M.T. drivers
happened just after Dunkirk. As everybody knows, the
Army was forced to abandon weapons, armour, transport,
everything. They returned to England wounded, sick,
dog-weary and the M.T. drivers met them. Tirelessly,
without thought of the strain they were putting on them-
selves, those girls drove the soldiers from the ports of
disembarkation to hospitals, to Depots, to their homes.
Up and down the country they trailed, snatching meals or
snacks when opportunity offered, stopping and starting
in the long snaky convoys or driving alone in the blackout
through districts they did not know-but they got the
men to their destinations.
And having got them there the problem of fresh trans-
port for all the reassembling units arose.
From the
various Ordnance Depots the M.T. drivers set forth
once more, this time with new vehicles of all descriptions
to refit the Army with transport. Girls who had never
driven anything bigger than a small car found themselves
perched in the cab of a two-ton truck; girls who had
never seen a Bren gun carrier discovered all the joys and
perils of riding in one—but the Army got its new transport.
Some of the journeys made by the M.T. drivers that
summer must have been sheer hell. A great deal of the
work involved night-driving, often the vehicles broke
down, help was impossible to get and generally they would
be many hours.on the road. They never complained-it
was "just a job "
Very few people knew anything of their experiences for
a long time afterwards. I myself was quite well acquainted
with one of those drivers, and when I was talking to her
a good while after Dunkirk I suddenly noticed she had a
ribbon up.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
147
"Where did you get that?"
She said she couldn't quite remember. The look in
her eye said, "Ask me another word about it and I'll
never speak to you again !''
One group of M.T. drivers worked the London docks
all through the worst of the blitzes. It was night work,
driving down in convoy to pick up Army stores from the
ships or the dock warehouses. If there didn't happen
to be a raid on the darkness was so Stygian that they
never knew when they might be teetering on the dockside
and the least touch on the accelerator might send them
hurtling into the dock-basin. If there was a raid on it
was ten to one that Jerry was going for the docks and
that the entire convoy might be blown sky-high at any
minute.
"It was a bit chancy," said one of them.
And another said, "I never minded if I was with
B--
She
so extraordinarily calm. I'd be
absolutely having kittens, but she'd be perfectly serene."
I pricked up my ears.
"Who did you say?"
She told me again and I blinked in bewilderment. I
knew quite well the girl of whom she spoke. Since the
blitz days she has won promotion and now holds an
important War Office job with great efficiency and a
Senior Commander's crown on her shoulder. In all the
times I had talked to her she had never mentioned having
been a driver. Brer Rabbit again !
IV
Every M.T. driver has to service her own vehicle and
keep it in first-class running order. She is allowed to
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
drive lorries and trucks up to and including three tons
and, if she was not one of the pioneer drivers of the
train days she curs heade thoroughly at a Driver
weeks' course, which
includes a thorough grounding in maintenance. If she
shows a decided bent for mechanics she can have special
teaching which will enable her to pass the trade tests for
Driver-Mechanic, in which case she will receive trade
rates of pay. She also has the opportunity of qualifying
eventually as an A.T.S. Driver Instructor.
Alternatively the budding M.T. driver may receive
training as an A.T.S. Motor cyclist, a job which also
involves long hours, snatched meals and, in addition,
much slithering about on greasy roads. A tremendous
amount of valuable and vital work is now being done by
these Auxiliaries, and despite the hardness of the work .
few express any wish to change their category.
Perhaps nowadays the M.T. jobs are not quite so
gruelling as they were before, say, 1942. The Service as
a whole has grown so enormously and experience has
Yet no amount of
organisation can avoid rusat periods, or the possibility
of breakdowns, or ensure balmy weather all the year
round. Before D Day I met a group of M.T. drivers
who had, as they put it, "moved South with the Army,"
and their faces were grey with tiredness for their convoy
had been on the go since daybreak. Not that they
minded. They were supremely cheerful and in love with
their work, and I thought as I looked at them that they
shared in some mysterious manner the spirit which had
carried the pioneer drivers through thick and thin five
long years before. They shared something else with
them, too, a quiet comradeship unlike any in other
branches of the Service, good though those other comrade-
ships undoubtedly are. And if you asked them anything
about their work they answered in the same words as
did their forerunners, "Oh, well, it's just a job."
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER XII
"UNWILLINGLY TO SCHOOL"
THrOUgH the window of the Chief Instructor's office
floated the sound of several voices singing, but it seemed
rather dreary singing, not in the least like the usual
full-throated song of the A.T.S. girls.
"We joined the Royal Artillery . . "
I poked my head out and saw a party of about twenty-
five Auxiliaries trudging down the drive. Surely even
the bitter weather could not account for their tuneless
droning or the way they hunched their shoulders inside
their greatcoats ?
The Chief Instructor sighed. "Ack-Acks," she said.
"They're fed to the back teeth because they've been
taken off operations and sent here to the Clerks' Training
School. Poor dears, I do feel for them. They just can't
see that (a) the Army must have more clerks and more
clerks, and (b) that curiously enough they'll probably
find the variety of jobs open to them after their training
far more interesting and far more likely to lead them to
where they want to go overseas than the ones they've
just left."
My sympathies were all with the ex-Ack-Acks. I didn't
feel I'd enjoy it at all myself if I were transplanted from
a gun-site to a clerks' school and I said so.
The Chief Instructor looked reproachful. "I know,
149
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
to you a clerk is just a clerk. Don't you realise there
are fifteen different sorts of clerk in the Army? Don't
you know how fearfully important it is that records and
pay and documents and hundreds of other things should
be kept in apple-pie order ? Don't you see what invaluable
chances clerks* have for fitting themselves for post-war
employment?"
I hadn't understood the least thing about Army clerking
hitherto ; but in the next several hours I was to learn a lot.
To begin with, the term "clerking" in the Army is a
misnomer. (In civilian life an accountant or an archive-
keeper would be rightly indignant if you called him a
clerk.) Anybody who has anything whatever to do with
books, papers, typewriters, duplicators, or even maps in
the Army comes automatically under the heading of clerk,
although his or her activities may be far removed from
what the ordinary man considers as a clerk's employment.
But the Chief Instructor was well away on her pet
hobby-horse.
"As you know, every fit man is needed
for active service; therefore the A.T.S. must provide an
Auxiliary to take his place. Well, clerking in its many
aspects is a job which women can do, and it's up to us
to do it. Just think how important it is that the man
in the field has all his documents in order, that he gets
his pay promptly and that his wife or other dependants
receive their allowances promptly. Look at the Records
Offices, how many people they require, and the typists
that are needed."
"Ye-es,
Ack-Ack."
but it still sounds a bit dull-especially after
She rose briskly. "You'd better come round and see
the school for yourself. Then you'll learn just how
interesting the courses are.''
Most surprisingly she was right. By the end of the
morning I had discovered many things about the school
ingly to school" in the first place, they settled down
extremely happily after a week or two.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
15I
Indeed, I came to the conclusion that the Clerks'
Training School was the best possible training ground
for the Auxiliary who had to earn her living after the war.
We went first to the typing classes. In one room were
thirty or forty girls who had joined the school only the
previous day. They were sitting squinting rather dubiously
at their machines while an A.T.S. sergeant instructor
explained the rudiments of touch-typing with the aid of
a chart and her own very persuasive voice. Even as I
watched I saw a glimmer of interest flicker across several
faces and by the end of half an hour at least 75 per cent.
of the girls were definitely trying their hardest to "play"
the keys as one plays a piano.
"You're right," I whispered, as we slid out of the
room. "They're coming round to it."
"Not yet," said the Chief Instructor. "They'll
practically all be asking for interviews with the Com-
mandant within the next three or four days, and they'll
say they can't stick it and that they feel typing is the end
of all things. Then we have the same old arguments all
over again and in about a week's time they'll perk up
and forget their troubles because they've really become
interested in the course. Have a look at this more
advanced class. They've been here a fortnight."
The spirit of that class sounded in the firm tap-tap on
thirty keyboards. The girls sat alert and upright, and
thestions they answered by telling mee wa asped they
could do, and one and all assured me that accuracy was
the thing to aim at.
"Do you possess a magic wand or what?" I demanded
of the Chief Instructor.
"Such a change in a fortnight
savours of necromancy."
"Nonsense. It's a little tact allied to the fact that they've
had time to find out that the work is really taking them
somewhere and that we don't bite. We do a lot by
reiteration here, you know. We tell them gently day
after day what a grand job they're learning and how
much it is going to help the men. Almost all of them
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
152
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
have somebody in the war, and if they think they can end
it quicker by becoming clerks then they're all for it."
In the next room we entered a senior clerks' class was
in progress.
"They're doing map-reading. Of course, if it were
anything like decent weather they'd be doing the job in
a practical way out of doors.
However, we're doing
our best to make the indoor job interesting by organising
a treasure-hunt."
The Auxiliaries were treasure-hunting in couples.
Before each pair was spread a large and detailed map of
an English county, and upon this they were tracing a
very involved route with the help of
a page of clues
which were written in very witty rhyme invented by one
of the instructors. One couple sat back looking like cats
that had swallowed canaries and said smugly that they
"had finished," but I fear they were in for a rude awaken-
ing, as they had misread two most important clues and
ignored a third. The other twenty-eight heads in the
room were bent over the maps.
That class was made as entertaining as it is possible
for a class to be on any given subject. The clues not only
made the girls chuckle but wove the whole treasure-hunt
into an interesting and exciting story ; the route was full
of traps and catches ; the time-limit given was close enough
to make people hustle their brains in order to reach their
journey's end before the instructor demanded the maps
back.
Incidentally, it seemed to me a most excellent method
of teaching sound map-reading, while on a bench behind
me was an even better way of teaching contour-reading.
It was done by means of various small sheets of glass
and a lot of little wooden blocks. The first sheet of glass
had on it the outline of the base of a mountain as it would
appear on any contour map. You placed a wooden block
at each corner of this and surmounted them by the second
sheet of glass, which bore a smaller outline of the same
shape.
So with glass and blocks, glass and blocks, you
built up a very creditable imitation of the mountain as it
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
153
actually was and thus taught the pupil to read contours.
Seeing that my prejudices against clerking were dying
the Chief Instructor bore me off in triumph to see a
shorthand class, again of girls who had just come to the
school. They looked as dismal as had the beginnner
typists, but when we went across the hall to a more
advanced class the same brightening of the general
atmosphere was apparent.
"How long do they stay here?"'
"It depends upon which course they choose, but at the
very minimum three weeks, while most take longer
courses."
"And how many do you have altogether at one time ?"
"About four to five hundred. We should like to take
more, as the Army want as many clerks as we can give
inst dot on of it is weste lific tips terriding ousy.
Still, it's a fascinating job."
Before the war the Chief Instructor had been what she
herself called an ordinary married woman," but in the
past five and a half years she had certainly amassed an
amazing amount of knowledge concerning the various
forms of Army clerking. What was more, she was
possessed of a quick sympathy which endeared her even
to the most unwilling pupil in the school.
II
A little later I sat in the Commandant's office and got
to know more about her establishment.
"We were up in the North of Scotland, but we moved
South bodily a year or two ago. I'm never sure whether
I'm glad or sorry. Of course, being near London is far
more convenient from the administration point of view,
because units can get hold of us quickly when they want
clerks, and we in turn can send all our test results and
marks up to the War Office easily. But our girls are
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
154
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
-
billeted in nineteen different houses and all last summer
we suffered rather heavily from flying bomb raids round
here-and in a training school those are not so good as,
naturally, they stop the students from concentrating on.
their work. Then London has a great attraction for the
average girl in her off-duty periods. The minute she is
free oft she bustles, and sometimes she spends so much
energy in enjoying herself that she's not much good for
work the following morning."
I said I was impressed by the way in which the
Auxiliaries settled down, although they arrived determined
to dislike everything.
She smiled. "They require quite a bit of handling
sometimes, especially at the moment. I suppose you've
been told that about 90 per cent. of our present pupils
have come from Ack-Ack batteries? They arrive feeling
extremely sore and one doesn't blame them, for after all
most of them have seen active service, and becoming a
clerk seems very small beer after that! They've heard,
too, that some of their late colleagues are now serving
with mixed Ack-Ack batteries on the Continent, and can't
see why they shouldn't have been able to join them. I
find it exceedingly difficult to explain to them that there
isn't nearly room enough for all of them. I know they've
been doing a grand job, but I do think a little bit of
their chagrin springs from the fact that they are no
longer the much publicised, the glamour girls of the
Service."'
"M'm, and that's a very hurtful thing to the young,
that sudden casting down from what you feel is a high
estate."
"Exactly. I usually start by reminding them that the
majority of them haven't been in action for a considerable
time, and that surely it is better to start learning a job
which will help the Army now and themselves afterwards
than kick their heels on some isolated gun-site with pre-
cious little to do. (To be truthful, I think we saw more
enemy activity here with flying bombs than they've seen
for over a year.) If my first argument doesn't work then
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
155
I try to make them see how they can help the men by
taking over their clerical jobs. Sometimes my reasoning
rings a bell; sometimes it doesn't, but as a rule the Chief
Instructor and I between us can persuade them at least
to give the course a fair trial."
"But surely you can't see all of them personally?"
"Oh, yes, each one has a separate interview when she
can put forward all her arguments and objections-that's
only right. Also it gives me an opportunity to see what
we can do to ease matters if they're acutely miserable.
You have to remember that apart from their feelings
towards the school there is the physical angle. Most of
these girls have been living tough in the open air for two
or more years and they definitely feel a sort of claustro-
phobia when they're suddenly shut up in classrooms for
several hours each day. We try to break things up as
much as possible with P.T. and treasure-hunts and so
forth, but it's difficult when they have so many classes
and lectures to cram into a short space of time."
"Yes, I can well understand they
don't appreciate
being ' cribb'd, cabined and confined.' "
"Well, there are other ways in which one can ease that
feeling.
We promise them that if they will settle down to
the course and do their best to pass the tests, then we
will do our best to post them to wherever they wish to
go. We make it clear that we can't actually promise to
send them near their homes, but as a rule we do manage
to send them to a place which is served by the same
main line as their home and not too far distant from it.
Failing that, we try to arrange that two friends are posted
to the same unit so that they shan't feel so lonely.
"I had no idea you went to all that trouble."
"Oh, dear me, yes! The hours I spend with maps and
railway guides mount up considerably-but it's well worth
it. You'll always find the contented Auxiliary will work
ten times better than her unhappy sister."
"Do you get many-well, 'problem children ' ?"
"A small percentage, and in most cases you can be sure
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
156
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
that there is something at the back of the problem which,
if you can drag it out into the light of day, will disappear.
We had an example not long ago of a girl on the permanent
staft. She was all right when she was posted here, but
gradually she grew nervy and depressed, and then she
took to having crying bouts. I had her in here several
times but couldn't make much headway until at last one
day she came out with the whole story. She had married
at the beginning of the war and her husband was taken
prisoner before Dunkirk, so she thought the best thing
she could do was to join the A.T.S. I think she felt that
her eflort might help to end the war all the sooner and
get her man back. The trouble was that when she wrote
and told her prisoner husband what she had done he
didn't take kindly to the idea at all! He was so angry
that he gave up writing to her altogether, and she had to
get news of him through his mother.
So we wrote to
him, explaining what she had been too frightened and
sad to do, exactly why she had joined the Service. Once
he understood that she had really done so in an effort
to help him he wrote her at once. Now everything in
the garden is lovely and she is one of the best girls we
have."
She told me then of some sadder and less curable
problems of the kind one is bound to find in a huge
body of women over 200,000 strong.
Most of these had
nothing whatever to do with the A.T.s.; they were rather
a terrible indictment against the conditions under which
the particular girls had been reared. Bad family histories,
youth spent in crowded slum dwellings, lack of employ-
ment before the war resulting in evil habits-—all these
things and many more were the root causes of trouble.
What did impress me was the infinite care expended
by the A.T.S. officers on each case. Very genuinely they
wanted to help the girls and not to hinder them, and
usually they succeeded in breaking down the barrier of
prejudice, the inferiority complex, or the plain sulkiness
which stood in the way of a girl becoming a useful and
happy member of the Service.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
III
157
That afternoon I visited more classrooms, and I also
chatted to the disconsolate group of trainees who had
been reminding each other they had "joined the Royal
Artillery'' earlier in the day.
"If we thought we were doing something by coming
here we wouldn't mind so much," said one.
"Stuffy rooms all day and people saying "don't do
this' all the time,'' said another.
"I wanted to go to France," said a third. "Two of
my girl-friends have gone and they write and tease me
no end. It's jolly unfair. If they can go, why can't I?"
I had neither the training nor the patience of the
Commandant and the Chief Instructor. All I could do
was to feel hopelessly inadequate and murmur platitudes
-which I should have hated had I been in their stead.
Just then the Quartermaster beckoned me. "You've
struck them at their very worst moment. Come upstairs
to my office and I'll show you why."
Her floor was piled knee-deep with the specially issued
Ack-Ack kit they had just handed in. Not for a very
long time have I seen anything quite so pathetic as those
heaps of gum-boots, "pants, long, for the use of,'"
leather jerkins, leather anklets, heavy gloves and thick
sweaters. It was bad enough to be taken off your job
and sent to a training school, but to give up the kit of
which you had been so proud! That surely was more
than youth could be expected to bear ?
The Quartermaster saw my expression. "Don't worry.
In another four or five days they'll have forgotten their
sorrows and be arguing with each other about touch-typing
or how you work the duplicator machine. It's marvellous
how they adapt themselves."
"I agree, but it doesn't help present agony. Oh, well,
may I look around your stores? They look good to me."
Her shelves were filled with neatly folded garments—
shirts, pyjamas, vests, brassieres, corset belts, stockings,
ties, all of excellent quality.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
I58
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
"And how often do they get replacements?"
"That really depends on the individual, for some girls
wear their things out far more quickly than others. But
they have to hand in any articles for which they want a
replacement and prove to me that they've done their
best to mend it before I'll play. By the way, have you
seen over the Auxiliaries' quarters yet ?"
I had not, so I followed her into a spotlessly clean
bedroom with five beds in it. On each bed were neatly
rolled blankets with tin hats perched on them, and from
each bed-rail hung a pair of brown Service shoes polished
as I have seldom seen shoes polished. The Quartermaster
picked one up and showed it to me.
"Look at this," and she ran her finger down a crack
in the upper.
"The Auxiliary this belongs to 1s an
absolute nailer on polishing her shoes. She'll take
months achieving a really fine glossy surface and then
she simply can't bear to hand in the shoes even if they're
obviously worn. I've been trying to get her to give these
in for the past few months—not a bit of it, she'd rather
suffer wet feet !"'
I peered in at the ablution block which was also
extremely well kept, looked at three more bedrooms and
decided that so far as cleanliness in the home was con-
cerned the A.T.S. were hard to beat, and walked into the
next door house-which was given up to classrooms,
and sought out the soldier who repaired and maintenanced
the typewriters.
He was hard at work repairing one and shook his head
at me as I walked into his little room.
"Varmints, these girls are-thump, thump, thumpin'
away at these poor machines until they're fit to come to
pieces in your hand. I'll have this one in apple-pie
order by tonight and I'm willing to bet any money I'll
have it in again by the end of the week."
"I expect the men are just as bad when they're learning
to type,
" I told him. "All beginners are apt to ill-treat
their typewriters."
"Nobody could be as heavy-handed as these A.T.S.,"
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
he snorted. "I've been working on Army typewriters the
past twenty years and never have I seen typewriters in a
state like these."' Then he put down his tools and leaned
confidentially across the table. "D'you hear about that
buzz-bomb back in last summer that dropped a few yards
from one of our houses ?"
"Yes, the Commandant mentioned it."
"My, you never saw anything like it! A Sunday morning
it was and pouring wet. It would be a Sunday, wouldn't
it? Only day those poor girls don't need to get up and
march down the road to their breakfast. The roof came
in on top of them and the windows came in alongside
them, and they were that smothered in rubble and glass
you could scarce see them. But did they mind? Not a
bit of it! Started singing away as if they'd just won a
present off the Christmas tree. They shoved on some
clothes and began sweeping up the mess and salvaging
all their goods and chattels just as if being bombed out
was something that happened every morning. Even when
the Commandant came down and ordered them all to
quit the house at once they argue-bargued with her about
how they could manage and they were quite happy.
Talk about guts! Why, none of them ever turned a
hair !''
I couldn't resist a dig. "But they're heavy-handed
with their typewriters !''
He flourished a chisel at me. "An' what's that got to
do with guts?'' he demanded.
IV
I walked back to the Chief Instructor's office and told
her of this interview.
"Ah, he loves his A.T.S. really, but he won't admit it
except in moments of stress. He's one of about seven
men we have on the strength here to do repair jobs of
various kinds and so on. They were all up in Scotland
with us, and when word came through that we were to
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
160
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
be moved South they got in such an agitated state at
thought of being parted from us that we managed to get
permission to bring them with us. As the transport
wallah said,
I've heard of soldiers taking their women-
folk along with them, but I've never heard of an A.T.s.
establishment taking its soldiers along with it.' They're
wonderful old boys and would do anything in the world
for the Auxiliaries, although they'd rather die than
admit that."
For the rest of the afternoon I sat and listened in at
interviews. One girl wanted to take the senior clerk's
course (which is a pretty stiff one not long open to
A.T.S. personnel), but lacked the necessary confidence.
Watching the Senior Instructor instilling that confidence
was interesting. She did the job so quietly, so gracefully,
that you could hardly tell she was doing it at all, but the
effect upon the Auxiliary was little short of magical and
she walked out of the room with head high and arms
swinging, obviously convinced that she was going to be
the best senior clerk the Army had ever known.
But most of the interviews that day concerned possible
service overseas and I was both astonished and gratified
to hear girl after girl put in a request to be sent abroad,
for when you have spent so much of your life as I have
exhorting the young to go out and see the world it is
pleasant to find that a lot of them want to do so.
"We had a hundred and fifty volunteers last month
alone," said the Chief Instructor.
"I'm very glad to hear it. I imagined the girls might
jib at thoughts of discomforts, and being so far away
from home, and—if they should be sent to a hot climate,
the insects and creepy-crawlies?"
"No, they're strangely sensible-far more so than our
generation ever were, taken all round. Of course, you
must remember most'of them have a sneaking hope they'll
be sent somewhere near their men-folk who are serving
abroad. But even if that hope breaks down they'll still
want to go. In fact, the hope of overseas service is one
of our trump cards when we're doing our poor best to
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
Blood transtusion orderlics.
[British Oficial Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro
RASC
Despatch riders.
140
[British Official Photo.

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
161
popularise the idea of becoming an Army clerk ! "
"I should have thought that all the men these girls are
releasing for foreign service would be sufficient? "
• " Not nowadays, with the bulk of our Armies out of
this country. The cry all the time is clerks, clerks, clerks.
It's time I went over to the Pay Office and saw how things
are going there. We've got a lot of girls passing out
today."
I walked with her and was pleasantly intrigued to find
that each girl received, besides whatever pay was due to
her and her travel warrant, a small sum in cash with which
to buy herself a hot drink during her journey.
"It's all graded,"' said a Pay clerk.
"So much if
your journey is four hours, more if it is six, and so on."
"I see, kind of fourpence as far as Crewe and sixpence
to Manchester? "
"Where's so-and-so? " inquired the Chief Instructor.
"She has to go to the chiropodist at five o'clock, she
complained of a corn yesterday."
I said, "I've suffered from corns for years but nobody
ever suggested sending me to a chirpodist just like that."
"Ah, but you're not in the A.T.S.! Corn-off to the
chiropodist! Toothache—off to the dentist! Sore
throat—off to the doctor ! "
We were joking, yet I knew that what she said was true.
The physical well-being of Auxiliaries is looked after
extraordinarily well and the smallest ailment sent for
cure.
Sure enough the corn-victim limped in a few minutes
later and brightened visibly when told of the appoint-
ment which had been made on her behalf. To me
she said half wistfully, "I wouldn't have dreamed of
going to have a wee thing like a corn seen to in Civvy
Street. It would have seemed too extravagant, wouldn't
it ?"
I nodded agreement and thought that after the war she
and many another girl might miss the various small and
delicate attentions vouchsafed to its servants by that
much grumbled at body, the British Army.
L
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
162
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
V
When we returned to the house which served as Head.
quarters a row of girls was lined up in the hall outside the
Adjutant's office. Everyone was excited and also a
shade tremulous, and when the Chief Instructor came in
to lewas grocted with wails of, " Oh, ma'am, I don't want
; "Ma'am, couldn't we stay another week ?";
"Will they let us come back sometime for a refresher
course, ma'am?"
Nobody seemed in the least desirous to leave the school,
which I thought was a great tribute to the Commandant
and her Instructors, but I really was startled when the
Adjutant whispered to me, "You realise, don't you,
that all these girls were in Ack-Ack before they came
here? "
So those who came "unwillingly to school'' departed
equally unwillingly! I stood turning this fact over in
my mind while farewells were being said. Then the
Auxiliaries marched out and down the drive. Their
footsteps rang out on the hard frosty ground and they
began to sing, but this time their voices were strong and
buoyant :
"We joined the Royal Artillery . . ."
In the process of becoming clerks they had regained
self-respect.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER XIII
NORMANDY AND BEYOND
D DaY plus Fifty-two is a date which the A.T.S. will
always remember and cherish, for it is the date on which
the first Auxiliaries to serve overseas with the British
Liberation Army landed in France, a small party consist-
ing of an officer, an M.T. driver, fourteen shorthand-
typists and two "Redcaps" who were to be attached
to the advance section of Field-Marshal Montgomery's
Rear Headquarters of 21st Army Group.
To say that they were thrilled is an understatement.
Ever since D Day they, together with the rest of the
A.T.S. who had served under 2lst Army Group in
England, had been in a fever of excitement. How were
things going? When would they be sent for? And now
they were actually picked as a small advance guard, the
first British women, bar nurses, to set foot on liberated
French soil !
They spent their last night in England under canvas in
a transit camp started by the Army for the especial use of
Servicewomen journeying to the Continent; but it is
exceedingly doubtful whether they slept. It was all too
incredible, from the farewell party they had just been
given in the sergeants' mess to the prospect of a dawn
awakening and a crossing of the Channel. Even when
they had breakfasted and were being driven in two
trucks to the embarkation port they kept staring back at
163
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
164
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
the stores lorry and utility van which followed them
carrying their belongings as though to reassure them-
selves that the whole affair was not a dream.
The port itself partly convinced them they were actually
starting on their great adventure, for the inhabitants
had made it their custom to speed the soldiers on their
way with little gifts and when they rushed out as usual
and saw Auxiliaries in the trucks, they gave them a
tremendous cheer. Great platefuls of jam and treacle
tart, also hot water to wash in, were provided by the
mother and sister of a Naval Petty Officer, and the
Auxiliaries certainly began their crossing with well-lined
tummies, for just before embarkation they took their
mess-tins to a mobile canteen and were served with their
final ration-tea, bully beef, bread and butter and cheese.
They stepped aboard an L.S.T., their lorry and van, well
waterproofed by their colleagues in some Ordnance Depot,
splashed through the water after them, and as their craft
had never carried women before they received a royal
welcome, cabins with double bunks and hot showers
being provided for them, while they were able to buy
cigarettes and sweets at the canteen.
History does not relate whether any of them suffered
from sea-sickness, but judging from an account of their
voyage in which the sentence, "They rushed with their
mess-tins to the galley the moment each meal was piped"'
recurs at frequent intervals, one gathers that they were
remarkably good sailors. They were young, they were
going on active service, they were terrifically excited-
they just hadn't time to think of being sick !
Before going ashore the Captain invited them to sign all
their names in a treasured book already holding the
signatures of officers whom he had landed in the North
African and Sicilian campaigns, in the Anzio bridgehead,
and on the Normandy beaches; and this seems to have
ince she asked for she to lowing messase to be sent lo
her parents:
"I'd like my family to know that I arrived safely after
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
165
a most enjoyable journey, thanks to the Royal Navy,
and at the moment I am feeling just like the Girl Guide
I almost was."
They were tired girls who saw the blasted houses and
bomb craters in the flashes of the distant gun-fire as their
convoy jolted over the deeply rutted roads, but they were
determined not to miss anything, from sight of a French
field to the waves of the handful of villagers attracted
by the noise of the trucks, so being true members of the
A.T.S. they kept themselves awake by singing their favour-
ite songs.
Never before had Auxiliaries followed so quickly in
the wake of an invading force; never before had they
served so close to the front as these girls were to do.
Their camp proved to be a big field next the offices in
which they were to work, and when they reached it they
found the Army had laid ground sheets inside the tents,
lighted lamps and laid on water for them. They were
also surprised to find a hot meal awaiting them in the
cookhouse, for they had expected to live on a twenty-four
hour ration pack. So sleepy were they that after supper
they simply dumped their personal kit and rolled them-
selves in blankets, not bothering to unload the beds they
had brought with them in their lorry.
The first day in France found them on duty in their
"offices"' —really large tents in an adjoining field, and as
most of them had been sent over by special request of
the officers whose clerks they had been in England they
received a grand welcome and soon slipped into the
familiar routine of work.
For the first few days the Auxiliaries were "confined to
barracks'; that is they were not allowed out of the
camp, but they found plenty to amuse themselves with,
doing their unpacking, washing their "smalls," burning
their fingers at the Tommy cookers and making friends
with the French farmers who still carried on with their
jobs in the camp area. A special joy was watching the
farmhands driving solemnly round at intervals to milk
the cows tethered in the fields, and the girls were delighted
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
166
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
to discover that Camembert and other cheeses were un-
rationed and obtainable in quantities because so few
civilians were left in the district.
Their relatives at home had no cause for worry as to
their comfort, for the soldiers had worked like beavers to
turn what had been a field full of thistles some four days
before the arrival of the A.T.S., into a proper "luxury"
camp with two big marquees as sleeping quarters, smaller
tents as officers'
and sergeants' lines and Company
office, and a spare one fitted up as an ironing room.
Drinking water was laid on from the start and hot water
provided by a stove, but very soon showers and electric
lighting were installed.
After the advance guard the main contingent of 21st
Army Group A.T.S., followed without much delay, and
a great send-off they got from the people of an English
port, these over four hundred officers and Auxiliaries
who embarked on a troopship wearing full equipment—
respirator, greatcoat, water-bottle, haversack, steel helmet,
and a kitbag to carry. With Canadian soldiers, R.A.F.
men and airborne troops they were allowed to go on to
the top deck to wave goodbye to home, and when they
transferred to an L.S.T. in order to go ashore in France
they had made so many friends that the Canadians
insisted upon carrying their kitbags, and the crew of the
troopship gathered at the rails singing We'll Meet Again
to the strains of an accordion.
Some of the A.T.S. clerks in this contingent were the
ones who knew a particular thrill out of seeing their first
prefabricated
harbour,
because for months they had
been typing "top secret" correspondence about it.
Like their predecessors the advance guard, the Auxiliarie
drove to their camp in darkness, and from time to time
the soldiers who greeted their convoy as they always greet
any new arrivals, were thunderstruck when women's
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
167
voices answered them-when they recovered themselves
they cheered frantically until the convoy was out of
earshot.
The advance party, together with the soldiers who had
made their camp with such care, provided a rousing
welcome, and although the next day was officially sup-
posed to be a holiday for the newcomers so that they
might find their feet, almost all of them went along to the
offices and found there so much work piling up that they
got down to it straight away just as if they were still in
England.
This draft of A.T.S. included seventy-three M.T.
drivers belonging to a mixed car company and within a
very short time these girls were driving staff cars and
jeeps along the dusty roads enjoying every minute of
their job.
The number of A.T.S. personnel in North-West Europe
has grown since those first two arrivals-and is growing
still. Among them are the members of the first Mixed
Ack-Ack Battery serving on the Continent—and they are
no strangers to active service, for the Battery was one of
the earliest mixed ones to be formed in 1941 and since
then it has seen long and arduous service through the
blitzes, the tip and run raids and the flying bomb attacks.
Many A.T.S. officers and other ranks have served with
it since its formation near Sheffield, and have travelled
with it to the Humber, to Derby and Nottingham, to
Lowestoft and Yarmouth and finally to Europe-not a
bad record for girls who knew nothing of gunnery a few
brief years ago. Still with the Battery too is Corporal
Grace Golland, B.E.M., who, as has already been told in
this book, was decorated by His Majesty the King for
her gallantry while under fire.
A proud Battery with a proud record. It posseses its
own drum and bugle band composed of twelve Auxiliaries,
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
168
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
all operative numbers, and five R.A. buglers. This band
has for long been a star turn in home areas where the
Battery has been stationed, with the A.T.S. drum-major
stalking ahead complete
with leopard skin, and the
drummers and buglers following in service dress with
white belts and gloves and red, blue and yellow dress
cords and, in the case of the Auxiliaries, side caps.
Nor is romance lacking in this tough fighting unit, for
many of its girls have married gunners during the past
four years, while two more of them married on their
embarkation leave, one bridegroom being a sergeant in
another Battery and the second a sailor in the Royal
Navy.
The Battery was stationed on the East Coast when the
Brigadier came round to announce it would shortly
proceed overseas. None of the Auxiliaries had previously
volunteered for foreign service, since the operational
numbers were not permitted to do so and the clerks,
cooks and orderlies could not bear the thought of leaving
their Battery. But when the Brigadier told them they
could go abroad as a complete unit eighty per cent.
volunteered straight off and cheered so lustily that he
could not continue his speech for several minutes! Great
was the sorrow of the remaining twenty per cent. who
could not leave England for compassionate reasons.
They were replaced by volunteers from other units.
For three weeks the Battery prepared for mobilisation
somewhere in the Midlands, and here the Auxilaries were
inspected by Chief Controller Whateley, C.B.E., Director
of the A.T.S.
A small advance party consisting of A.T.S. and Royal
Artillery, and including A.T.S. officers, sergeants and
cooks, flew over to the Continent to open up the camp.
The remainder followed by sea.
The Ack-Ack A.T.S. took with them beds, pillows,
sheets and blankets and were issued with specially warm
clothing besides Service dress and two suits of battle dress.
Extras included long woollen pants and woollen stockings,
leather jerkins, four pair of boots and shoes, rubberised
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
169
jackets, trousers and rubber knee boots; while the Duchess
of Northumberland's Fund provided a splendid supply
of woollies, among them balaclava helmets, scarves and
gloves.
That the Auxiliaries in the Battery will acquit them-
selves as well on the Continent as they did in this country
goes without saying-but I wonder personally what
stupendous effect first sight of that magnificent band is
going to have on the local population !
IV
Between the first Auxiliaries who served in France in
1940 with the B.E.F. and the Auxiliaries who now serve
with the Liberation Army in Europe stretches a long line
of girls who have gone on foreign service. The first
group of A.T.S. to leave England after Dunkirk went to
Washington in May, 1941, and now well over two hundred
are working there.
The second group left the country in
December of the same year for the Middle East, where
they served under the control of Controller Chitty, who
remained in charge of them for over two years, and
during that period the A.T.S. Middle East Force has
expanded enormously. Girls are working there as
clerks, cooks, M.T. drivers, storewomen, signalwomen
and orderlies; and in hospitals as radiographers, mas-
seuses and laboratory assistants. Moreover, recruiting
has been going on successfully for a long time now in
Egypt and Palestine, and women living there who belong
to any of the Allied countries may join, the only proviso
being that each must get the permission of her own consul
before enrolment. These recruits go to the Palestine Train-
ing Centre for a four weeks' basic training course and for
specialised employments extra training is given. They
receive lectures on Army and A.T.S. organisation, messing,
clothing, pay, discipline, Military Law and hygiene
among other subjects, and a highly necessary addition to
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
170
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
the usual curriculum are lessons in English, as a great
many women anxious to join have practically no know-
ledge of our language.
One A.T.S. officer in this Command is in charge of an
Auxiliary M.T. Company whose achievement has been to
transport thousands of casualties without one single
accident or late arrival over a period of six months; and
when one considers the climatic and other difficulties
under which these girls have to work one is amazed at
such a record.
More A.T.S. officers are serving in North Africa and
Gibraltar; one is on the staff of the British Military
Mission to the Polish Army; and a third is Assistant
Director of Labour in Eritrea.
One of the most interesting experiences of some member
in the Middle East Command was when Controller Chitty
was asked to provide A.T.S. personnel to do work in
connection with the conference held in North Africa
between the three Allied Powers, Great Britain, the
United States of America and China.
Two A.T.S. Signals officers did highly secret work
with telegrams, and the Controller had also to choose
twenty sergeants and eighteen corporals to act as "house-
keepers' to the various members of the different dele-
gations. To begin with it was no light task to find
sufficient suitable Auxiliaries who were at liberty to under-
take the jobs: to end with it was rather an ordeal for
those who were ultimately chosen.
A large number of villas had been taken to house the
delegatés, and in many cases native servants had been
left in them. Now native servants can be excellent, but
it was an extremely difficult thing for British girls who
had hitherto had no experience of dealing with natives to
ensure that the visitors had everything just as they would
like it and keep the peace with the servants at the same
time! Moreover, until the A.T.S. actually walked into
the houses they had not the least idea of what the job was
going to be, owing to the very necessary security ban
which prevented any news of the conference leaking out.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
171
But "the work of these girls was excellent and they
were praised by all the delegates," said an administrative
officer; and the Controller herself was told by a woman
friend
"Your women are earning,golden opinions,
everyone is saying how good they are.
Willingly and cheerfully the Auxiliaries tackled their
strange task and acquitted themselves with the greatest
possible degree of success. In the house allotted to
Generalissimo and Mme. Chiang Kai-shek one A.T.S.
sergeant acted as supervisor to the servants, while another
was given a full-time job as personal attendant to Mme.
Chiang Kai-shek. It is pleasant to note that the Chinese
delegation were extremely friendly and grateful to these
girls and thanked them most heartily when they went
away.
Apart from Middle East Command there are consider-
able numbers of A.T.S. serving elsewhere overseas. Fast
Africa has one contingent and North Africa another.
Italy has a third contingent and Washington a fourth,
while in the far Caribbean Sea Auxiliaries have been
stationed on an outpost for quite a long time.
And the Army's need for A.T.S. to serve overseas
grows ever greater. There are plenty of volunteers;
but the trouble often is that these do not belong to the
particular categories required at the moment. For this
reason it was recently announced in the House by the
Minister for War, that it was proposed to introduce
conscription for foreign service.
Immediately there was an outcry from Members of
Parliament, Press and public. It was, so people averred
a dreadful thing to force young women into leaving their
native land so that they might face heaven knew what
perils in other countries. Such a proposal must be
nipped in the bud forthwith.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
172
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
• It is not for me to put forth any views on this vexed
question. Perhaps it is as well though to present some
tacts.
Since April, 1941, when the A.T.S. was given equal
military status with men, Auxiliaries enrolled for General
Service and over twenty years old, are liable for service
overseas. Despite this ruling no Auxiliary who is in
any way unfitted either physically or mentally for such
duty, or who can show genuine compassionate reasons
for remaining in this country, is ever chosen for foreign
service.
The great majority of Auxiliaries themselves are
bewildered by the hue and cry which has arisen.
"It's queer, you know," a corporal said to me only
the other day, "nobody seems to care what any other
body of girls in the country does, but just let the A.T.S.
start—and then the fat is in the fire."
There was a deal of truth in her pronouncement.
Whenever any change has been contemplated in the
organisation or administration of the A.T.S., people up
and down the country suddenly develop an
inordinate
interest in the Auxiliary's well-being, an interest many of
them unfortunately forget just as quickly so soon as the
storm has died down.
From what I have seen of them-and I have seen a
good deal-the Auxiliaries themselves have not the slightest
objection to being called upon for foreign service. Those
who have compassionate reasons for staying in England
trust their officers and know there will be no question of
"'forcing" them to do anything which is unsuitable or
unkind.. Those who are free to leave the country are
genuinely keen to be given the opportunity-although
many of them will add the rider-"if my people will
let me."'
That last remark, I think, is the rub. I know perfectly
well it is exceedingly hard for parents who have sons
serving abroad or who perhaps have lost their sons
during this war to face with equanimity the prospect of
a beloved daughter also leaving them: I do feel some of
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
173
those parents do not try to see the matter either from
their daughters' or their country's viewpoint.
As for the perils supposedly surrounding the Auxiliary
who ventures from these shores there is no doubt in my
mind that she would be as well, if not better, looked after
in North Africa, in Kenya, in Washington, in Italy, in
Palestine or in North West Europe than she is in this
country. The A.T.S. looks after its own most admirably,
and in addition to extremely sensible unit officers who
have wide experience of dealing with girls of all types,
the Service also employs welfare officers whose especial
job it is to ensure that Auxiliaries enjoy reasonable com-
fort, plenty of social activity of the right kind in their off-
duty times, and infinitesimally small chances of falling
into bad company while far from their homes.
But the storm will die as other storms have died. The
Auxiliaries will go as other Auxiliaries have gone to help
the men who have fought for them for so long.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
CHAPTER XIV
PREPARING FOR CIVVY STREET
I
One of the biggest and toughest problems facing any
Women's Service in wartime is how to keep its members
interested in the normal civilian life they must eventually
go back to, when they are leading an existence which
bears not the slightest resemblance to any they have ever
led before or ever will again.
At the outbreak of war the A.T.S. senior officers looked
at that problem squarely and gave a great deal of thought
and time to schemes for tackling it. They realised they.
were dealing, in their fast-growing Service, with large
numbers of bright, eager young creatures who were only
too anxious to throw themselves heart and soul into the
business of helping to win the war. Therefore the direct
approach, the "You must keep up with your reading, or
your studies or your eflorts to get a little more schooling
because some day you'll need to get a job again," was of
no use whatever. Being impatient and short-memoried
youth would merely toss her head and say that yesterday
was dead and tomorrow might never come, or if it did
it wouldn't arrive for a long, long time.
No, the approach had to be indirect; but here again
difficulties put out bristles.
The very word "education"
served to send the Auxiliaries scurrying in all directions
and if an evening lecture or concert was advertised in a
unit then the girls simply failed to turn up. "Why,
they argued, "should we go and sit in a stuffy old hut or
174
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
175
shed listening to something highbrow when we could be
out dancing, or at the pictures with a boy friend? "
"Vocational courses"' to be taken in ofi-duty times
were all wrong too, for the Auxiliaries had strong ideas on
the liberty of the subject and resented any attempt to
push them gently in the right direction.
But the officers hadn't given up hope by any means.
If they could not interest the majority of the girls in their
future as citizens, or in education, or yet in some sort of
spare-time training they would start very slowly, very
tactfula to interest thin hth fite seth wond. dies.
classes rose and flourished, dancing practices of various
kinds went with a swing, even hygiene classes were well
attended and as the girls grew hard and wiry with good
food and much outdoor living so physical fitness grew in
importance.
Then the A.T.S. came under the Army Act and there
began a most excellent plan of co-education for Auxiliaries
and soldiers alike.
Now it is one thing if a group of young women in, say,
an Ordnance Depot have to give up an hour of their free
time to discuss town-planning with their Junior Com-
mander. It is quite another if men and women meet
together in an hour taken from duty and discuss town-
planning. Instead of dreariness and people shufling
their feet and wriggling on their benches, there were
fascinating arguments as to whether a young couple
required two sitting-rooms or one, or whether you'd
prefer a cottage in the country to a flat in a city.
"Well," said one Auxiliary to another after attending
her first A.B.C.A. discussion group, "I never knew those
sort of things were so interesting before ! "
"They weren't," remarked her companion sapiently,
"until we got the boys into it too.
There was something in that ; there was also something
in the fact that the A.B.C.A. hour gave everyone the
pleasant feeling that they could sit in a warm hut instead
of working outside in the cold without anybody reprimand-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
176
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
ing them for laziness; there was a third and deeper
reason-the native thirst for knowledge which lurks
somewhere in every human being was satisfied at last
because information had been put across in an attractive
and amusing way.
Gradually the suspicions of the Auxiliaries to as any
"uplift nonsense" dwindled as the scope of the A.B.C.A.
discussions widened. All manner of subjects came up
for survey, from the progress of the war in different
theatres to why you should use your local council vote
at the annual elections.
Auxiliaries who had never been known to discuss any-
thing more intellectual than the latest mode of hairdressing
began to take an interest in current affairs; others who
had rather fancied their superior education were aston-
ished to find that an ex-factory hand who had left elemen-
tary school at fourteen had a far shrewder grasp of the
work of local governments than they had themselves.
An extremely silent girl developed a talent for public
speaking, and in cookhouse and pantry, stores shed and
packing department fierce arguments raged.
Of course, the first flush of enthusiasm died down, but
A.B.C.A. had done a rather wonderful thing: it had
stirred alive the imp of questioning in a great many
Auxiliaries' minds with the result that within a few months
A.B.C.A. hours had gained a solid and enduring popu-
larity among them, much more useful than its initial
success.
Thanks to A.B.C.A. the Auxiliaries began to take an
intelligent interest in people and affairs outside their own
immediate circle. For all too many of them life had
hitherto been bound by Mum, Dad
I, brothers and sisters,
a handful of cousins and the families living in the same
street, and so narrow had these boundaries been in some
cases that a girl born and brought up in one of Britain's
large cities had no idea of what went on in any other part
of the country at all.
It was not her fault. She had
probably started out with quite a sharp little brain; bnt
she had gone straight from school to factory or mill, and
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
[British Official Photo.
Bonnie lassie-Hielan' lassie.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
(British Official Photo.
Welding a Churchill tank.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
177
there hadn't been any cash to spare except for the bi-
weekly orgy at the movies, and the family had thought it
"swank'' to buy newspapers except on Sundays, and so
the brain had dulled. In time the Service would have
made the brain keen again, but A.B.C.A. did the job
more quickly if more ruthlessly.
Nobody welcomed the A.B.C.A. periods more whole-
heartedly than the A.T.S. officers. In their wisdom they
knew that such a mental fillip from outside gave the girls
a flying start in general adult education which they, inside
the Service, could not provide. It was their job now to
stimulate the mental processes A.B.C.A. had set moving.
They did so in a hundred different ways, suggesting end-
less ploys for barrack-room evenings, running study circles
and play-readings, collecting books to form libraries,
getting up concerts and theatricals.
"That's all very well," said a Company Commander
in an isolated unit when I congratulated her on a concert
provided entirely by the girls and rehearsed, cajoled,
browbeaten and wheedled into production by herself,
"we fall down on one essential thing-we can't make
them think! I don't see how it can be helped: they
never get a chance to think. Everything is provided for
them without the least conscious thought on their part;
their food, clothing, bedding, housing, pay, rail warrants,
journey money. The only time they ever do think is
when they sign their names on leave applications-and
that's only because they want the leave.
I saw what she meant. It did seem a pity they didn't
have to use a little more grey matter, but on the other
hand it would be impossible to run a useful and successful
Service of over 200,000 women if they were all allowed
to think their own thoughts and act upon them. At the
same time I had noticed signs of budding self-confidence
in her concert performers and I told her so.
"That's a step on the way to thinking.
And they're
much more wide-awake than when I was here about seven
months ago. You are too near to them all the time,
you don't see the change.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
178
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
That Company Commander did not know it, but she
had done her girls all the good in the world; and the
more I visited A.T.S. units the more I admired her and
her colleagues. They had their own exacting jobs to do,
yet they spent their small leisure in devising fresh interest
for their girls.
II
Things educational in the A.T.S. have marched swiftly
in the past three years from their very sticky beginning to
a close-knit and comprehensive policy which is now
proving
exceedingly satisfactory. In my opinion its
success is due half to the hard work put in by the A.T.S.
unit officers, and half to the officers and sergeants of the
and discussion groups, and in acting as father confessors
to the ambitious who are a little afraid of telling their
dreams of a training in this profession or that trade.
When I was doing an Army lecture tour recently in
lonely districts of Wales two A.E.C. officers and a Warrant
Officer took it in turns to escort me on my visits to A.T.S.
units, and I was amazed at the variety of projects for
Auxiliaries these three had on hand.
At one unit the girls were anxious to learn glove-
making, so up the valleys and down the valleys of Gla-
morgan went their particular A.E.C. officer in search of a
lady he had heard of who made the real professional
articles. It took him an afternoon of persuasive conver-
sation, but finally she agreed to visit the camp one evening
a week for ten weeks. He had no sooner fixed that up
than requests for shorthand lessons came from another
unit so an instructor was found and a course arranged.
Always when I travelled with that officer the back of
the car looked like a mobile library; and indeed that is
just what it was, for at each A.T.S. camp the girls would
cluster round waiting for the books he had promised to
loan them.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
179
They were almost all technical volumes, dealing with
wireless, with electrical or mechanical engineering, with
hotel management, with joinery and carpentry, basket-
weaving, gardening-and pig-breeding. The last-named
was a ponderous tome I picked up at a random from the
heap, and when the officer saw my raised eyebrows he
laughed.
"That's for the little sergeant at B—— Poor child, she's
eating her heart out for a piggery. Apparently she
wanted to become a Land Girl at the beginning of the
war, but father and mother didn't think it ' quaite naice,'
so she joined the A.T.S. She's gained a whole lot of
confidence since then, says she's going to keep pigs after
the war or bust, and keeps asking me if I think she'll be
able to start with two pigs on her gratuity."
"Can she think ? " I asked absently.
"What's that ? Oh, I see. Queer isn't it how Service
life develops initiative with one hand and cuts out
thought with the other? But I should imagine this girl
can . . . damn, I've lost Julian Huxley's Essay's in
Biology.
"Who's that for ?"
" The mess orderly at S——. She's a good scout, but
got the devil's own inferiority complex. I'm giving her
a course of reading by way of cure. Y'know it's an
AT. by thousing the book, Pup hide the
return it.' Always infuriates me because I've been getting
them books for over a year now and they've never let
me down once."'
"They wouldn't; they're a grand crowd."
"Oh, here's Huxley! I say, when you go to l.--
tomorrow remind the
thonging."
Warrant Officer to take some
I scribbled "thonging" on the back of an envelope, and
forgot all about it until arrival at L—, when a breathless
corporal rushed up to me and said :
"Have you brought my thonging? "
I remembered and blushed. I hadn't the foggiest idea
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
180
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
what thonging was but the Warrant Officer produced a
roll of what looked like leather shoelaces from his pocket.
"Here you are."
As I talked to the girls that evening I observed the uses
of thonging. Six of them, including the corporal, sat in
the front row making handbags and afterwards I examined
them. They were beautifully made and lined with odd
pieces of silk.
"Lovely leather, isn't it?" inquired the Auxiliaries
"Captain D. gets it for us.".
The next day I stumbled over an enormous roll of
something soft done up in sacking as I stepped into the
саг.
"Just a few old bits of felt to make toys with. Getting
near Christmas, you know."
"Have you brought them patterns too ? "
"Why, yes, jolly good ones. There's a super lion."
I regretted my nastiness and felt humble. Was there
anything this conscientious young man and his satellites
wouidn't get the A.T.S. if they thought it would amuse
or instruct the girls in these out-of-the-way camps?
One day the Warrant Officer brought his own violin to
lend to a lance-corporal, another day the Lieutenant
produced twelve gramophone records for an Ack-Ack
Battery who had long since played their own half-dozen
back of the Captain ss ar which popped out like a jack-
in-the-box to greet some group of excited Auxiliaries.
Between the three of them they had at least seven really
useful handicraft courses running at different units, one
pianoforte class, a series of lectures on modern art and an
exhibition of home-made toys of which they blandished a
press photographer to come and take a photograph.
Nor did their activities end there. They specialised in
the giving of sound advice regarding post-war careers.
If they had no reliable knowledge of a particular subject
themselves they would go to no end of trouble to acquire
it, and if they thought a girl was contemplating taking up
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
18I
some job for which she was unfitted they told her so
frankly.
I have cited these three A.E.C. men as an example, but
in the past two years I have met their like in many different
parts of these islands. They are sincere, indefatigable
the deservedly popular with the A.T.S.- and they know
III
For my own part I have watched the Auxiliaries at
lectures over a term of years now and noted the results
brought about by the efforts of their own officers, by
A.B.C.A. and by the A.E.C. I first talked to units early
in 1942 and thought maybe they were appalled by the
word "'lecture" which I myself dislike intently. For a while
a few of them listened and asked questions, the majority
sat glumly and dumbly or indulged in fits of spurious
coughing. Selfishly I did not realise on my earliest visits
that a very small proportion had been in the Service for
any length of time, that they were still at the bewildered,
"How shall I ever stick it?" stage, or that with Russia
and China I was speaking about countries which to them
were more remote than the moon.
Then things began to brighten up. By the end of 1942
I was getting interest, laughter, exclamations and so many
questions that we generally had to call a halt. But to me
the fascinating thing is the difference between the Decem-
ber, 1942, questions and the February, 1945, questions.
1942 I was inundated with childish inquiries: "Why
don't the Russians have a king like us ?"; "Why do
Chinese men wear pigtails?"'; "Is there a Mrs. Chiang
Kai-shek ?"; "Do all Russians wear beards? " Nowa-
days I indulge in brisk arguments on economics, sociology,
education, child welfare, the attitude of Russia towards
Japan, the reasons behind the Yellow River floods, the
pay given to Russian women in technical jobs.
As I said earlier the best questions usually come from
clerks, cooks and orderlies. They want to know how
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
182
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
other people live, while the highly technical A.T.S. trades-
woman has a narrower viewpoint and is only interested in
what women of her type are doing elsewhere.
The A.T.S. officers have done right away with the
"'lecture"' idea.
The girls are encouraged to bring their
knitting or sewing, to smoke, to lounge back as com-
fortably as they like while a talk is in progress-and
talks are given on barrack evenings when the Auxiliaries
do not go out anyway, so none of their actual free time
has to be given up. All these improvements are excellent,
but it is the work behind the real awakening of the girls
that is the great thing, and that has been brought about
chiefly by their Education and unit oflicers.
IV
At the present moment the A.T.S. Education Officers
under their Senior Officer in London are still busy work-
ing out more and more trainings which Auxiliaries may
take under the Army scheme to fit them for jobs in the
post-war world. Many of these are already in operation
and courses connected with music and art seem excep-
tionally popular.
The officers, however,
are
rightly
insisting that the girls should remember that a living will
have to be earned and although at this stage of affairs
there is no longer any resentment at mention of this
subject—for the Auxilaries realise that far-away. Civvy
Street is looming closer on their horizon—there is still a
disinclination to think clearly and coolly about what
they want to do.
After two or three or five years of Service life it certainly
must be desperately hard for girls who were little more
than children when they joined up to visualise a world
in which there are no officers to take troubles to, no
Army beds, no three square meals a day-no anything
unless they go out and seek it. They have lived hard
in the Service and suffered discomfort and sometimes
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
183
extreme danger as in Ack-Ack, but they have been looked
after and the Army has acted as buffer between them and
the outside world.
From this buffer idea has grown another, a natural but
entirely wrong illusion: that if they enter for one of these
pre-demobilisation courses for training in a profession or
trade the Army will automatically pop them into nice
safe post-war jobs.
If I were an Auxiliary I think I might easily suffer the
same illusion, simply because I should be so used to the
Army guiding my career; but for the A.T.S. Education
Officers this idea is a constant worry.
"•We've told them time and again," said a Senior
Commander, "that while we'll do absolutely everything
we can to help afterwards-references, suggestions,
introductions and so on—we simply cannot get then
jobs."'
And still some of her girls cherish the belief that Authority
will provide !
In consequence it is rather difficult sometimes to per-
suade girls to take the right pre-demobilisation course of
training. Take for example a girl who was a shorthand-
typist before the war. Vaguely she supposes she'll get
a job of the same sort after the war, but the Education
officer has hard work to make her see that if she would take
the course in commercial French and German she would
greatly enhance her value to some future employer.
Study of the list of the courses in progress or being
arranged shows the tremendous amount the Authorities
are doing for Service members. Every kind of work,
from University examinations to cooking, is catered for
and the Auxiliaries thus have a wonderful opportunity
to get free tuition while still in the Service.
Many of them have taken advantage of this ; but there
are many who still hesitate, perhaps because it means
they must give up their free time on several evenings a
week. Later on it is hoped to have the courses in wotking
hours, but the state of Europe must be tidied up before
that can happen.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
184
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
IV
As I have said previously the bulk of the A.T.S. long
for a home, a place of their own; so the courses in
"home-making"
are exceedingly popular. I had imag-
ined these would be sensible and fairly comprehensive
trainings, including house management and cleaning,
cookery, food values and perhaps dressmaking. 1
reckoned without the A.T.S. Education Officers !
These women know perfectly well that in the ordinary
small home domestic matters never move on oiled wheels.
There is always a minor crisis of some description, and the
girl who has learnt domestic science at a school often finds
it enormously hard to cope with a house which simply
does not possess gadgets of all sorts, a house where the
coal does not arrive, or the pipes burst, or unexpected
guests occur.
So one part of the home-making course fascinated me.
On entering each pupil was given a slip of paper. This
was her "assignment" for that lesson. I quote two of
these " assignments.
1. You live in a cottage in the country a good way
from a town. Butcher and baker call only twice a week
—and this is not one of their days. In your cupboard
you have (there follows a list), and in your garden are
(a list of vegetables). It is ten o'clock in the morning
and you get a telegram saying that two rather important
visit are on and you hate da wish in which ta
prepare for them. What are you going to give them to
eat ? "
The second "assignment :
2. It is a Friday and your small son has just come back
from a holiday and all his clothes need washing and
mending. Your husband telephones to say that his
mother is ill and that you must all go to his home, a
considerable distance away by train, for the week-end.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
185
He wants you to pack his bag. You and the boy are to
meet him in about five hours' time at a certain station.
Which of your child's clothes are you going to wash?
How will you dry, iron and air them in the time available ?
Now to my mind these two assignments are first-class.
They present just the sort of crisis which occurs in the
small home, just the kind of thing these Auxiliaries will
have to face when they have homes of their own.
To make the thing complete each "assignee" finds the
things she requires laid out for her-including the small
boy's dirty clothes! And during her lesson she actually
has to do the best she can with them.
The "assignments' are tremendously popular with
the girls, and it adds to their interest, for they never know
until they walk into the classroom what difficulties they
will have to surmount.
Cookery classes are also in much demand, and here
again the cookery taught is of the "make-do" variety.
Great attention is paid to the way in which simple dishes
are presented, also to the care which should always be
taken in the buying of foodstuffs. Some girls who are
A.T.S. cooks finds difficulty at first in handling such
small
quantities. If
you have been accustomed for
several years to catering for big numbers you are apt to
throw in ingredients in a large way! But in these classes
the girls definitely learn how to cater for one to six people.
" And once you get the lesser quantities fixed in your
head," a cook told me, " then it's marvellous how quickly
service yourself able to adapt dishes you've learnt in the
"I find cakes and buns difficult," said a second. "I
can make a batch of a hundred buns and they'll turn out
splendidly ; but I'm bothered if I can make a similar
batch of a dozen! The wretched things just don't rise."
Invalid cookery is also taught with a view to possible
hospital jobs, while it is emphasised that the average
A.T.S. cook would find a restaurant or institution job
interesting and suitable.
To this end she may attend a
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
186
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
refresher course on nutrition values, butchery and so
forth.
**In London," said the Senior Commander, "it is very
difficult to get the girls to attend courses--a pity, because
we have so many facilities which cannot be found else-
where. The truth is there is too much going on outside
and the girls naturally wish to go to concerts or theatres
or cinemas in their spare time. We find that the girls in
lonely districts are the ones who most appreciate this
pre-demobilisation training."
It must be remembered that the whole business of pre-
demobilisation training is still in its infancy. The
Auxiliaries are still much too busy with their immense
variety of Army jobs to give time or thought to other
work.
The important thing is that the scheme is there,
ready to the last hair, and the moment circumstances
permit it will be put into full operation.
V
Some people may think I have put A.T.S. Education in
rather a sombre light. Certainly I have tried to present
the innumerable difficulties under which any educational
plans must labour in a Women's Service, but I have also
tried to show the great strides which have been made in
the past three years and the growing appreciation of the
girls for some kind of post-war training.
It is no light job to find out what over 200,000 young
women want to do and to provide them with the means of
doing it-especially when a short hour or two a week is
all the time available.
Personally I hold the most sincere admiration for the
way in which the A.T.S. has tackled this problem. I like
especially the officers' frank admission that their girls will
find many things which are awkward when they return
to civilian life, that they will experience difficulty in re-
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
187
acclimatising themselves. I like even more the way in
which the officers have thrown themselves into the prepa-
ration of different schemes. If an A.T.S. girl starts
civilian life without an adequate training in the back-
ground it will certainly not be the fault of the Service.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
ENVOI
THERE are so many categories I have not mentioned, so
many remarks from Auxiliaries I have not put into this
book. I have not, for example, mentioned the A.T.S.
"Redcaps," those girls whose first public appearance
caused both protest and ridicule, yet whose real job is a
most necessary one.
You cannot expect 200,000-odd girls
all from different walks of life and different sorts of homes
to behave perfectly all the time, and it is thanks to the
"Redcaps" in great measure that those who do misbehave
are caught before they go too far.
I have not mentioned the shoe-repairers, or the hospital
orderlies, or many other groups of Auxiliaries who are
doing excellent work both here and overseas. I have
forgotten also to write about a group of A.T.S. officers
and N.C.O.'s who receive small recognition outside the
Service, but who are deserving of highest praise because
for the past five-and in some cases six-years these
women have been at the gruelling job of training their
fellow-women. They have trained the girls in the basic
training camps, they have trained N.C.O.'s on a variety of
courses for specialised work, they have trained the bud-
ding officers in the O.C.T.U.'s.
Training, training..
and training. Giving the same lectures week in and week
out to the changing groups, answering the same questions,
checking the same examination papers. To my mind
their work seems so monotonous as to be well-nigh
unendurable, but although many of these training officers
188
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
189
have often ached for a posting to a more exciting brar.ch
of the Service I have never yet met one who has allowed
herself to get stale or bored.
And I have not written this book as a chronological
survey of the Auxiliary Territorial Service. I have tried
merely to give a series of pictures and descriptions of what
the Service has done since the outbreak of war.
Their contribution to the Army has been colossal-
that is a big word I know, but it is the only right one.
Who would have imagined six years ago that women
would be working in Ordnance Depots, driving three-
ton trucks year in and year out, manning Signal Stations,
cleaning ammunition, sealing tanks, mending wireless sets
and telephones, working kine-theodolites, manning Ack-
Ack guns? Yet the Auxiliaries have done all these
things and more, done them superbly well through
blizzards and blitzes, through discomforts and dangers.
What's more, they're still doing them and they won't let
up until the Japanese war is over.
They haven't had an easy time. Perhaps the public
does not realise how much the Auxiliaries feel when,
owing to the action of one of their problem children, the
whole Service is discredited; but the girls do feel such
things very deeply indeed for they are rightly proud of
their record.
Time and again in my wanderings among the A.T.S. I
have been struck by their capacity for hard work, tough
work, any sort of work which presented difficulties. You
need only to meet their Director to understand where that
capacity comes from, for she works harder than any man
or woman I have ever met. She has tradition behind
her—she is the granddaughter of a Field-Marshal who
rose to that rank from a midshipman in the Navy; she
is completely feminine; she is exceedingly tolerant—
and she works.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
190
BRITAIN'S OTHER ARMY
Her example is reflected throughout the Service she
leads.
You will find it in her Senior officers and you will
find it in the smallest A.T.S. private. Give an Auxiliary
an impossible job and she will set upon it like a terrier
worrying a bone.
What is more she won't leave it alone
until she has done her utmost to conquer it.
The A.T.S., however, are remarkably modest about their
achievements.
"We're not soldiers,
" one of them told
me, "we don't pretend to be-but we're awfully good
stooges."
That is how some of them like to be known, "the
stooges"' of the British Army.
I have seen Auxiliaries working in all weathers and a
variety of costumes and I used to think I liked them best
in their oily dungarees and kerchiefs round their heads,
crawling under tanks and lorries. I've changed my mind,
for I keep remembering a "Salute the Soldier" week
parade I attended in a North of England city.
The huge crowds cheered different Naval, Army and
R.A.F. detachments, swayed to and fro in excitement,
made the praiseful or derisive comments of the usual
English crowd. Then from the distance came the shrill
sound of the bugles, backed by the beat of the drums and
a band of the A.T.S. came into view, marching slowly
through a wide square. They marched superbly. Ahead
of them was their drum-major, a tall slim girl with the
leopard skin spread bravely across her and her arms
swinging, twirling, swinging as she beat the drum. Against
the khaki of uniform buttons shone with a dazzling sheen,
dress cords made zig-zags of brilliant colour. The band
looked neither to right nor left but blew on their bugles
as though their lives depended on the volume of sound
they could issue. The crowd went mad—I have never
seen an English crowd so moved by anything, and I got
a lump in my throat. They might call themselves
"stooges": I knew better. They were Britain's other
Army.
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
0UD 2 5 1950
ENVERSITY OF TORNIN
Created with Scanner Pro

Britain’s other army.pdf:
Return it
Check dur
TITLE: 1
#3
Item(s)
UA
659
A9B54
1946
C.1
ROBA
Created with Scanner Pro

