The Mechanization Board was a predominantly military body whose duties
were mainly of an advisory and liaison nature.
Within the Board there were
two committees : an "A" Committee which dealt with technical questions
including tracked and semi-tracked tractors
relating to A.F.V.s of all types," B" Committee which dealt with technical
for artillery equipment, and a
questions relating to other mechanical transport vehicles of all types.
Under war-time arrangements the War Office qualitative requirement for
major items of both "A" and "B" vehicles was drawn up in the form of a
General Staff Policy Statement for approval by the Organization and Weapons
Policy Committee and for subsequent ratification by the C.I.G.S. and S. of S.
The General Staff specification within this policy statement was passed to the
Ministry of Supply, who allotted the work to industrial firms and supervised
development.
Until the prototype stage,
when the General Staff was invited
to inspect, development was entirely in the hands of the Ministry of Supply.
The Tank Board' performed the functions of the former "A" Committee of
the Mechanization Board, but its constitution and terms of reference had been
considerably enlarged to enable it to deal with the broader field of responsibilities
necessitated by active war conditions.
Briefly, the Tank Board was responsible
for the settlement of all major questions of policy in regard to development and
production of A.F.V.s, and it was directed to give particular attention to the
qualitative aspects of the tank programme.
The Board was responsible to the
Minister of Supply,
but its membership included strong General Staff
representation.
There was however no counterpart, in the war organization, to
the pre-war " B" Committee of the Mechanization Board.
The nearest approach was the " Committee? on the Provision, Design
and Maintenance of Wheeled Vehicles," under the chairmanship of the
D.Q.M.G. (A.E.), and composed of War Office and Ministry
of Supply
representatives.
Its functions were to co-ordinate the activities of both depart-
ments in their relation to the provision, design, supply and modification of
wheeled vehicles.
It also dealt with standardization.
The main weakness in
the war-time system lay in the fact that there was a lack of formal liaison between
the Ministry of Supply and the General Staff throughout the entire development
process of "B"
vehicles.
Informal touch was maintained between the
D.S.W.V.'s Directorate of the branch concerned in the War Office with the
corresponding branch in the Ministry
meet General Staff requirements; nor was
of Supply, but this was insufficient to
it a satisfactory method
reconciling conflicting views arising between the two departments.
On paper
the terms of reference of the D.Q.M.G.(A.E.). 's Committee would appear to
have been wide enough to overcome this difficulty, but in practice the Committee
concerned itself primarily with the provision of " B" vehicles rather than their
development, and with modifications rather than designs.
The new policy of
standardization and the employment of a limited range of engines and trans-
missions, described in Section 2 of this chapter, made it imperative that there
(*) See Part I, Chapter III, Section 1.
it unid be noted that the " B" committes of the Mechanization Board continued no
(2) Generally known as the Wheeled Vehicle Committee.
technical officers
the Chairman,
were transferred to T.T.2 as
who became D.D.M.(Development),,
This had Do cing of the hen sals of thie rank Board
120
W027
78
9
should be increased General Staff supervision over and liaison with the Ministry
of Supply.
The War Office was doubtful whether the existing Committee was
conflicting interests.
basically constituted to take decisions on a sufficiently high level to reconcile
Furthermore, as the Ministry of Supply was responsible
for the design and development of all " B" vehicles, it was more appropriate
that the Board or Committee concerned should be responsible to the Minister
of Supply rather than to the Q.M.G.
The logical result of this chain of reasoning was, from the War Office point
of view, that a " B" Vehicle Board should be set up by the Ministry of Supply,
on the lines of the existing Tank Board, to maintain formal General Staff contact
with the Ministry at all stages of development subsequent to the issue of
a General Staff Specification up to and including acceptance trials.
responsibilities of this Board would be to promote research and foster
The
development of all types of "B" vehicles, including both wheeled and partially
tracked types.
After some experience had been obtained in the working of
such a Board, it was envisaged that it might be possible to extend its terms of
reference to emphasize its responsibilities in relation to production and provision,
and to abolish the Wheeled Vehicles Committee.
The existence of a Board on
these lines would ensure that General Staff opinion was given full weight at all
stages of development, and would enable the General Staff to keep in formal
touch with the actual state of each type of vehicle under development.
It could
also assist in maintaining a correct balance between "A" and " B" vehicles.
In the past, development of " B" vehicles had suffered much on account of the
overriding claims of production of A.F.V.s and in the Army of the future it was
very necessary that competing claims should be accurately assessed.
The
proposed Board would be in an ideal
position to ensure that maximum
standardization of vehicle types was maintained; a judicial view could be
taken of all possible developments and questions of air-portability and wading
could be taken into account throughout all stages of development.
The Ministry of Supply did not at first take very kindly to this proposal,
the C.G.M.P. considering that the Wheeled Vehicle Committee was quite
adequate for its purpose and taking, perhaps not without reason,' some exception
to the analogy of the Tank Board, of which he had a poor opinion.
He thought
that " the reasons for its inception have been largely political" and " its record
not one to be imitated."
At this point, however, the report of the Industrial
Advisory Panel of the S.M.M. & T. was issued,? and the C.G.M.P. was led to
the conclusion that an ad hoc® committee should be appointed to discuss its
conclusions and at the same time to consider the formation of a permanent
"B" Vehicle Committee.
The conclusions reached by the ad hoc committee,
issued on 10th July,
1945, were numerous, and a summary is provided at
Appendix C to this chapter.
Two major recommendations are especially
pertinent. First, the Industrial Panel's proposal that design and development of
vehicles should not be undertaken in any Government Establishment but should
be dealt with by Industry in special development establishments set up at
Government expense was
unacceptable.
Secondly, the proposal for the
formation of a permanent " B" Vehicle Committee was approved.4
(4) 24 Jan., 1945.
(2) Ibid.
(*) This, in fact, was the title of the committee throughout its short existence.
(* 57/Vehs/2132.
121
