Section 3.—Research and Design Organization
The formation of a research committee,
composed of members of the
Institute of Automobile Engineers, and representatives of the Army, was
suggested as early as
November,
The matter was raised again in
September,
1943, as the result of discussion of the merits of Canadian and
British methods of controlling development and design.
Canada possessed a
supreme development authority, known as the Army Technical Development
Board, which exercised control over industry and material. In Great Britain,
research into design, at any rate of "B" vehicles, was almost entirely in the
hands of manufacturers under the general supervision of the Ministry of
Supply? For some time the Ministry of Supply hotly defended the current
British system, stating that there was no call for an establishment such as
existed in Canada, and that it was not possible or desirable in the middle of the
war to have any common design of vehicles.
This attitude,
" disturbingly
complacent "* as it appeared to the War Office, was ultimately abandoned.
While the War Office was formulating its "B" vehicle requirements for
the post-war Army, as has been described in the preceding section, further
consideration was being given to the type of organization required for examin-
ation into the practicability of the Army's demands and for independent
research into vehicle problems.
The D.C.I.G.S.5 stated the case clearly.
He
considered that one of the Army's first tasks was to obtain and maintain the
utmost mobility possible over land surfaces and across coastal and inland
waters and that to achieve this object the first step was to set up some
organization to study the whole range of problems involved in providing the
most satisfactory army vehicles.
As army vehicles, he included not only all
conventional " A" and " B" vehicles, but also amphibians, crawler tractors,
excavators, bridging equipment-everything, in fact, which was used for moving
the Army across country. His views were accepted by the Weapon Development
Committee, which then proceeded to consider how and within what framework
such a research and development organization should be set up.
D.S.A./A.C. pointed out that although the motor industry might suitably
study components which were common to both civil and military vehicles, it
could not reasonably be expected to produce the best answer to problems of
suspension and traction. Manufacturers of commercial vehicles were concerned
suith production for hard roads, but the Army's requirement was for vehicles
to operate on soft surfaces and on extremely rough going across country, under
all conditions of weather and terrain.
It is worth noting at this point that the Admiralty and the Ministry of
Aircraft Production faced a similar problem, to meet which they had already
taken active steps.
The former had prob am, industrial organization to develop
marine engines, financed partly by the Admiralty but largely by big industrial
The latter had also sponsored research into the development of jet
propulsion by supporting an industrial establishment limited to pre-production
(1) Minutes: 15th Meeting, W.D.C.
(3) Minutes: 10th Meeting, W.D.C., 18 Mar., 1943.
(e) Paper by C.G.M.P. for W.D.C. (WDC/P(43)66), dated 20 Sept., 1943.
(*) M.A. to D.C.I.G.S., 20 Sept., 1943.
(*) 28th Meeting : W.D.C., 21 Sept., 1944.
118
W027
28
orders, not exceeding 20 in number of any particular equipment or aircraft.
It was generally accepted by the Weapon Development Committee that the
War Office also must obtain the backing and good will of industry, in spite of
its limitations.
This conclusion was reached for very significant motives.
It
was realized that no organization would be of any value unless the best brains
in the country were available to it, and since the Government would never pay
the best designers as much as would the industry, it was essential that the support
of the motor industry be obtained if a central research organization were not to
lay behind civil development.
The C.G.M.P. was therefore requested! :-
"... to undertake a preliminary discussion with leaders of the motor
industry as to how a research organization devoted to the fundamental
study of movement across country should be set up."
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, representing the industry,
welcomed this approach, and appointed a panel of its members to discuss the
problem with the Ministry of Supply.
conclusions were reached which may be condensed as follows? : —
(a) The S.M.M. & T. should set up a permanent panel to advise the War
Office® on the design, development and production of future military
(b) if the work of this panel and the industry in general was to be effective,
there should be a strong military department composed of technical
military experts, able to give a firm lead on Army requirements ;
(c) development and production should be carried out by individual
manufacturers selected after consultation with the panel ;
(d) special arrangements should be made at Government expense to deal
with design and production outside the scope of normal commercial
In order to keep in perspective the various activities which were simul-
taneously going on, all with the same ultimate object, it is here necessary to
drop the story of the S.M.M. & T. Panel's deliberations, and to give some
account of the formation of the" B" Vehicle Committee.4
had for some time felt the need for a high level committee composed of its own
representatives and those of the Ministry of Supply to be responsible for the
settlement of major questions in regard to the design and development of all
types of " B" vehicles. In December, 1944,5 the D.C.I.G.S. made this clear to
the C.G.M.P. Before the war,® general policy regarding the conduct of research
into mechanical transport problems was defined by C.I.G.S.
This policy was implemented by the Director of Mechanization in
collaboration with the Mechanization Board and the automobile industry.
(*) 28th Meeting, W.D.C., 21 Sept., 1944.
(2) Minutes :
Dec., 1944. A fuller statement of the Panel's
iews is contained in Appendix
47th Meeting, to this chapte
responsible for provins heed that in pher time thie Monty or sia yau hase the
but n° The late Parthi, Chapte in see War Office organization has already been discussed,
(5) 28 Dec., 1944.
57/Vehs A/2132(3A).
is a the autions conside as wilady more
authors consider it will be more
119
