Three steps were necessary before the ideal could hope to be achieved.
First, the Army had to make a clear statement of its requirements.
Secondly,
some form of research and design establishment had to be created to put these
requirements into a practical shape.
Thirdly, the problems of manufacture of
the
" finalized" designs in peace and war had to be solved.
Section 2.—The Statement of Requirement
The general principle underlying the Army's statement of vehicle require-
ment has remained constant since it was first expressed as General Staff Policy
in September,
1944,
although inevitably time and experience have brought
changes in detail.
That principle was standardization, interpreted as the
employment
of the smallest possible
number
of types of vehicle.
advantages and difficulties of standardization have already been discussed, but
it is worth while to repeat that its primary object was to reduce the problems
of maintenance and provision.
During war, standardization of British vehicles,
could for many reasons be no more than a pipe dream, but the Army was now
thinking of future peace-time equipment,
and had before it the war-time
achievement of standardization in the U.S. Army.
An outstanding example
was the design of the 2}-ton, 6 x 6 vehicle, which was on the drawing board in
August,
1939.
Although constructed by the motor trade for commercial
purposes, it had become the United States W.D. standard medium load-carrying
and towing vehicle, and it had also formed the basis of the amphibious DUKW.
In the same way, the British Army was now contemplating employment of the
fewest possible types of engines and transmissions, and one make only of each
type-not, for example, Morris or Bedford or Austin, but British W.D. pattern.
The selection of the basic types of engines and transmission for the post-war
army was to be governed by the needs of divisional, corps, army and G.H.Q.
troops, and it was a guiding principle that any special requirement as to chassis
frame or body design arising from within
the
various arms of the Service
was to be capable of utilizing one of the basic engines and transmissions as a
power unit.
It was accepted that cross-country
standards would necessarily
be highest within divisions and corps troops, and that certain types of army,
G.H.Q., and L. of C. units could accept a lower standard.
Even the lower
standard, however, would necessitate all wheel drive, special tyre equipment,
good clearance, special braking systems and a large reserve of power to deal
with difficult terrain and towed loads.
Consideration was also given to the wheels versus tracks controversy.! The
arguments for and against each type at that time were:
wheeled vehicles were
more economical for use on roads and good cross-country going.
They were
easier and cheaper to construct and maintain than vehicles
with tracked
suspension, but, on the other hand, on account of the high clearance required
for cross-country work, it was not possible to obtain a really low silhouette on
wheeled vehicles, while the provision of armour was not only difficult technically,
but detracted considerably from the payload.
Half and three-quarter-tracked
vehicles, by reason of their suspension and tracks, had a more satisfactory cross:
country performance hoth as personnel and weapons carriers or as tractors, but
(*) See Chapter XI, Section 2.
110
78
road performance was inferior to that of wheeled vehicles. They could more
easily attain a low silhouette and accept armour, but initial costs and difficulties
of maintenance were greater.
Track life was also limited.
Three-quarter-
tracks had a better cross-country and road performance than half-tracks, but
were much heavier, more bulky and more expensive to produce.
of importance, tracks were noisier than wheels.
Finally, and
Single rear-axle drive (4 x 2) was ruled out as impracticable from the start,
and it was recommended that only 4 x 4 and 6 x 6 wheeled vehicles should be
employed in addition to half-tracks-these latter to be replaced by three-quarter-
tracks if and when research and development made it possible to produce a
simpler and less expensive type.
War experience had proved that considerations
of weight and payload made it impracticable to design " B" vehicles to carry
heavy armour or for extensive use of light armour, but it was considered possible
to apply light armour to vehicle bodies and vital parts of engines and trans-
missions to enable personnel and vehicle to traverse forward areas under small
arms fire with a reasonable degree of safety and to give some protection from
bomb splinters.
Apart from the transporting of tanks and similar special duties, the require-
ments of gun-towers for use in the field place the heaviest strain on "B" vehicles
and the performance required of field, medium and heavy artillery towers was
therefore taken as the yardstick in their respective vehicle classes on the assump-
tion that if these exacting requirements could be met, the resulting vehicles
would be capable of meeting all other demands.
These requirements include
the best possible cross country performance, a good average of speed on the
road, ease of manœuvring, low silhouette and adequate stowage room.
anti-tank equipments, it was thought that a fully tracked towing vehicle would
be essential for reasons of performance, low silhouette and armour; that the
half-tracked vehicle would be satisfactory as a field and possibly as a 17-pr.
gun-tower, and would be able to cover the requirements of battery staff; the
heavier natures of artillery were to be broken down to enable them to be towed
by standard heavy tractors.
To meet these exacting requirements, employing a limited number of engine
and transmission types with different chassis and bodies where necessary, it was
proposed to reduce the classes of vehicles required to four, namely :—
(a) Light.—Based on a 60 B.H.P. engine on the lines of the 4 x 4 Jeep with
possibly one type of chassis and body ;
(b) Car.—Based on a 90 B.H.P. engine with four-wheel drive for staff cars ;
(c) Medium.—Based on a 180 B.H.P. engine.
This was to be the pre-
dominant class for the Army with two main wheeled and one half-
tracked chassis :—
(i) 6 x 6 for 3-ton and heavy load-carriers, light tractors and heavy
ambulances for forward area work ;
(ii) 4 x 4, as in (i), for vehicles mainly not operating in forward
areas or in difficult terrain.
It was hoped that this type might
appeal to some commercial users, especially overseas, and that
a subsidy scheme might be arranged ;
111
