reduction in the Horse Transport Branch of the Army Service Corps.
This and
other trials of the same kind led to the conclusion that the steam vehicle could
be abandoned, except for certain special uses, and replaced by vehicles propelled
by the internal combustion engine.
This conclusion was made operative in
1911, and the war establishments necessary for the new field organization were
published.
They involved the provision of some 1,400 lorries for the Expedi-
tionary Force, of which about 900 were needed to supplement those already in
the service.
Although the necessity for construction of special vehicles for all
military requirements had not been fully realized at this early stage,
the
advantages of standardization were clearly seen, and two schemes, the Main
Subsidy Scheme and the Provisional Subsidy Scheme, were first put into effect
to achieve this end in 1911 and 1912 respectively.
In consultation with industry, a specification for a lorry suitable for military
purposes was evolved which required considerable standardization
of com-
ponent parts between makers.
This specification' was drawn up in such a way
that the individuality of different makes was not impaired, and that the resultant
vehicle would be equally suitable for commercial work.
The intention was
that a number of vehicles built to this specification should be purchased by the
Army for its current needs and that the remainder should be sold to commercial
users on the understanding that they were to be handed over to the Army on
mobilization. It was to provide an inducement to civil purchasers that the main
Subsidy Scheme was devised.
Before any vehicle could receive a subsidy, it
was essential for the War Office to be satisfied that it fulfilled every requirement
of the specification.
Manufacturers therefore had to submit designs for approval
and prototypes for trial before the issue of a certificate authorizing similar
vehicles to receive the subsidy.
There was at first considerable outcry in the technical press and among com-
mercial users because they had not been consulted in drawing up the specifica-
tion, which was not considered practical for every day peace-time use.
The
War Office, however, knew what it wanted, consulted the manufacturers to
ensure that its requirements could be met, and realized, as civilian users did
not, that military requirements were far more exacting than those of civil life.
The specification was therefore detailed and precise, and in time became popular
with growing recognition of the fact that vehicles built to it were considerably
in advance of any others then on the market.
It was not possible to obtain as
much interchangeability as was desirable for the familiar reason that only a
small sum of money was available for a subsidy, but some of the more important
replaceable parts were standardized as well as vehicle control arrangements.
The possibility of making interchangeable such major components as engines,
gear boxes and frames was considered, but regretfully discarded on this same
score of expense.
As it was clearly impossible to expect any results from the
Main Subsidy Scheme for a considerable time, the Provisional Subsidy Scheme
was formulated to fill the gap, and consisted of a census of suitable vehicles
was so nate entered a sues a case to hand over their vehicles to the
War Office on mobilization.3
Continuation of the subsidy, which was limited
to some s choi is dependentinuatio the result of inspections carried out
twice a year.
These two schemes provided the bulk of the vehicles required at
(3) Ibid.
(*) Details of this specification and of the subsidy are given in Appendix B to this chapter.
(°) Details of the scheme are shown at Appendix A to this chapter.
WO27
28
the beginning of the 1914-18 war, in which the country had good reason to
be grateful for the laborious pioneering efforts of the Army in pre-war days.
The heavy solid-tyred chain-driven lorry of the day,
influenced by, War Office specifications did its job well.
either designed to, or
Progress in design during the 1914-18 war was not outstanding in this
country, except for the growing use of pneumatic tyres.
The United States,
however, showed themselves in the forefront of development, in particular by
mass production of the four-wheel drive lorry.
Development after the war
was equally slow, and for many years, even for supply transport, establishments
for horse-drawn and mechanized vehicles existed side by side.
The problems
of mechanization of transport fell into two parts-mechanization of operational
and front line vehicles and mechanization of the supply vehicles in the rear of
the front line-the divisional train.
In the 1920s practical experience of the
war just ended led to the general belief that both problems should be tackled by
the design and provision of special military vehicles.
The comparatively small
requirements of the Army of that day made this policy practical from the point
of view of industrial capacity if expensive from the point of view of the Treasury,
and a very great amount of experimental work and of trials by units was carried
out.
Apart from
the Royal Army Service
Corps, which was
virtually
mechanized by 1929, the mechanization of the transport of the Army was a
very slow process which took place in a piece-meal fashion from 1920 to 1935
when the Infantry Division was mechanized.
The principle of total mechaniza-
tion was not accepted until 1930, and the use of vehicles for the various arms of
the Service was only sanctioned after exhaustive and lengthy trials by experi-
mental units of those arms.
The result was that ultimately each arm was
equipped with types of vehicle admirably suited to its peculiar purposes,
produced as the result of independent research.
There was, however,
correlation of the requirements of different arms, and an invaluable opportunity
for standardization from the outset was lost.
Section 2.—Early Development and Design
Early in the 1920s the Mechanical Transport Advisory Board began to
develop the 6 x 4 vehicle as being the most promising design for standard
transport for the Army as a whole.
It is difficult to understand why more
attention was not paid to the two-axled four-wheel drive type, which had
proved its worth in the United States Army in the 1914-18 war.
Some rather
perfunctory experimental work was done, notably by the R.A.S.C. School in
adapting the " Hathi" vehicle as a heavy tractor, but until shortly before the
1939-45 war there appeared to have been a somewhat inarticulate prejudice
against it.
It soon became clear that the War Office intended to pin its faith
on the 6 x 4 machine, and three sizes were actively considered —light, medium
and heavy, with load capacities of 30 cwt., 3 tons and 10 tons respectively.
By
1925 provisional specifications of the light and medium types had been prepared,
and a small number of manufacturers took an interest and carried out experi-
mental work both independently and in conjunction with the War Office.
May, 1927, a final specification for the medium vehicle was published, followed
soon afterwards by a specification for the light vehicle, which was tentatively
intended to be used for first-line transport.
These two types were intended to
form the backbone of military transport, and in the next six or seven years
formed, on paper, a very large portion of the transport establishment.
Great
