10. Terms of Purchase.—The price to be paid for any motor vehicle shall be
the value of the said vehicle as at the date of taking over by the War Depart-
ment, plus 25 per cent., provided that the sum to be paid shall not be greater
than the agreed total cost price as recorded in column 9 of the Schedule, nor
less than 30 per cent. thereof.
The value of the said vehicle for this purpose shall be arrived at by deducting
from the agreed price of the vehicle as shown in the Schedule hereto 74 per cent.
of that price in respect of each complete half-year which shall have elapsed from
the date of delivery to the present owner, together with a further 1ê per cent.
for each six weeks in respect of the broken period (if any) in excess of a complete
number of half-years.
For example, if the agreed price of a vehicle were £600, the amount to be
paid by the War Department would be as under :—
Period of Present
Ownership.
Depreciation
to be deducted
Depreciated
Value.
Sum of 25 per
added to the
Depreciated
Value.
Price to be
paid by War
First 6 months
6 to 12 months
45
135
to 2 years
2 to 22 years
000C
105
95
2} to
315
32 to 4 years
285
240
469
119.
256
300 0 0
The inclusive cost of taking the vehicle to the place ordered, and of services
incidental thereto, is included in the purchase price, irrespective of the method
of delivery
employed.
11. In the event of a vehicle having been obtained upon the hire purchase
system or any similar system of deferred payments, the actual purchase price
shall be depreciated 5 per cent. per annum over the period of hire or payment,
and the resultant figure shall be deemed the total cost price paid by the owner
as required to be inserted in column 9 of the Schedule hereto.
12. Power of Rejection.—In the case of a motor vehicle being considered
unserviceable by the War Department when delivered, it may be rejected, in
which case no payment will be made by the War Department for expenses
incurred.
13. Total Disablement.-If an enrolled motor vehicle is at any time totally
disabled, or through accident or other cause likely to be unavailable for a period
in excess of 21 days, the owner shall at once notify the War Department, and
take all reasonable steps to have the vehicle put in running order oF otherwise
made available with as little delay as possible.
The War Department shall be at liberty to have the vehicle inspected during
this period, and, after consideration of the cir unstances of the case, to indicate
a time-limit for the completion of any repairs.
This time-limit shall be notified
to the owner and, if it is exceeded, the War Department shall be at liberty to
strike the vehicle off the list of enrolled motor vehicles.
W027TTz
14. Withdrawal from Enrolment.—An owner may not withdraw a motor
vehicle from enrolment without the written permission of the War Department,
which will, however, not be unreasonably withheld.
In case of withdrawal
being permitted the owner shall forfeit all claim to any outstanding instalments
and shall refund to the War Department a proportionate amount in respect of
any unexpired period for which payment has been made.
15. If during the period of the Agreement the owner shall wish to send an
enrolled vehicle out of the United Kingdom he shall apply to the War Depart-
ment for permission to withdraw the vehicle from enrolment. Such permission
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
If permission to withdraw is granted it
shall be under the conditions laid down in Clause 14 hereof.
16. Sale of Vehicle.—An owner shall not be entitled to sell or part with the
possession of an enrolled motor vehicle (except by hiring under the next clause)
during the continuance of this Agreement without the permission in writing of
the War Department, which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Should an owner desire to sell an enrolled vehicle he shall give the name and
address of the prospective purchaser.
Should the purchaser be prepared to
take over this Agreement in respect of the vehicle in question, and should the
War Department sanction that arrangement, the purchaser shall be deemed to
be substituted for the owner for all the purposes under this Agreement so far as
relates to that vehicle, as from the date of such purchase, as if the contract had
been originally made by him with reference to the vehicle in question.
Failing
any such arrangement with the purchaser any permission granted shall be under
the conditions laid down in Clause 14 hereof.
17. Hire.—No special permit is required for letting motor vehicles enrolled
under this Agreement on hire to third parties, but the address of such third party
must be forwarded by the owner to the War Office in cases where the duration
of letting exceeds one calendar month.
The owner remains responsible to the
War Department for all purposes, including the despatch, if ordered, for purchase.
All hiring must be expressed in the hiring agreement to be subject to the
liabilities imposed upon the owner by this Agreement.
18. Care and Maintenance of Vehicle.-
—An enrolled vehicle is to be kept
under suitable cover when not in use and due protection from frost and any
other deterioration ensured by the owner.
No alteration in the constructional
detail of the vehicle is to be effected after acceptance for enrolment without the
prior consent of the War Department.
19. Access to Books.—Where the
Inspector deems it necessary for the
purposes of this Agreement he shall at all times be afforded reasonable access to
and information upon any documents or matters affecting any vehicles enrolled
under this Agreement.
20. Joint Ownership.-In the case of a vehicle held on the hire purchase
system or any similar system of deferred payments, or in any case of joint
ownership (other than by a corporate body) the written consent of all interested
parties to the enrolment of the said vehicle shall be attached hereto by the
