involved modification or re-design of parts and assemblies.l
Every time such
modifications became essential the spare parts problem was intensified.
The
types most largely produced in Great Britain were the basic chassis for 15-cwt.
and 3-ton loads.
These chassis had, in any one factory, many parts including
engine assemblies in common, and were used to carry many types of technical
body as well as the normal load-carrying body.
In general, therefore, while
considerable progress was made in the standardization of component parts, it
was found impossible under conditions of war to achieve anything like the same
degree of standardization for vehicles themselves. It was an unfortunate situa-
tion for which there was no immediate remedy.
The only way in which
successful standardization could have been achieved would have been by exten-
sive and elaborate planning before the war.
The outbreak of war meant that
opportunity had gone, never to return.
Section 4.—Re-organization of the British Vehicle Provision Repair
The connection between this subject and standardization is not very obvious,
and in fact there is no immediate connection apart from the fact that both form
part of a systematic attempt to increase the efficiency of the national war effort
by effecting economy in production, storage, and time spent in maintenance and
The process is known in modern governmental and business jargon
as " stream-lining."
Some description of the changes in the system of issue
and repair of vehicles has already been given in Chapter III, but the matter calls
for a closer examination into causes and results with regard to transport vehicles.
At the beginning of the war there existed a distinction between "A", "B"
and "R.A.S.C." vehicles, which had grown up spontaneously with the growth
of mechanization. The reasons for separate classification of "A", or fighting
vehicles, are easy to comprehend, although during the course of the war it
became more and more difficult to draw a hard and fast line between classes of
ehicle, as has sen surested in the introduction to this boto.
vehicles was largely owing to the fact that the
Royal Army Service Corps was the first branch of the Army to be extensively
mechanized, and thus a separate organization for the provision and repair of
R.A.S.C. vehicles had been formed before serious attention had been paid to
mechanization of the remainder of the Army. It therefore appeared more
convenient to retain separate administration for a branch of transport which
had already become an established fact, from that which dealt with development
Thus the Royal Army Service Corps was respon-
sible for the provision and upkeep of all second line transport vehicles, ambu-
lances and fire engines operated by corps units at home and abroad, while the
Royal Army Ordnance Corps was responsible for the provision and upkeep of
all first line vehicles, including A.F. V.s, for all operational units at home and
The rapid growth of mechanization throughout the whole of the
Army, together with the formation of the Ministry of Supply as a provision
agent for all vehicles, made this system unwieldy and extravagant, and the
increasing shortage of manpower which became apparent after the fall of
France, made inevitable a co-ordination of paralle systems of vehicle provision
• (1) Aluminium had to be eliminated from all wheeled vehicles.
WO 27 7726
indirect means.
Attention was first drawn publicly to the weaknesses of the current system by
For some considerable time complaints had been made by
tradesmen conscripted into the Services, by employers of labour and by trades
union leaders that large numbers of skilled artificers, who could have been use-
fully and fully occupied in industry, were either idle in the Services or employed
in ways which made no use of their trade skill. Ultimately a Commission
under Sir William, now Lord, Beveridge was set up in late 1941' to investigate
these allegations.
The Royal Navy emerged exceedingly creditably from these
investigations, the Royal Air Force received some criticism tempered by
admission of certain special circumstances which inevitably caused extravagant
use of manpower, but the Army was forced to accept very heavy criticism for a
waste of skilled labour for which few extenuating reasons could be found.
The
essence of the Commission's recommendations with respect to the Army was
that artificers at that time scattered throughout the Service should be absorbed
into one body which was to deal with all mechanical and electrical maintenance
and repair work for the Army.
Thus was born the Corps of Royal Electrical
and Mechanical Engineers? in April, 1942. It was intended that the new corps
should develop in two main stages.
In the first stage R.E.M.E. absorbed :-
(a) the whole of the engineering side of R.A.O.C. ;
(b) all R.A.S.C. maintenance, except that carried out by R.A.S.C. workshop
platoons in transport companies;
(c) some mechanical maintenance functions of R.E.
At the same time responsibilities for provision, storage and issue of vehicles,
including spare parts and assemblies, which had been divided between R.A.S.C.
and R.A.O.C., were now to be concentrated in the R.A.O.C. In the second
unless experience of the first phase proves that the absorption of
unit tradesmen in L.A.D.s is wrong, all tradesmen whose duties are solely
or predominantly the maintenance of technical equipment, may ultimately
be transferred to the new corps."3
This latter proposal met with such unanimous disapproval from all commands
As a result of this re-organization, the distinction between "B" and
"R.A.S.C." vehicles disappeared, and all wheeled vehicles and motor-cycles in*
the Army, with the exception of A.F.V.s, became known as "B" vehicles.
Stocks of R.A.S.C. and "B" vehicles were amalgamated and the R.A.O.C.
became the sole source of supply of vehicles to all units of the Army. All
vehicle reserve depots in the United Kingdom, with one exception, became
centrally controlled by the Chief Ordnance Officer, Chilwell.
organization consisted of :—
(a) a department of the Central Ordnance Depot, Chilwell, known as
" Headquarters, Tanks and Vehicles
Section The report of the commission was published in Feb., 1942. See Part I, Chapter III,
(2) The formation of such a corps had been considered and rejected by the Army Council
some years before the war.
20/Engineers/7006.
(3) War Office Letter 20/Engineers/7006 (S.D.1) dated 16 Apr., 1942.
(*) War Office Letter 20/Engineers/7006 (S.D.1) dated 23 July, 1942,
by C..0, OR Daley workshops and machinery lories and trailers, adminisered separately
