motor-cycle was built up of approximately 2,166 separate parts.
The production
shop
capable of 2,487 separate
machining operations.
A factory producing 400 motor-cycles a week would
require approximately 415 machine tools.
In order to introduce a standardized motor-cycle, it would have been
necessary to re-tool all existing plants and to provide new patterns and dies for
the suppliers of castings and stampings.
Further, by the middle of the war,
approximately half of the total manufacturing capacity available was producing
spares, and this huge volume would have been required, to a gradually decreasing
extent, for some years after the introduction of the new model.
two ways in which it was considered possible to provide production capacity.
Both had serious disadvantages which ultimately caused standardization to be
The first scheme was to provide new buildings and machine tools
to the extent of half the plant then engaged on motor-cycle production.
estimated that plant alone worth some £800,000 would have to be obtained and
No estimate whatever could be given of the time taken before
production began.
The second scheme was to re-tool existing plants, which
would probably have taken 12 months during which the output of the old type
There would have been an interim period before
production of the new type began in which, as no priority existed, it was most
unlikely that the labour force could have been kept together. The objections to
re-tooling applied whether standardization was effected by concentrating on an
existing or on an entirely new design, except that in the former case production
at one of the six factories would have remained constant. Such were the main
practical difficulties in the way of standardization.
There were also psychological factors to be considered.
been chosen as the standard,' the other manufacturers would
the selection invidious and would have been
unwilling, at least subconsciously, to co-operate.
way reflecting on their patriotism and public spirit, no firm could shut its eyes
to its prospects of post-war business, and to have been making motor-cycles
not of its own design would have put it in a bad position for resuming peace-
Nor could it have been expected that the management of a factory
or its staff could have taken the same personal interest in the production of an
alien machine as in one bearing their own name.
The incentive to make a
satisfactory article would have largely disappeared in such circumstances.
The rapidly increasing dependence of the United Nations upon North
American production soon showed that standardization was an international
requirement needing treatment on a broad scale. The question was first raised
by the United States before the passing of the Lend-Lease Act and formed the
background to every transaction between the United Kingdom and the U.S.A.
It appeared first in the form of doubts expressed by the U.S.
War Department as to the necessity for very large demands for spare parts for
obsolete and obsolescent vehicles of U.S. manufacture, and ended in an enquiry
into the degree of standardization attained by the U.S.A., Canada and Great
not always repeated in service.
WO2777
At the beginning of the war, Allied governments and the governments of the
Dominions, India and the Colonies had acquired very large numbers of
American vehicles for military purposes and for essential civil services, Britist
vehicles being neither obtainable nor suitable.
purchased from the United States many military vehicles which were non-
standard-that is to say of types not employed by the U.S. Army. Appendices
C, D and E to this chapter give figures of the civil and military vehicle holdings
of the British Commonwealth and dependencies at the end of 1942, together
with an estimate of the proportion of vehicles of North American origin. It
will be seen from Appendix D that military holdings overseas of non-standard
makes alone amounted to no less than 61,707, of which rather more than half
were estimated to be of U.S. origin.
These figures alone, apart from those of
essential civil transport, represented a formidable problem in terms of spare
parts, and the United States very naturally doubted whether it was worth
while to maintain them.
The fact that spare parts took less shipping space than
complete vehicles, even when boxed, decided the issue, but a distinction was
made, for maintenance purposes, between military and civil vehicles.
quantity of spares permitted to be exported from the United States for civil
vehicle maintenance was limited by a yearly dollar allowance on each vehicle,
based on the cost of the military scale of spares for a G.M.C. 2}-ton 6 × 6 U.S.
One year's spare parts for 1,000 such vehicles cost $1,300,000,
and it was estimated that military requirements were three times greater than
civilian requirements owing to dispersal, increased wastage and usage. One
year's spares for essential civil vehicles therefore would have amounted to
approximately $400,000 for each 1,000 or $400 each vehicle, but this sum was
halved by allowing the export of certain functional spare parts only.
figure evolved was thus $200 each vehicle, and even this reduced allowance
brought the total expenditure for theatres of British interest to no less than
$58,000,000 a year.1
Standard British G.S. vehicles ordered in the United States but not conform-
ing to U.S. War Department specifications, were treated differently, as it was
considered essential that they should be fully maintained throughout their
Spares for these types of vehicle were delivered to central stores
so that they could be drawn upon by theatres of war in proportion to actual
requirements in the same way as prescribed for U.S. standard military vehicles.
Military vehicles which conformed to neither U.S. nor British standards, most
of which had been obtained from local sources in the Dominions and Colonies,
were treated for maintenance purposes as requisitioned, and spares were obtained
from the civilian sources from which the vehicles themselves were acquired, as
for example, General Motors in Port Elizabeth, South Africa.
From these preliminary decisions it was clear that international standardiza-
tion was the ultimate ideal, and much was done to achieve it. In so far as the
United States were the largest producers and thus by sheer quantity effected a
form of standardization, and in so far as British and Canadian manufacturers
were building vehicles to British G.S. specifications, a measure of success was
The ideal, however, postulated :—
(a) the adoption by the armed forces of the United Nations of vehicles of
(b) the reduction of the numbers of types in each and all of the forces.?
(*) Paper by Ministry of Supply for third meeting, C.P.R.B. Truck Committee, 3 Dec, 1942.
(2) C.P.R.B. Truck Committee Report on Production and Distribution of Vehicles.
20 Aрг., 1943.
