municipal and rail transport, ambulance services, etc., the scale of spares
Parts not in short supply were held in quantities
equivalent to three months' consumption in the hands of dispersed distributors.
Vehicle manufacturers were instructed to reserve approximately 20 per cent.
of their total production capacity for the provision of spare parts, in addition
to the scale of supply for major assemblies such as engines and gearboxes to
which they were bound by their new vehicle production contracts.
Such were the broad outlines of British policy, as stated by the Ministry of
On paper the planning appeared admirable, but achievement fell far
An appreciation of the spares position for vehicles required
for the invasion of Europe,? prepared by D.W.S., gave an alarming and factual
picture, which proved, in essence, that manufacturers were unable, or unwilling,
to produce spare parts on the scale laid down by the Ministry of Supply and the
D.W.S. pointed out that a review of the supply position of engine
assemblies held in December, 1942, showed that vehicle manufacturers were
greatly in arrears in the delivery of engines contracted for in addition to new
vehicles, and that the 10 per cent. scale, then current, of provision of spare engines
would prove insufficient for forthcoming operations.
The Ministry of Supply
was therefore informed by the War Office that not only would it be necessary
for all arrears to be cleared up by ist July, 1943, but that, in addition, the scale
of engine assemblies required with new vehicles would be approximately doubled
The Ministry of Supply replied that, with the exception of
two firms,® industry could achieve this target without loss of vehicle production.
The loss of production anticipated from these two firms was 500 vehicles a
Arrears in delivery were in fact cleared, and manufacturers were able
to provide engine assemblies to the new scale, and the position in this respect
became reasonably satisfactory, but this was by no means the case with the
detail" spare parts, in which a very similar situation had arisen.
Here, in spite of heavy pressure from the Ministry of Supply, no headway was
made by a considerable number of vehicle and motor-cycle manufacturers in
overtaking arrears and meeting increased requirements.
At Appendix F to
this chapter is a tabulated statement showing manufacturers concerned, the
numbers of parts of each make in consistently short supply, and the percentage
of parts for which large " dues out" existed.
The table is concerned only with
parts which were functionally necessary, the absence of any one of which was
sufficient to keep a vehicle off the road. It will be seen that a very serious
situation existed, and it was aggravated by a recent decision to rebuild Class IV
vehicles to Class I standard, a policy which automatically increased the require-
ment for replacement parts.
The relevant clause in the contract between vehicle manufacturers and the
Ministry of Supply is of interest :-
"In addition to the production of the major assemblies specifically
ordered under this and other contracts with the Ministry, the contractor is
required to reserve 30 per cent. capacity for the provision of wearable and
consumable parts (excluding road wheels) for Service vehicles.
and Was fur her increas orio ally fixed a 1 , 94.3.
(2) Minutes, 46th Meeting, Wheeled Vehicles Committee, 11 Jan., 1944.
(8) Vauxhall and Humber.
(*) January, 1944.
The production of spares is to be automatic and delivered to the
contractor's spare parts stores so that Service demands can be met from
The requirements of the Service depots for such spares will be
demanded under the contractor's running contract for spares."
Two alternative and legitimate assumptions could be made : either, manu-
facturers were not complying with the terms of their contracts, or 30 per cent.
reserve of industrial capacity was not sufficient to meet increased War Office
requirements of spare parts owing to increase in the number of vehicles in service
and the additional dispersal needs of landing reserves and beach maintenance
The general shortage of manpower throughout the country meant that
vehicle manufacturers were unable to recruit labour to meet increased require-
ments, and the institution of overriding priority for Ministry of Aircraft Produc-
tion work made it impossible to replace even normal labour wastage.
therefore much to the credit of manufacturers that, notwithstanding the shortages
shown in Appendix F, vehicle production programmes were on the whole
maintained and the volume of spares increased, although not to the degree found
It was evident, whichever of the alternatives stated
above was responsible for shortages, that any further increase in production of
spare parts would necessitate a redistribution of existing labour and manu-
facturing capacity within each factory.
In other words a cut in production of
complete vehicles was essential.
In this state of affairs only small comfort
could be obtained from the fact that such a reduction would not reflect in direct
proportion upon the number of serviceable vehicles available for operations, as
the increased production of spare parts would secure the return to service of a
large number of vehicles immobilized by this very lack of spares.
The results
t a 10 co cent. e in conlete vehicle production imposed upon the manu-
(a) a deficit of approximately 840 new " B" vehicles, including 665 lorries,
3-ton, for the equipment of 21 Army Group, which could be made
good by the provision of Class II or rebuilt Class I vehicles ;
(b) a deficit in British production over the whole of 1944 of 7,000 " B"
vehicles, including 1,440 trucks, 15-cwt., 2,500 lorries,
In spite of the anticipated cost, the Ministry of Supply was requested to impose
a 10 per cent. cut on vehicle production so that the errant firms might redistribute
labour and production capacity within their works, and thus increase the output
of urgently wanted spares.
As an obvious precaution, types of vehicle already
in short supply were not affected by this decision,? and the cut was as far as
possible directed towards vehicles of single axle drive.
Production of 4 x 4
vehicles was restricted only if satisfactory results were unobtainable in any
other way.
In May, 1944, on the eve of the invasion of Europe, the Ministry of Supply
was confident that the effect of the cut in production was beginning to show,
and pointed to substantially increased tonnage of spares provided by Ford,
C) Minutes, 52nd Meeting, Wheeled Vehicles Committee, 6 May, 1944.
wire comand to g, a onto, get A , matiny; lorio, 3402,
(C31438)
