(E) 'Platform Area.—Platform area to be not less than 11 ft. 6 in. by 5 ft. 6 in.
in the case of Class "A," and not less than 8 ft. 6 in. by 5 ft. O in. in the case of
(F) Ignition.—Preference will be given to lorries fitted with high tension
An addition of £10 will be made to the " Initial" subsidy if a second magneto
is carried ready for use and merely requiring attachment to the base.
magneto to be considered the property of the War Department until the expira-
tion of the original term of agreement.
An efficient cover of insulating waterproof material to be provided on the
working magneto.
(G) Lamps.—Every vehicle to be fitted with two side lamps, one tail lamp,
and at least one head light and generator.
(H) Garage.—Every vehicle to be kept in a garage, or other suitable
covered-in building, where the necessary protection from frost will be ensured.
(K) Drivers.—Vehicles to be at all times driven by a properly qualified driver.
(L) Speeds.—Class "A" to average
10 miles per hour fully loaded.
Class " B" to average 12 miles per hour fully loaded.
CONDITIONS GOVERNING GRANT OF ANNUAL SUBSIDY
5. Inspection.—Prior to being subsidized, any vehicle proposed for enrolment
shall be inspected by an Inspector appointed by the War Department.
subsidized vehicle will be subsequently inspected once every six months by a
War Department Inspector, in order to ascertain that it is maintained in a
thoroughly efficient condition.
The dates of inspection to be arranged by
mutual arrangement between the owners and inspectors.
possible the inspection will be carried out during the ordinary working of the
If a vehicle is found to be unserviceable or in a bad state of repair at any
half-yearly inspection, the half-yearly subsidy will not be paid unless the owner,
with the written permission of the War Department, puts it in a thoroughly
serviceable condition within a reasonable time.
Failing this, a proportion of
the initial subsidy fee, and of any money which has been paid under Clause 4 (F),
calculated on the unexpired portion of the period of enrolment, shall be returned
to the War Department by the owner.
6. Purchase.—If His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the War
Department shall certify in writing under his hand that the country is in a state
of national danger, or if a proclamation shall be issued under the Reserve Forces
Act, 1882, while such proclamation continues in force or such certificate
remains unrevoked, the War Department shall be entitled to purchase, as
hereinafter mentioned, any motor vehicles enrolled hereunder.
7. Notice of Purchase.—Notice by telegraph or in writing of the intention to
purchase any vehicle shall be given to the owner by the War Department, and
the owner shall, within three days after receipt of such notice, deliver the vehicle
together with its spare parts by road to the War Department at the place ordered
with every part in thorough working order.
WO277726
The inclusive cost of taking the vehicle to the place ordered is included in
the purchase price:
8. Terms of Purchase.-
—The purchase price to be paid by the War Depart-
ment shall be the then value plus 25 per cent., provided the value thus calculated
shall never be greater than the original cost of the vehicle and never less than
30 per cent. of such cost. The then value of the vehicle shall be arrived at as
The actual purchase price of a vehicle shall be ascertained (this shall include
only those spare duplicate parts which form part of the free outfit of the vehicle),
and it will be depreciated at 7½ per cent. per half-year.
Such depreciation coming into force at the beginning of each half-yearly
period from the date at which the vehicle was delivered to the owner on purchase
by him from the manufacturer.
For example, if the purchase price of a vehicle were £600, the prices paid for
it during the first four years of its life would be as under :-
Depreciation to
7 per cent. per
half-vear.
Depreciated
Then value.
Sum of 25 per
cent. to be added
Price to be paid
Then value.
55*
0 to 6 months ..
1 to 12 years
1, to 2 years
2 to 22 years
27 to 3 years
32 to 4 years
360
In the case of a vehicle being found unserviceable when delivered, the
War Department may reject the same.
9. Total Disablement.-If an enrolled vehicle is totally disabled through
accident or other cause, the owner shall at once notify the War Department, and
unless an equally suitable vehicle is presented within three months, a proportion
of the initial subsidy fee, and of any money which has been paid under
Clause 4 (F) calculated on the unexpired portion of the period of enrolment,
shall be returned to the War Department by the owner.
10. Withdrawal from Enrolment.— An owner will not be allowed to withdraw
a vehicle from enrolment without the permission of the War Department, and
then only on repayment to the War Department by the owner of a proportion
of the initial subsidy fee and of any money paid under Clause 4 (F) calculated
on the unexpired portion of the period of enrolment.
11. Sale of Vehicle.-Should an owner desire to sell his vehicle during the
period of enrolment, he will apply to the War Department for permission, giving
the name and address of the prospective purchaser.
Should the purchaser be
prepared to take over this contract, and should the War Department sanction
that arrangement, the new owner will be liable from the date of purchase, as
if the contract was originally made by him.
Otherwise the provisions of
Clause 10 shall apply.
17
