APPENDIX C
CONDITIONS OF THE 1923 30-CWT. VEHICLE SUBSIDY
Note.-The Appendix and Schedule referred to in this document are not
reproduced in this Historical Monograph.
1. Object.—The object of the scheme is to provide mechanical transport to
supplement the requirements of the military forces in a national emergency.
On a national emergency arising (see Clause 8) the vehicles may, if the
War Department so desire, be purchased upon the terms hereinafter laid down.
Vehicles will not be enrolled for hire purposes.
2. Class of Vehicle.—The scheme refers to mechanically propelled road
or chassis of British manufacture capable of carrying a minimum net
30 cwt., such load to be independent of the weight of body and any
chassis which the chassis was normally designed by the makers to
vehicle will be equipped with tyres of British manufacture, and be
operated with such tyres during the period of enrolment.
The numbers, makes, types and conditions of vehicles or chassis, hereinafter
referred to as vehicles, eligible for enrolment will be decided by the War
The War Department reserves the right to accept or refuse any
vehicle without assigning a reason.
• 3. Amount of Subsidy. —The period of enrolment will be that stipulated in
the Schedule in each case. It is intended that it should usually be for a period
of one year, with an option on the part of the War Department, subject to the
written consent of the owner, to extend year by year up to a maximum of three
An inclusive annual subsidy of €40 will be paid by the War Department
This subsidy will be paid in half-yearly instalments in advance
after inspection of the vehicle, the first instalment to be paid on acceptance.
4. Tools and Accessories. —There must be provided and maintained by the
owner in respect of each vehicle or chassis enrolled the tools, etc., as enumerated
in the Appendix hereto.
5. Trial and Inspection.-Prior to acceptance an inspection of the vehicles
will be made by the War Department, which inspection may include, at the
discretion of the War Department Inspector, a trial run under full load for a
distance not exceeding 10 miles.
The cost of the trial run and services incidental
to the inspection will be borne by the owner, but no fees for such inspection will
be chargeable against the owner by the War Department.
In order to ascertain and ensure that every subsidized motor vehicle is
maintained in a thoroughly serviceable condition and in a satisfactory state of
repair, an inspection will be made every six months, or thereabouts, by a War
Department Inspector, who, in addition to inspecting the vehicle at its garage,
hall. at the cost of the owner, be conveniently afforded a journey on the vehide
by road when fully loaded for a distance to be decided by the Inspector, but
such distance shall in no case exceed 10 miles.
The Inspector will as far as possible regard the owner's convenience when
making his inspections, and such inspections will take place within a reasonable
fuel and other running expenses during any inspection or services incidental
time before the instalments become due.
No reimbursement on account of
thereto will be made by the War Department.
If it is found at any inspection that a vehicle is in an unsatisfactory state of
repair, or for any reason unserviceable, or that any of these Conditions are not
being complied with, the owner shall, within a reasonable time to be determined
by the War Department, at his own expense, put the vehicle into a thoroughly
serviceable state of repair and otherwise comply with these Conditions to the
satisfaction of the Inspector. If this reasonable time is exceeded, or the vehicle
is found to be in an unsatisfactory condition at more than one inspection, or if
otherwise these Conditions are not being complied with, the War Department
shall be at liberty thereupon to cancel enrolment of the vehicle, and the owner
shall be liable to refund the whole or any portion of the fees paid during the
previous six months.
In addition to the regular half-yearly inspections, the Inspector shall have
access to the vehicle at all reasonable times for the purpose of ascertaining its
condition, and at any time to request repairs to be carried out at the owner's
expense.
If the vehicle is not put into proper condition and running order, the
provisions of this clause applicable in the case of a vehicle being found in an
unserviceable condition or unsatisfactory state of repair shall thereupon apply.
6. War Department Liability for Damage.—While a War Department
Inspector is driving a vehicle under inspection the War Department will accept
responsibility for any damage to property, including damage to the vehicle
under inspection, or for personal injury which may be caused by the negligence
of the Inspector or other person so appointed.
7. Appeal and Arbitration.—In case of dispute affecting the Interpretation of
this Agreement or any matter arising thereunder between the local War Depart-
ment Inspector and the owner, the matter shall be referred to the War Office.
If it cannot then be settled satisfactorily between the War Department and the
owner, the matter shall be referred to the decision of a single arbitrator to be
appointed by the President of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers.
8. Right of Purchase.—If and whenever during the
Agreement the Army Reserve or any portion thereof shall be called out on
permanent service, whether by proclamation under the Reserve Forces Act, 1882,
or otherwise, the War Department shall (without prejudice to any statutory
or other power of the Crown) be entitled to purchase as hereinafter mentioned
in Clause 10 any motor vehicle enrolled hereunder.
9. Notice of War Department Intention to Purchase.—Notice of the intention
to purchase any motor vehicle shall be given to the owner by the War Depart-
ment, by telegram or in writing, or by any such means as the War Department
shall deem best calculated to reach the owner at his last known address, and the
owner shall at his own cost, within 72 hours after the despatch or giving of such
notice, hand over or deliver the vehicle to the War Department, together with
all accessories, spare parts and tools in accordance with the Appendix, by road
or by such other means as may be the most expeditious.
If at the date of the despatch or giving of the said notice the vehicle is more
than 100 miles from the place to which delivery is ordered to be made, an extra
time allowance shall be given in the proportion of 24 hours for every additional
