As the result of these considerations, at a meeting held by V.Q.M.G. on
10th August, 1943, it was decided—
" that the American tracked amphibians which were in production should
be investigated with the object of seeing whether they could be produced
either in Canada or the U.K., or both.
The Ministry of Supply would take
action on this question."
The Ministry of Supply was not at that time able to develop a vehicle on these
lines because all appropriate design and production capacity was fully occupied
with the manufacture of tanks, and efforts to obtain an allocation from American
production
were unsuccessful.
At the end of 1943 the War Office again
discussed this requirement with the Ministry, producing a General Staff Specifica-
tion? for a vehicle of the U.S. L.V.T.3 type, but with a large hold capable of
accommodating British equipment such as the 25-pr. gun,
which the U.S.
vehicle could not conveniently carry.
It is worth noting that at this period an alternative amphibian, the Argosy,
was offered by the Minister of Production.
This vehicle was considered by
C.O.H.Q. and the War Office to be unsuitable because it did not possess a large
clear hold, nor a ramp for easy loading and discharging, its tracks were unsuitable
for negotiating submerged obstacles, and its weight was excessive.
Nevertheless
persistent efforts were made to induce the War Office to accept Argosy over a
considerable time, and there is some justification for the opinion frequently
expressed that the existence of this amphibian was partly responsible for delay
in attacking the problem of producing from British resources an equivalent to
the L.V.T.3.
The specification produced by the War Office made no demand for armour
at this stage.
U.S. armoured amphibians approximated in some cases to tanks
and in others to support craft, and it was considered that in view of the existence
of D.D. equipment and the probable provision of adequate numbers of support
craft by the Admiralty, it would be unwise to overtax British production by
demanding an armoured amphibian in addition to the normal type, which could
in fact be temporarily armoured.
At a meeting held on 18th January, 1944, to
discuss production possibilities, a series of difficulties and objections was raised
by the Ministry of Supply,* of which the first and most important was the state-
ment by D.G.A.F.V. that production of a vehicle based on this specification
could not begin before mid-1946.
He also asserted that the only engine available
was the Liberty, the design of which made it impossible to comply with the
specification requirements of an unobstructed hold and a ramped stern.
A.C.I.G.S. (W), as chairman, somewhat abruptly closed the meeting as pointless,
since the Ministry of Supply were apparently unable to meet the requirement in
reasonable time for forthcoming operations.
The specification was, however,
officially forwarded to the Ministry with a request for the construction of
It appeared that an impasse had been reached.
However, during
the course of his duties Mr. J. A. Goddard. a Deputy Director of the Fightin
Vehicles Department of the Ministry of Supply, Tead the correspondence on this
(1) 57/Vehs A/1499.
to ,O) A short description of the various types of American L.V.T. is given at Appendix F
(2) Specification at Appendix E to this chapter.
(*) 57/Vehs A/1775.
76
WO27 7/26
28
project, and his earlier professional career led him to take a personal interest in
the matter.
In spite of the fact that it was the policy of the Ministry to entrust
problems of this kind to a parent design firm in this case Nuffield Mechanisa-
tion, Ltd.— he decided to draw up a design himself.
His design was based on
the employment of the Meadows D.A. V. horizontally-opposed engine, a type
used in the Covenanter tank, production of which had stopped at the beginning
of 1943.
Apart from numbers which were immediately available, production
could easily be re-started as this assembly line was the same as for the smaller
H.O.P. engine used in the Harry Hopkins light tank.
Mr. Goddard submitted
his ideas to D.G.A.F. V., and was encouraged to produce a more detailed design.
This design incorporated a fluid flywheel and four-speed crash gearbox.
The
steering was by Wilson Steering Units, the track suspension similar to that of
the L.V.T.3 and the hold capable of taking any of the loads required.
were accepted by D.G.A.F.V. and approved by the war Ofice, which was
encouraged by the Ministry of Supply's undertaking that the new design would
be in production nine months earlier than was possible with the G.S. specification.
Twelve prototypes were ordered, of which the first was due by the end of 1944,
and the new vehicle was given the name of Neptune.
The urgency of the demand for this vehicle was so great that steps were
taken to plan accelerated production even before the completion of the prototype
as the estimate of Autumn, 1945,
given by the Ministry of Supply was still
considered to be too late.
The Chiefs of Staff had already recommended to the
Defence Committee that sufficient L.S.T. should by some means be obtained in
time for operations in the Far East in the Spring of 1945.
These L.S.T. were
required partly to carry wheeled vehicles and partly to carry amphibians, and
the efforts made to produce them would therefore have been stultified if the
amphibians were not ready to put into them.
The requirement was thus not
the beginning of production by the Autumn of 1945, but the provision of
adequate numbers in India or the Pacific by the Spring of 1945.
The Prime
Minister took a personal interest and ordered the original contract for 500
British L.V.T. in 1945 to be increased to no less than 1,500.! Provision on this
scale, and in so limited a time meant production before the prototypes were
tested, and was utterly dependent upon the merits of the original design.
The
Prime Minister's stated aim in insisting upon this policy was his dislike of
dependence upon U.S. equipment, but the Minister of Production felt bound to
point out that even if development of Neptunes went well, it was inevitable that
for operations in the Far East even as late as Autumn, 1945, British forces would
be largely dependent upon U.S. L.V.T., as in spite of increased production it
would be impossible to ship more than a few hundred during 1945.3
The Prime
Minister required to be informed of the effect of this production upon other types
of equipment, and the Minister of Production was able to say that the majority
of the firms to be employed were engaged on A.F.V. and other contracts due to
terminate.
In the case of one firm-Metropolitan-Cammell- selected as a
producer of Neptune, it was necessary to cancel a contract for 95-mm. Harry
Hopkins S.P. and to ensure that no additional orders were placed for Sherman
D.D. conversion and equipment.
The War Office agreed to reduce their require-
ment of Harry Hopkins S.P. to 300, a quantity which could be produced by
(4) The total order was incréased to 2,000.
(3) 3 June, 1944.
57/Vehs A/1755.
77
