From this generalization emerged a demand for two distinct sizes of amphibian ;
one with a capacity of 3 tons or over, for which the quantity required was
estimated at 200, and the other, a smaller vehicle, with a capacity of 3 tons or
ess.
The latter was intended for use in combined operations at the end of a
long sea voyage, and the quantity required was at that time unknown.
The
reason for the double requirement was chiefly a consideration of stowage.
The
larger vehicle was clearly the more economical and was suitable for a short sea
voyage,
but shipping difficulties were anticipated on landing in a strange
country after a long voyage.
Normal ship's derricks were designed for a lift of
5 tons and could in fact achieve a lift of 6z-7 tons.
It was therefore impossible,
without the aid of dock cranes, to hoist any vehicle of over 7 tons unladen weight
out of the hold.
The distinction would have been clearer if it had been expressed
in terms of unladen weight rather than of pay load.
General Staff specifications
of both vehicles are shown at Appendices B and C to this chapter.
Soon after the appearance of this statement of policy, A.C.I.G.S. discussed
the possibilities of two types of amphibian, tracked and wheeled, with the
Ministry of Supply, which at once declared its inability to undertake develop-
ment of a tracked vehicle on account of the overriding priority of tanks.
It may
be pertinent to point out here that in spite of the urgency of tank production it
was possible to spare time for the development of a tracked amphibian as a
private venture.
Two prototypes of this vehicle, the Argosy, were constructed
by Morris-Commercial Cars, Ltd., but were unfortunately not acceptable to the
General Staff, largely through their lack of cargo space.
The Ministry did,
however, agree to design and develop a wheeled amphibian, and ultimately,
after many pangs, was produced the still-born infant known as the Terrapin.
The wheeled amphibious vehicle produced in the United States was con-
sidered by the General Staff to be extremely satisfactory.
It was, however,
based on a standard 2}-ton 6 x 6 chassis, and there was no similar suitable
chassis in production in the United Kingdom in sufficient quantity to provide for
more than existing demands? for normal wheeled vehicles.
It was therefore
necessary to prepare a completely new design for the Terrapin, and its failings
certainly did not include lack of originality.
The prototype Terrapin, Mark I,
was an 8 x 8 vehicle, shod with 12 • 75-in. x 24-in. agricultural tyres, and driven
by two Ford V-8 engines with standard Ford 3-speed gearboxes.
The engines
were arranged each to drive one side of the vehicle through a line of worm-
shafts mounted directly on the wheel bearings.
In addition, each engine was
coupled to one propeller shaft with a two-bladed propeller.
The wheels were
constantly driven on land or in water, but the drive to the propellers could be
disconnected.
Steering on land was achieved by manipulation of twin throttle-
levers, and at sea by a tiller and rudder.
central engine room.
Cargo was carried fore and aft of the
Trials of the prototype were carried out by the Ministry of Supply at Hayling
Island and by the Combined Operations Experimental Establishment (C.O.X.E)
at Westward Ho.
alterations were recommended.3
The results were satisfactory and no material structural
There was nevertheless some reluctance
"at a
high level conference in Scotland "4 to authorize production, on the grounds that
(4) 57/Vehs A/1366.
(3) 57/Vehs A/1366.
(3) C.O.X.E. Preliminary Report, 25 June, 1943.
(*) D.D.V. to D. of M., 2 July, 1943.
57/Vehs A/1366.
57/Vehs A/1366.
70
WO277
28
9
a suitable vehicle already existed in the DUKW and that it was a mistake to
adopt an additional type.
It was admitted by the War Office that the DUKW
was probably a better vehicle than the Terrapin, but there were other tangible
and intangible considerations. Tangible facts were that the Terrapin carried a
greater load than the DUKW, and could be accommodated in the lift of an
upon which it was unsafe to rely.
Intangible were such problems as the allocation of U.S. equipment,
The War Office had to consider the possibility,
which in the past had proved to be fact, that if the United States undertook
some new project involving the extensive use of DUKWs, assignments to this
country might cease.
It was therefore as an insurance, if nothing else, that it
was essential to place the British type in production, and an order for 500 was
accordingly given to the Ministry of Supply.
From the moment that production began Terrapin was in continuous trouble,
and the promise of the prototype was belied.
In January, 1944, after a visit to
the Birmingham factory? in which they were manufactured, D.S.W.V. criticized
the production facilities allotted by the Ministry of Supply and the small amount
of labour being employed on the project, neither of which appeared sufficient to
ensure delivery in a reasonable time.3
Soon afterwards, serious defects in pro-
duction models were reported by C.O.X.E. as the result of early trials.
Defects
in carburettors, wheel hubs and bearings appeared which made it necessary for
all early models to be withdrawn for examination by the Ministry of Supply.
Damage to wheel hubs and bearings was found to be a result of insufficient
greasing during assembly, and for a time sabotage was suspected.
In May,
1944, D. of M. was obliged to inform the War Office that a weakness in the gear-
boxes had appeared which required attention before the vehicles were used
operationally.
This weakness was owing to faulty materials in the reverse idler
wheels, which were losing their teeth and wrecking the gearbox.
In the same
month it was reported that cooling difficulties on the first 200 could not be
rectified and that the vehicles were therefore only fit for service in temperate
climates.
Finally, grave doubts were expressed by the Director of Naval Con-
struction on the stability of the design.
In his opinion loads could only be
carried safely by exercising the greatest care and utilizing quiet waters.* Although
this criticism was disputed by Messrs. Thornycroft's chief naval designer, the
suspicion of weakness remained.
The C.O.X.E. report on the production model, unlike reports on the proto-
types, was largely based on comparison with the DUKW, already admitted to
be a superior vehicle, and contained criticisms of defects in performance and load
capacity which were grossly unfair to the designers, who had not been charged
with the production of a vehicle fulfilling such requirements.
However, in the
light of these new requirements, and the suggestions of instability, the Terrapin,
Mark I, was not considered satisfactory.
A summary of the report which finally condemned the vehicle is of interest
in that it shows how the demand changed from one for the simple transport of
normal stores from ship to shore to that of the complicated transport of special
including artillery, through comparatively rough water and across
(*) D.S.W.V. to D.S.T. 22 July, 1943. 57/Vehs A/1366.
(3) Terrapin was manufactured by Thornycroft and the Nufield Organization.
(3) D.S.W.V. to D. of M., 13 Jan., 1944.
57/Vehs A/1366.
(*) C.O.X.E. Report 10 Aug., 1944.
57/Vehs A/1366.
