S.P.
T.T.
ABBREVIATIONS continued
Scientific Adviser to the Army Council.
Supreme
Allied Commander, South East Asia.
Special Air Services.
Supply
Board Technical Establishment.
Staff
Duties
(rlans),
Branch of the War Office.
Later
G.S.(P).
South East Asia Command.
Code-name used by German High Command for projected
amphibious operations against the U.K.
Anglo-American Conference in Cairo Nov./Dec. 1943.
Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, N.W.
Senior Military Adviser, Ministry of Supply.
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.
Superintendent of Design.
Special Operations Executive or Subversive Operations in
Europe (British).
Self-propelled.
Single Unit Pack.
Territorial Army Vehicle.
Troop Carrying
Treasury Inter-Services Committee.
Tanks and Transport Branches, Ministry of Supply.
Twin Unit Pack.
United Kingdom Commercial Corporation.
Under-Secretary
of State, the War Office.
United States War Department.
Vice-Chief of the Imperial General Staff.
End of the war in Europe.
End of the war against Japan.
Vice-Ouartermaster-General.
Vehicle Reserve Depot.
Weapon Development Committee, the War Office and
Ministry of Supply.
War Production Board (U.S.A.).
War Supplies Limited (Canada).
Wheeled Vehicles Committee, the War Office and Ministry
of Supply
Wheel en
Vehicles
Experimental Establishment, the War
Office and later Ministry of Supply.
A token used in operational planning to denote the first day
or month of a projected
operation, succeeding days or
months being Z plus 1, 2, etc.
the firsition in chicle wheel brat chents follows staigure the number of driven
Description of vehicle wheel arrangements follows standard War Office practice,
wheels, and the third figure, if any, the number of trailed wheels, e.g., 4 x
2 indicates
a four-wheeled vehicle driven on two wheels; 6 x 4 indicates a six-wheeled vehicle
driven on four wheels.
vili
27
WO27
28
CHAPTER VIII
MECHANIZATION
Section 1.—Early History of Military Mechanical Transport
Mechanical transport first appeared in the Army between 1880 and 1890.
It is at any rate certain that the driving of steam traction engines in 1885 formed
part of the course of instruction of officers at the School of Military Engineering
at Chatham.
Later a small number of traction engines was used overseas during
the South African war, driven for the most part by civilians.
Up to this time
interest in mechanical transport had been confined to the Royal Engineers, but
in 1900 the War Office began seriously to consider its application to the Army
as a whole, and set up the Mechanical Transport Committee to investigate the
matter.
The starting point of the Committee's activities was a memorandum
from the Adjutant-General in November, 1900, which asked for consideration
of reports on the use of steam transport in South Africa, the extent to which
mechanical transport could usefully be employed for military purposes in
countries with and without good roads, and the relative cost of such transport
as compared with the means of transport then in use.
The Committee was
further asked to state its recommendations regarding the types of vehicle
suitable for the Army and the provision and organization of the personnel
required.
One of the first decisions of the Committee was that mechanical
transport came more properly within the province of the Army Service Corps
than that of the Royal Engineers or any other branch.
This decision was acted
upon in 1902.
During the first ten years of this century the use of petrol for civilian transport
was officially discouraged in every way, notably by excessively severe restrictions
on its storage.
Speed was also rigidly controlled by the law which required that
a man on foot bearing a red flag must precede a mechanically propelled vehicle.
Thus Army trials of vehicles for military purposes, organized in 1901 on a fairly
extensive scale, were entered almost entirely by manufacturers of steam driven
vehicles.
Nevertheless, the Milnes-Daimler entry with an internal combustion
engine, which ran on paraffin after starting on petrol, was purchased by the
War Office.
A military factor responsible for a reluctance to adopt petrol
engines was uncertainty about supplies during war.
Great efforts were made to
design a satisfactory paraffin carburettor, and in all over €30,000, a large sum
for the times, was spent by the Mechanical Transport Committee in the first
decade of the century, mainly in research on steam and paraffin engines, and on
the comparative merits of the wheeled tractor-cum-trailer and the load-carrying
vehicle.
The Committee also watched progress in civil transport of the petrol
engine and a few petrol engined lorries were bought annually,
mainly for
experimental purposes.
Trials were also conducted of tracked tractors, as
mentioned in Chapter III, Part I.
In 1908 a large scale trial of the application of mechanical transport to war
purposes took place with the aid of 94 vehicles of the London General Omnibus
Company.
The object, which was a concentration of troops at Shoeburyness,
was successfully achieved, and led directly to provision in the Army Estimates
for the following year of additional mechanical units and a corresponding
