pg_0027.pdf:
no bord
Cair ti
G.N211T
son int
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
The Ammunition Point will be under the control of an RASC
officer loaned to
185 Inf Ide for this purpose.
Units will
draw. from Ammunition Point with unit carriers.
Demands for
ammunition stating
quantity and nature will accompany vehicles
and will be handed to the RASC Officer.
The vehicles comprising the Ammunition Point will remain under
control of 185 Inf 3de until recalled under divisional
and will be used for drawing ammunition
from the Sector Stores
it such a
i dant sent tom the seete stores are
these vehicles are withdrawn units
in unit first line
transport.
As the advance inland continues so the location of the Ammunition
Point will move forward under orders of the Staff Capt,
the new
locations being given to units.
(o) 12' RV
Each unit will in every location select a 'n' RV
always be a unit representative to meet maintenance vehicles
transport on arrival.
All stores of all types will be routed to this
The location of the "' RV will be notified to this HO by
the quickest means possible, likewise any changes to it.
TRANSPORT
3.
(a) Priority vehicles of units start to land at H + 240. These vehicles
will move direct from the beach to the Battalion Group Assembly Areas.
They will NOT pass through the transit areas..
Group assembly Areas first stages uf de-waterproofing will be done and
reserve stretchers will be dumped.
See Amdt
(b) The six lorries forming the Armunition Point will land with the
priority vehicles of units and proceed direct to the A Ech Area
(see paragraph 6 below).
They will remain there under command of
the Bde T.O until ordered to move forward to form the Ammunition
PET ROL
Each vehicle will land carrying a reserve of petrol.
Normal issue
of POL will NOT be made from DID until morning D + 1 and then only restricted
issues.
SUPPLIES
(a)
Each man will land will land ith two 24 hour hoss tin rations,
111 units will carry in first line transport a reserve of compo
This reserve will be drawn prior to embarkation and will
remain under unit control, and will be consumed only in an emergency.
Rations will be drawn on D + 1 for consumption D + 2.
Thereafter
rations will be drawn daily for consumption the following day.
A ECH AREA
So
All first priority vehicles of units which are NOT irmediately needed
in the carly stages of the battle will proceed to the A Ech Area.
A Ech Area will move forward as the situation permits.
Dde T.C will
ensure at all times that the location of 1 Ech Area is made known
to all units.
•/ (b)

