pg_0032.pdf:
185 Inf Bao Adm Instr
BIGOT
TOP SECRET
Copy No. 3.
SECTION 4
MOVEMENT AND TRAFFIC CONTROL
ACTION UPON DISEMDARKATION
1.
(a) Troops landing on first tide
Troops landing on first tide will proceca to Unit Assembly
Areas (see Section 18).
(b) Troops landing on second tide
Troops landing on second tide will be passed through the appropriate
Transit Area.
From the Transit Areas they will be directed on to
the forward route and.
will follow signs
to Bde A Ech Area from where
they will be re-directed to unit locations.
2.
( c)
Troops landing on D + 1 onwards
Troops landing on D + 1 onwards will pass through Transit Areas
to issembly Area sections as indicated in paragraph 4 below.
Orders for personnel and vehicles on disembarkation
(a)
Printed cards already supplied (see Appendix 'H') will be issued
to all personnel before marshalling•
These cards will give
instructions to all personnel as to the action to take on landing•
(b)
Cards need not be used on D day. If used they may be modified
to suit unit requirements.
For use thereafter they will show the sub section of the assembly
Areas to which individuals are to report, vide paragraph 4 below.
Cards will also show what action the unit or sub unit is to take
on leaving the Assembly Sub Section.
TRANSIT AREAS
3.
Transit Area WEST (see Appendix 'A') is being organised for the
passage of personnel and vehicles of 3 Division on D day.
Area WEST will close under orders 5 Beach Group as soon as Transit
Area EAST and MOON Assembly irea are open, and when personnel and
vehicles of 3 Division landing on first and second tide have passed
(7)
Transit Area FAST (sco Appendix 'A') will be opened for the pas sage
of personnel and vehicles to the Assembly Area D + 1 and onwards.
All marching personnel, except those landing tactically or those
with a definite task to
the beach, will, on landing
from craft, proceed to Personnel Transit irea to which they will
be directed under arrangements of Beach Group Commander.
In this
area they will be organised under an officer or NCO of their own
unit and ordered to march to the sub section allotted to their
unit, or, to an area previously selected for tactical or administrative
Marching parties will get clear of the Transit Area as
quickly as possible.
../(a)

