doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan)
Return by (19/11/2025 07:00:01)
WO 171/524
1681
AR Duan
ILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
of mobilisation or
bordinate command
nents sec. 30. 2n0
iv) Detailed account of operations. Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
a voilaul phases.
v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied,
vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
herend the nunber of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
n addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport. ete
vilMeteorological notes.
vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
OTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time thej
ccur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
d his representatives.
ly, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
VOTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and.7.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
1) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008
outme order or instructioi
a he. Wouls and of each oneration o
the war chary.
issued during the period covered by the current volume
i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands il no longer required
PARA. 2.-—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
to nrovide dat
which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
anisation and administratio
pie decipiy head he above)i Appendies will be
o appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. € 21Ml
ter for the History of the War.
war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the ofhcer detailed to keep it
It 1s to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.
om a war alary is an onence under une Uncial secreis Acts.
or her peTe monit be made de, that the oficer who is to do the derie the commander
PaRA. 3.—Omitled.
PARA. 4.--In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparine a clary
) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i Dare tient then ot the of tent he and arcent dispositions.
i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
Aka. Orall dares will contorm to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
) Unless otherwise orde
tacted, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Otte, are he l taken the alices appendice
tre attached.
Army Form C. 211
ding the in ron proced
not healter wit
MAT 19440
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Delete heading not required).
Jnit.50TH (NORTHUMERIAN) DIVISION.
ORD, FD. PK. RAOC.
Commanding Officer MAJ, D. C, H. MERRILL.
Keterences to App
Month and Year.
lour
BURLEY. 1:
- 14.
jummary of Events and Information
Unit engaged in preparing vehicles and stores for operational roll.
Tater
proofing of vehicles for 1st Flight in progress.
Supreme Commander visited the Division at Brockenhurst - this mit represented
para
рани.
17
by Lieut.A.F, Swarbrick and 9 Other Ranks.
G.O. visited C.O.D. Feltham re scaling.
Cormenced waterproofing 2nd Flight vehicles.
1st Flight, consisting of 4 vehicles and 15 0. Rs. left for final Concentration
кари
25
Area at Beckton Marshes.
Advanced Party moved to Bustard Camp, Larkhill. (Final Concentration Area
LARKHILAD.
26.
27-31.
for remainder of
Main Party moved to Bustard Camp, Larkhill.
Init engaged on Vehicle Maintenance - recreational training®
WAR DIARIES SECTION
-O JUN 1944.
G. H:a: 2nd Echelon
Vt,62038/1102 650м. 9/14 W. H. & S. 51-9071
