doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan)
Return by (19/11/2025 07:00:01)
WO 171/524
AR Duan
PILATION OF WAR DIARTES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
lay of mobilisation or
subordinate command.
ntments (Sec. 36), and
nd his representatives.
my, war duties will be
VOTE B.— See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
a wal ulary should be kedt by a min
sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Undey Should be kept by a un
The War Ofice, London, S. W.l.
PARA 2—A war chary 1s Secret
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
ma to provide data udon which to base
rcanisauon and aaministration.
tuture improvements in army training, equipment,
heir formations or units any ideas, opinions
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
^ regara to weanons edminment tactica
Da nicati and tato, based on lactual expenience
c service co-operation wnic
ay be of benent for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of vali
ater for the ristory of the war.
nA. a diary will be entered up daily, ea
ach entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
etention of appendices, maps. etc..
om a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
ToTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
r oner person mentioned in para. ., not the oicer he details to do the clerical work.
ParA. 3.—Omitted.
preparing a diary so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
i Daily location in th ver of tater mith or at toenty four rad present dispositions.
ich branch of the staff.
1V) Detailed account of operations.
operations
opographical and climatic.
mportant phases.
matic hoar shetant occur poss, factors opting
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
ind of animals should be
vii) Meteorological notes,
vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
VOTE.-Events should be entered up, not in the
occur, or come to notice.
At the del up, cat in the ever a i am in it at tha time they
PARA. 5.— Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F.
w.3009) and of each operation or
he war diary.
ine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Lor tererence.
iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
o appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders
y have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
nev should be includedi
PArA. 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
see F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows
1) Unless otherwise ordered, the origin
e forwarded on the firet doi
ll) the aupacate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
of two monthe th
the c
balidat units wilder Secretary of State, The War Office. The hid Foher
Place
SUDBURY
BURI.EY
- 11.
12.
17
10 - 25.
SieG
NAR DIARY
Month and Year
APRIL 19440
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY.
Erase heading not required).
army Fori
Unit. 50TH (NORTHUMERIAN.). DIV. ORD.
R. A. 0.C.
Commanding Officer. MAJOR, D.C.H.MEHT
C. 2118.
D. FK
Date
Hour
Summary of Events and Information.
References to Appendices.
Unit preparing to move to new location in Southern Command.
Advanced Party consisting of 1 Officer 13 Other Ranks and 7 vehicles,
loved to Moorhill House, Burley, Hants.
Main Party (including remainder of unit) moved to Transit Camp, Yattenden.
Move continued to Burley.
Kinu
Rear Party returned to Sudbury to complete hand over of Barrack Equipment. Varu.
'eneral occupation of new site - drawing accommodation stores, reinforcing
sites for vehicles - painting vehicle signs etc.
канги
WAR DIARIES SECTION
12 Bin Lorries and 9 Bulk lorries despatched to C.O.D. Feltham to collect
initial scaling of M.T. Spares.
Lorries returned from Feltham. Skeleton scale only drawn.
Unit commenced
1 1 MÀY 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
to prepare demands to complete to required scale.
Demands prepared for a 30-ton overload of M.T, spares to be transported by
R. A,S.C. lorries.
Checking and binning stores - personnel assisting on A.D.O.S. Dunpo
юми
Дали
1622, P.MEA/ 1-500.000.9/41.
