doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan)
Return by (19/11/2025 07:00:01)
WO 171/524
14622852
AR Duan
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
-s it Be turt, to gone wither on no, o the diay should to st by a unt
The War Office, London, S. W.1.
ILATION OF WAR TARTES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
y or mobilisation or
mportant phases.
lear sketches showing positions of troops a
uvorcinate commana
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(r) chang in the hine die ran or lone at tie the n ho a no f
n addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vil) Meteorological notes.
tments (Sec. 36), and
(vii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
IN oT come to to tould be entered up, not in the creer given hi hit at he ting thay
nd his representatives.
ny, war duties will be
PARA, 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(* one order fist retion ste is are pere overed ay do curte votine of
ne war darv.
(i Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
organisation and
that one this are an eno, a grade encouraged to indue in the at diarien of
mare be of beneit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later b
A war diary will be entered up daily, each tray in tilled by the officer detailed to keep it.
of appendices, maps, etc.,
a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
OTE.-It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.- Omitted.
pant diary so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(1) Imp decit os taken.
tant orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
argh tattenin the gene entage mith ot torey fos he asid arent dispositions
11) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
o appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
opies of important s
escriptive heading naming the author. References
elevant demi-official letters by commanders of formation:
ey should be includedy have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considen
See F.S.R., Volu
All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows
nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office
3nd Echelon to be transmitted to
entered chonia ha
he unit concerned.
Instructions reading Wain i ries S. RIntelligen C
Month and Year MARCH 19440
WAR DIARY
NPBLLIGBNOE SUMMARL
Erase neading not required).
Summary of Events and Information.
SUDBURY. 1 - 31
Nothing of war Diary importance to warrant Daily entries.
C.O. still performing duties of A.D.O.S. at Rear H.Q.
Unit re-organizing on new W.E. 111/290/1.
90% of vehicles and AFG. 1098
stores have been received and personnel have been reinforced to complete
War Establishment.
Leave continues as usual and persennel are attending
courses and lectures.
There has been little opportmity of carrying out
Regimental Training Programnes.
AIMY HO
50TH (N) DIV. ORD. FD. PK. RAO
Commanding Officer.
MAJOR. D. C.H. M
m C. 2118.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
1 1 APR 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
1622, P.MEA/ 1-500.000.9/41.
