and the importance of the strictest security. Although essentially a
set of instructions to British servicemen in the Second World War
on how to behave to the civilian population in a foreign country,
its blend of commonsense and humanity makes it a document of
enduring interest.
It is fascinating to compare this pamphlet with the Instructions
for American Servicemen in Britain 1942 (Bodleian Library, 2004). They
have much in common. Both consider it necessary to rehearse the
basics of considerate behaviour abroad, including avoidance of political
argument, criticism of local customs and over-enthusiastic acceptance
of hospitality in countries where food is scarce and rationed. Brit-
ish servicemen are told to 'be natural, but don't make yourself too
much at home till you are sure your French friends like it', and the
Americans are advised to 'be friendly, but don't intrude anywhere it
seems you are not wanted'. The British are given a three-page sum-
mary of the history of France and told that throughout the sixteenth,
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the French were not only the
dominant power in Europe, but also the chief cultural and civilising
influence: while the Americans are reminded that Britain is the cradle
of democracy and of many American liberties. It takes two pages to
instruct the British soldiers on how France was governed before
the occupation. Americans are told simply that the old monarchical
power has shifted to the Parliament, Prime Minister and Cabinet, but
are warned 'NEVER' to criticise the King or Queen.
In an article in the Daily Express of 9 June 1944, just three
days äfter D-Day,J. M. Cameron wrote that, far from being a 'school-
masterish' set of instructions or 'a Cook's appendix to the King's
Regulations', the Soldiers' Guide was 'the gentlest and most human
article the soldier carries to the wars'. The suffering of the French
people during four years of enemy occupation is a recurring theme
in the pamphlet, as is the need to move on from the collapse of
France in lune 1940 and to recognize the achievements and sacrifices
of the French Resistance. The frequent references to the events of
1940 reflect their importance in shaping contemporary opinion in
Britain about France and the French. Similarly the sections on the
French, their culture and their way of life are as revealing of British
attitudes as they are of those of their allies across the Channel. As
Cameron shrewdly pointed out, the pamphlet was 'probably the only
guide to foreign parts which holds up the mirror not to the place,
but to the visitor'. For example, an instruction not to drink too much
alcohol is accompanied by the information that there was always less
drunkenness in pre-war France than in England, and that the inability
of some British troops to 'take their wine' was 'the one point made
against our men in France in 1939-40 and in North Africa'. Again,
soldiers in the British Expeditionary Force in 1944 are warned to
guard against the thoughtlessness of some British peace-time visitors
whose behaviour implied that nowhere abroad came up to their
standards or expectations.
