While the Vichy system, which replaced the pre-1940
Republic, will certainly not survive, the old politicians are
unlikely to come back to power. Nor is the old Republican
constitution likely to be fully restored. However, the
questions of who will come into power and what
sort of constitution France will have are entirely
matters for Frenchmen to decide when France
is freed. Many Frenchmen have very strong feelings
on this subject. Much will obviously depend upon the
men who have led resistance to the Germans in France
since 1940, risking their lives for years as dangerously
as a soldier risks his life in battle.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES.-Without butting into
French politics, you will want to know something about
the local authorities. For however the country may be
temporarily run in the arças occupied by Allied armies,
we shall still need to respect the system which exists.
This system depends on the French county, which is
called a "Département". (There are go of them, includ-
ing Corsica.) The chief official in the Département is
called the Prefect and he is nominated by the French
Government, just as in Britain the Lord Lieutenant is
appointed by the King. The Prefect is, however, unlike the
Lord Lieutenant, a paid full-time official with very wide
powers. You are unlikely to come across him in person.
If you do, remember that he is a most important man,
to be treated with respect.
Below the Département are smaller local groupings,
called Arrondissements, Cantons and finally Communes.
The Commune is the equivalent of the English town
council, urban district council or rural district council,
and at its head is always and elected "Maire" (Mayor). It
is with the Maire that a unit is most likely to deal over
local problems like billets, traffic accidents or entertain-
ments. If you arrange a football match it will always be a
good idea to invite "Monsieur le Maire". He will almost
certainly be delighted to come.
FRENCH LAW.—Besides being France's greatest mili-
tary genius, Napoleon was also her greatest law-giver.
The code of laws which he established, the Code Napo-
leon, lasted in France, with amendments, through the
the Second Republic, the Second Empire and the Third
Republic. Napoleon's system of laws is nominally in
force even to-day. The Quisling government of Vichy
has never dared openly to attack or revoke it, though in
fact it ignores many of its provisions.
