-THE COUNTRY—
FRANCE is a country of over 212,000 square miles,
i.e. nearly 2½ times the size of our island. Until Hitler
bégan to sprawl over his neighbours, France was the
largest country in Europe outside Russia. It has rivers
much longer than our own Thames, and more and higher
mountains than can be found in Britain. And whereas we
have the sea as our frontier all round, France has nearly
2,000 miles of coast and almost the same length of land-
frontiers. These land-frontiers make France far more a
continental than a maritime Power. Neither the French
navy, nearly as large as our own and thoroughly efficient
in 1939, nor the fine French mercantile marine and
fishing fleets, nor the possession of an Empire overseas
second only to the British Empire, has made French-
men in the mass think of the sea as a really important
element in the nation's existence. For it is only over the
land-frontiers that any direct threat to the nation has
come in recent centuries.
When French schoolboys sketch a frechand outline
of their country, they start by drawing a six-sided hex-
agonal figure.
The shape of France then fits fairly easily within this
framework. An imaginary tour round this figure, anti-
clockwise, starting at the top (northern-most) corner,
12
would go first along the edge which faces us across the
Channel, past Dunkirk, Calais, Boulogne, Dieppe, Havre,
Cherbourg (jutting out on a peninsula like a thumb);
St. Malo, and in the north-west corner (Brittany) Brest.
Then the western "side" makes a great curve forming
the Bay of Biscay-
and containing the Atlantic ports of
Lorient, St. Nazaire, La Rochelle and Bordeaux. Next
comes the mountain frontier with Spain the Pyrenees.
You have now covered three of your six sides.
Follow the next stage France's Mediterranean coast,
with the inward curve of the Gulf of Lions and the mouth
of the Rhône, then an outward curve taking in Marseilles
and Toulon and ending on the east with the Riviera, where
the Alps come down to the sea. Next, northwards along
a very jagged "side"— the Alpine boundary first with Italy,
then with Switzerland. The frontier begins to turn into
another mountain range, the Jura, and then the Rhine
boundary with Germany, protected on the French side
by the Vosges mountains. So far you have followed the
natural frontiers, but along the final stage you follow the
unprotected north-eastern edge of France, touching in
turn Germany, Luxembourg and Belgium.
NORTH-EAST FRONTIER.-It is this frontier which
the Germans crossed in 1870, in 1914 and again in
1940- there are people in France who have suffered
