towards us are probably more cordial than at any time
in the past, certainly more so than during the "phoney
war" of 1939- 40 or during the campaigns of 1914-18.
The small, astoundingly brave minority who have led
active resistance with in the Mother Country, have had
behind them a growing proportion (lately up to 95 per
cent) of the French people, who have passively resisted the
Germans and their Vichy stooges. All the resisters, active
and passive, have warm feelings towards this country,
not only because we have the common aim of finishing
off the Nazis, but because our broadcasts and leaflets
have been an important means of keeping up their will
to resist. Moreover, the example of British tenacity and
British success has in itself been a spur to resistance. If
Britain had failed, France might well have despaired
THE 1940 DISASTER.-In 1940 our two countries
suffered a joint military disaster. But while we continued
the war undeterred, unofficial resistance in France and
General de Gaulle's fighting forces, disowned by Vichy,
were for a long time the only signs that France was un-
subdued. At that time some of us, not without reason,
blamed French politicians for failure to continue the war.
Some of us also blamed certain French generals. A great
many of us, however, blamed the French as a nation. If
you are one of these, remember that nothing is
32
to be gained on either side by raking up the past,
and secondly, that events since 1940 have proved
what the spirit of France is like to-day.
The French remember an aspect of the war which we
sometimes forget: the fact that Britain was not overrun
in 1940 was due not only to Mr. Churchill and the "few"
of the R.A.F., it was due also to our being protected by
20 miles of sea and by the Royal Navy. If the Germans
could have crossed our water-obstacle-the
Channel-in the same way as they crossed the
French water-obstacle-the river Meuse-are we
quite sure that Britain would not have suffered
the same immediate fate as France? Thousands of
our soldiers, sailors and airmen might have been carrying
on the fight (as General de Gaulle had so long to carry
it.on) from outside the Mother Country, while inside
the Mother Country the civil population might still be
fighting back at German occupying troops (as the French
have done) through sabotage, resistance and, when the
time came, open revolt.
Thanks to the sea, this nightmare never occurred here,
France was overrun with surprising speed, and the then
French Cabinet decided by narrow majority not to carry
on the war from North Africa. An armistice was signed
and a puppet Government, which the French people
have never recognized, was installed. The French are
33
