DONT'S
Don't criticize the French Army's defeat of 1940.
Many Frenchmen are convinced that they had a fine
but insufficiently equipped army, not very well led. Many
others themselves critical of the French Army of 1940,
but they, too, will resent their own criticism coming
from a foreigner.
Don't get into arguments about religion or politics. If a
Frenchman raises one of the points which have strained
Anglo-French relations since 1940, drop the matter.
There are two sides to every question, but you don't
want to take either.
Don't get drawn into discussions about the comparative
merits and successes of the United Nations.
Don't, even if food is offered to you, eat the French out
of house and home. If you do, someone may starve.
Don't mess things up even in an empty billet. Someone
will live there after you.
Don't drink yourself silly. If you get the chance to drink
wine, learn to "take it". The failure of some British troops
to do so was the one point made against our men in
France in 1939 40 and again in North Africa.
Don't sell or give away your food or equipment.
44
-MAKINGYOURSELF UNDERSTOOD
It is never very easy to make yourself understood at first
in a foreign language, and it may be even less easy to un-
derstand a Frenchman's reply. If you find someone who
knows a little English, speak very slowly and distinctly.
If you are trying to understand French, get the speaker
to say the words slowly, or (if that will help) to write
them down clearly.
The words and phrases at the end of this booklet will
NOT make you speak French "like a native", but they
may help you out of difficulties until you learn more of
the language. If a Frenchman cannot understand your
pronunciation, point out the French word you want on
the list.
You can't expect to learn all French grammar in one
sentence, but you may notice that all French nouns are
either masculine or feminine, and the adjective or article
(i.e. "a" or "the") changes according to the gender of the
noun which goes with it. Thus "my father" is "mon père";
"my mother" is "ma mère", "A knife" is "un couteau"; "a
fork" is "une fourchette". (English is the only language
without these gender complications.)
45
