three German invasions!; and it was because of this
frontier, and, of course, because of German ambitions
and German strength, that the French were forced to
introduce conscription as long ago as at the time of the
Revolution, generations before we did this. The southern
frontier of France, with Spain, has been settled for nearly
300 years. The eastern frontier with Italy was fixed in
1860. The north-eastern frontier has changed many times
through the centuries.
A few years before the war the French started to pro-
tect this vulnerable flank with the Maginot Line, which
most of us thought was so strong that the Germans could
not get into France this time. However strong, it was not
long enough; for from where the Belgian frontier begins
at Longwy, to the sea nearly 3oo miles away, no Maignot
Line had been built. It was believed that the Germans
would not invade Belgium again, or that the Belgians
would be strong enough to stop them. Both ideas were
wrong. France was invaded once more.
14
-THE MAKING OF FRANCE
BRITISH HISTORY begins with a succession of invasions
from abroad. Since 1066 no one has ever invaded our
island: In France, which is not an island, the invasions.
have continued to our own times, and the 1940 invasion
was the third within living memory. That is one reason
why the French, starting not unlike ourselves, have
developed rather differently.
Roughly 2,000 years ago, just before the Romans
came, France and Britain were peopled by closely related
races the Gauls and the Ancient Britons.
In both countries the Romans failed to penetrate to
the outlying corners, but their domination of France
was more complete and lasting. They left more imposing
monuments, particularly in the south temples, aque-
ducts, arenas. The Romans also left much of their cus-
toms, their laws and their language. These were adopted
by the Franks, the next invaders of France, whereas we
in Britain got a different system of laws and a different
language brought in by the Angles and Saxons.
NORMANS AND ENGLISH.-Curiously enough the
next great invasion also had quite different effects in the
two countries. The Danes who raided and settled in Eng-
land became absorbed. The Norsemen, Viking cousins of
