have suffered worst, but the country districts have not
escaped lightly. Short or non-existent rations have, of
course, been supplemented by black market activities.
Some of the activities have been designed to keep food
out of German hands, and have had general approval of
patriotic Frenchmen. Others have amounted to black
market selling and buying as we know it for the benefit
of profiteers and those with enough money to buy at the
expense of their poorer countrymen.
EFFECTS ON THE FRENCH.—So the French, after
the German occupation, are, generally speaking, in no
position to entertain you lavishly, though families may
get up from the cellar in our special honour a long-
hidden bottle. If so, remember that it may be the last
they have. A good many people are likely in any case to
lack the energy or the mood to do much "celebrating,"
however great their joy and relief at being freed. When
anyone has been living for a long time suffering from
privation or in a concentration camp, and is suddenly
let out, it takes him time to recuperate. And France had
developed under the German occupation much of the
physical depression of a huge sick-room, and much of
the mental stress of a huge concentration camp.
Lack of food, lack of medicines, lack of soap and towels
have spread disease in France to an extent previously
unheard of. A recent French estimate suggests that as
many as one in twelve of the population may be suffering
from tuberculosis. Cases of syphilis were most frequent
in the neighbourhood of German military centres and
may be as many as one in eight of the population. As
for the spirit of the concentration camp, two-thirds of
France has been ruled directly by the German army and
the Gestapo since June, 1940. The rest of France was
indirectly controlled by a Quisling Government at Vichy
until November, 1942, when the Germans occupied this
portion too. The Vichy Government was then allowed
to carry on as a local administration. The Germans and
their Vichy henchmen introduced all the blessings of
the "New Order." Getting on for a million Frenchmen
(apart from 1¼ million prisoners of war) have been
deported to Germany. Another 150,000 have been in
actual prisons or concentration camps in France. Each
year at least 5,000 Frenchmen have been shot
for active resistance-one very two hours. This
includes anything from derailing a German troop-train
to helping British soldiers or airmen escape.
HELPING OUR MEN ESCAPE.-For security reasons
we have not heard much about the help which French
civilians, at the risk of their lives, have given British
soldiers and airmen since the 1940 Armistice. But it is
