NOT LIKE MONTMARTRE.—It is also as well to
drop any ideas about French women based on stories of
Montmartre and nude cabaret shows. These were always
designed as a tourist-attraction for foreigners; in Paris
in peacetime one saw far more British and American
(and Germans) than Frenchmen at the famous Folies
Bergères. If you should happen to imagine that the first
pretty French girl who smiles at you intends to dance
the can-can or take you to bed, you will risk stirring
up a lot of trouble for yourself and for our relations
with the French.
Like us, the French are on the whole a conventional
people. But it happens that their conventions differ in
some respects from ours. Some British peacetime visi-
tors to France were shocked to find that the French had
licensed brothels. Well, French visitors to Britain have
been sometimes equally shocked by couples love-making
publicly in our parks. The men may relieve nature rather
openly in public and see little harm in frankness on vari-
ous matters. But French people are rather startled when
they hear a music-hall comedian in this country joking
about "nancy-boys" or see some of us, "with drink taken"
badly out of control. We are not the only nation to feel
more virtuous than our neighbours, or to criticize their
morals. The French do the same with regard to us. It is
perhaps characteristic that what we call taking French
leave", the French call "filer à l'anglaise".
26
-HOW FRANCE WAS GOVERNED-
BEFORE the war the French Republic had at its head
a President, who, broadly speaking, "reigned" like our
King, but with the important difference that he was
King, but vich th an had the the our hero Deputi ,
years. There was a Senate, rather like our House of Lords'
but again elected, and an elected Chamber of Deputies,
rather like our own House of Commons. Instead of
again cleated on House operative, arties T
, the French Communist party more numerous than our
"Liberals" the French called "Radical Socialists". In any
case, both the names and the parties they represented
may well have been replaced by new ones by the time
you get to France.
Largely because there were so many parties the pre-
war French political system did not work very smoothly.
Cabinets lasted sometimes only a few days and seldom
for more than a year. Many French politicians (for in-
stance Laval, who leads the Vichy Quisling Government)
gained a bad name for corruption and double-dealing.
There are herdiatry titles in France, relics of pre-Republican days, but it is a mere
coincidence if a French Duke or Viscount is also a Senator.
27
