The bitterness of French social conflicts in the last
years before 1939 and the frequency of strikes were
largely due to political quarrels and the comparative
newness of large-scale industry and organized trade
unionism. Class distinctions are not very obvious in
France. The old social castes were largely swept away by
the French Revolution, and the Revolution's key-words,
"Liberty, Equality and Fraternity", have at least reduced
social snobbery to a minimum. Every Frenchman likes
to feel himself as good as his neighbours. He would
consider himself insulted if a stranger did not call him
"Monsieur" ("Sir").
In general the French earned less money than we
did in similar occupations-
and worked longer hours
for it. They spent less on their clothes and the decora-
tion of their homes, less on travel and entertainment.
But common sense and good cooking probably made
the average French clerk's or workman's home more
comfortable than that of many Englishmen of the same
status. If it sometimes had fewer or smaller rooms, this
did not matter much, since the Frenchman entertained
his acquaintances in cafés or restaurants. You had to be a
close friend before he asked you home. To-day, of course,
the comfort and the good food, thanks to the German
occupation, have vanished and he has been unable to
replace his worn clothes. Do not judge by present ap-
pearances, or remark on "bad housing" when what you
actually find is poor sanitation and lack of repairs.
By and large, Frenchmen, whatever their income or
job, are inclined to what we would call a "middle-class"
view of life. They are outwardly politer than most of us,
and they enjoy and intellectual argument more than we
do You will often think that two Frenchmen are having
a violent quarrel when they are simply arguing some
abstract point. The excitement is all on the surface; fun-
damentally they are at least as tolerant as ourselves.
The French, however, are not tolerant of author-
ity-as the Germans have found to their cost. Their
• first reaction to a uniform or a regulation is not to obey
unquestioningly, but rather to ask whether it is neces-
sary and make disrespectful comments if they decide it
is not. This is all part of the Frenchman's deep belief in
the individual. He is convinced of his right to think for
himself and voice his criticisms aloud.
RELIGION AND ART.-The need for tolerance was
taught the French by the religious wars and persecutions
of earlier times. To-day the vast majority are Roman
Catholics, with about a million Protestants. And though
many French people call themselves "free-thinkers", you
will probably find French parish churches better attended
than most English churches. Roman Catholic clergy do
