a thing we should remember with the utmost gratitude.
The controlled Press and Radio in France have been
dinning anti-British propaganda into French minds ever
since 1940, accusing us of betraying France and then
trying to seize her Empire. These stories have been an-
swered only by the B.B.C. French broadcasts (to which
the French are forbidden to listen), by leaflets dropped
by the R.A.F. and the Americans (which it is forbidden
to pass on), and by the "underground" newspapers run
(again at the risk of their lives) by French patriots. Yet
the ordinary Frenchman and Frenchwoman have
never ceased to regard us as their allies. They
have sheltered and fed (often at great personal sacrifice)
hundreds of British soldiers and airmen, and passed them
right through the country and across neutral frontiers,
knowing all the time that their own lives were forfeit if
they were discovered.
One motive which encouraged them to take these
risks, apart from French patriotism, was certainly the
popularity which British troops earned in France between
1914 and 1918, and again in 1939-40. Those of us who
were there at the time remember many acts of kindness
received from the French, and many small courtesies
which we were able to offer in return. We must always
remember that we have twice fought together in this
century on the soil of France: British cemeteries, if
you see them, are a permanent reminder. On this, the
third time, we shall get less generous hospitality, just
because the Germans have stripped France. But the
present British Army is unlikely to behave less well to
the French than earlier British expeditionary forces.
Indeed, we have reason to show even greater considera-
tion. For the individual German soldier in France has
been outwardly very "correct," on the strictest orders.
He almost overbalanced, at least at the beginning, in his
contortions to appear friendly-
but without thereby
winning the regard of the French. We owe it to our
self-respect as British soldiers to show ourselves
really well-behaved in every way. But we, unlike
the Germans, can be naturally friendly, seeing
that the French are naturally our friends.
One word of warning. If you are among the first to
land in France, your welcome will be of the warmest.
But if you are a few weeks after the first troops, and if
Allied assistance to the French population
has appeared to them slow in coming, there
may be a slight reaction. Remember then, if tackled on
the subject, to say that we are doing our best, and all
eventually will be well. For that will be the plain truth:
after all, the war has hit us, too.
