lucky. If you should be offered wine or spirits,
remember that this will be stronger drink than
you are used to. French beer is rather like our own
light ale, but you will be fortunate if you come on any,
and at present it is very much watered down.
WOMEN. —French women, both young and old, are
far from shy and you will, if you are a man of sense,
make them your friends. But do not mistake friendship
for willingness to give you their favours. The same sort
of girl with whom you can take liberties in England can
be found in France, and the same sort of girl whom you
would grossly offend in this country would be greatly
offended if you were to "try anything on" in France.
The fathers, brothers and fiances of French girls will
often be unable to protect them because they are fighting
the Germans or have been deported to Germany, Apart
from any question of discipline, you are on your honour
to behave to their womenfolk as you would wish them
to behave to yours. If you do not, you will injure the
reputation of the British soldier, by showing a worse
example than the Germans, who at the start, at least,
behaved with considerable restraint, though they later
lapsed. As for the loose women, if you have noted the
facts on page 12 about the prevalence of V.D., you will
see good reasons for avoiding them.
ENTERTAINMENT.-French cinemas are not as
modern as our own. In many of them smoking is not
allowed for fear of fires. E.N.S.A. will, in due course,
see after your entertainment; the films for ordinary
as thoughtless to crowd the French out of their own
French cinema willar to be some. It would be almost
cinemas or cafes as to buy all the food in the shops: you
have had plenty of chances for recreation at home. For
this reason some places of entertainment will be put
out of bounds.
SPORTS.—The French are keen footballers, playing
Soccer all over the country and Rugby largely in the
towns, except those of the north and east. They have
also produced some first-class tennis players. Hockey
is played, especially in the North, and basket-ball is
also popular. They do not play cricket or go in greatly
for dog-racing, nor does horse-racing attract the same
following that is does in this country. A sport on which
the French people are particularly keen is cycle-racing:
if your unit finds a chance to arrange a cycle-race fixture
with the local champions, most of the neighbourhood
will turn out to see the race. Another game familiar
in almost every part of France is the French form of
bowls, usually played on a small "dirt" ground instead of
39
