—WHAT DO THE FRENCH THINK OF US?—
IT IS FAIRTO SAY that in 1940 we and the French parted
on pretty bitter terms. They felt that we had not sent them
a large or powerful enough B.E.F., and that we had left
them in the lurch at Dunkirk. Few of them believed we
should carry on the war long after the evacuation. We,
on our side, thought that the French had fought badly
and had let us down by asking for a separate armistice
which left us in the lurch. Since 1940 the French have
learnt to value us rather more justly and generously. It
is time for us, in our turn, to think rather less about
the French collapse and rather more about subsequent
resistance in France, and the fighting contributions made
by Frenchmen at our side outside France, under General
de Gaulle and, latterly, General Giraud as well.
In the interval between 1940 and now, unfortunately,
some British forces and some French have fought against
each other in several parts of the world outside France.
It began with our sinking several French ships at Oran
in Algeria, in July, 1940, for fear the Germans should
get hold of the French fleet. Then at Dakar and, later,
in Syria, in Madagascar, and during the first few days in
North Africa we have been in battle against Frenchmen
loyal to the Vichy Quisling government. On the other
hand, throughout the Abyssinian, Libyan and Tunisian
campaigns thousands of Frenchmen have fought by our
side against the common enemy. Where they have op-
posed us, French troops and sailors have been obeying
the order of superior officers weeded of pro-British
elements by Vichy-
-which acted under German orders.
Many of those who fought against us have since fought
far more willingly by our side, with the knowledge that
we are their friends.
ATTITUDE TO BOMBINGS.—If you are in doubt
which of the two attitudes is more characteristics of the
feelings of Frenchmen in France itself, recall a few facts.
Remember how when the R.A.F. has bombed factories
and airfields and railways used by the Germans in France,
often killing and injuring French citizens in the process,
the French still understand what we are doing so well
that they help our airmen who bale out to escape, and
pile with flowers the graves of British airmen who crash.
Unfortunately, later bombing in thickly populated areas
has caused increasingly heavy civilian casualties. It is only
natural that these should have caused some resentment.
Remember, too, the heroic French stand made at the
Battle of Bir Hakeim and the way the French drove the
Germans out of Corsica.
We need not doubt the goodwill of the vast
majority of the people of France. Their feelings
