not proud of their misfortunes or of their Government's
actions in 1940. But if you are rash enough to discuss
them with a Frenchman, he will tell you that Britain is
fortunate in being an island. France is not.
FRANCE SINCE 1940.- The greatest mistake you can
make in going to France is to try to pick up the threads
of the Anglo-French story where they were broken in
June, 1940, as though France had stood still since that
date. Try to realize something of what has happened since
then. Apart from the general suffering and the general
refusal to play with the Germans already referred to,
two main facts should always be borne in mind in order
to avoid misunderstanding.
First, that the Vichy Government, of which you have
heard so much, has long been disowned as a German
tool by almost every Frenchman. Secondly, that active
resistance, starting immediately after the collapse from
small isolated groups, has organized itself in the teeth of
the Gestapo, the German army and Vichy, into a highly
efficient network covering the whole of France. It rec-
ognized a central authority, and its members regarded
themselves as soldiers under military orders. Frenchmen
who have risked everything in these resistance groups
feel that they have done all that lay in their power to
redeem the disgrace of their country's collapse in 1940
34
by fighting on as our active allies. So, before reminding
a Frenchman that France let us down in 1940, remind
yourself that you may be speaking to one of the thousands
of soldiers without uniform who have been fighting
the same fight as you against the same enemy, but with
fewer advantages.
ALLIED BLOCKADE.-The Germans and Vichy
have tried hard to tell the French public that the shortages
it has had to put up with were due to the Allied blockade.
Their propaganda has, on the whole, misfired, and the
average Frenchman attributes shortage to German loot-
ing. Here and there, however, some resentment may be
felt about the results of the blockade. If you come across
it, try to steer clear of discussions which, on details, can
only be complicated and inconclusive. Total blockade was
an absolute necessity in order to deny supplies of all kinds
to the enemy, whose deliberate policy has been to reduce
to a minimum the food available for local consumption
in all occupied territories.
RELIEF.—You may, as already suggested, find some
disappointment if relief supplies are slow in coming.
If you are questioned on this subject, explain
that it is essential to defeat Germany as rapidly
as possible, and consequently first priority on
35
