not marry. The parish priest' in France is even less well-
paid than an English parson. He feels it quite natural to
live like the "people" rather than the "gentry"; he is usually
a man of weight and influence locally, and he is called up
for combatant service like any other Frenchman.
of French craftsmanship. Some are built in the very
The cateriat both of French hit in the rong,
solid-looking "Norman" style, with round arches and
thick pillars, others in the more graceful "Gothic" with
pointed arches. The older public buildings, too, are
often remarkable even in a comparatively small French
town. Just because they have been less of an industrial
nation than ourselves, the French have destroyed fewer
Englishman. You will find French painters, both Old
Masters and modern artists, taken seriously by more of
their fellow-countrymen than our own great artists are
in Britain. But if you yourself are interested in art, you
may be surprised to find how little Frenchmen know
about British painters.
called the "vicaire"
mewhat confusing for us that the vicar is called the "curé" and the curate is
24
FAMILY LIFE.-In normal times the French have a
family life rather less free-and-easy than the life of a
British household. The father is very decidedly head of
the family and exercises authority
over his grown-up
children, particularly daughters, in a way which has gone
out of fashion in our country. Women in France, even
in peacetime, work on the land and in the factories to
an extent reached by women in Britain only in time of
war. In 1918 the wartime work of the British women
was made a reason for giving women the vote. Nothing
similar has yet occurred in France, and the French-
woman has shared in ruling modern France only, but
very effectively, through her influence in every way on
her menfolk.
Thanks to jokes about "Gay Paree", "French fares",
and "Pictures from Paris", there is a fairly widespread
belief among people in Britain that the French are a
particularly gay, frivolous people with no morals and few
convictions. This is especially untrue at the present time,
when the French have been living a life of hardship and
ple in Breople with at the prerdhip an
suffering. But the idea of the French living a in glorious
orgy of "wine, women and song" never was true, even
before the war. The French drink wine as we drink beer.
It is the national drink and a very good drink, but there
was far less drunkenness in peacetime in France than in
peacetime England.
