. WHAT WOULD YOU FEEL?— You will find in this
book a few special "tips" on how to behave to the French.
But your principal guide is, of course, your own com-
mon sense, coupled with your imagination of what you
would be feeling about friendly foreign troops in your
own town or village. Your own people at home must
have told you that both British and allied units in their
neighbourhood vary considerably in their conduct. Most
of them make themselves welcome guests. But some make
themselves just a nuisance which has to be endured. One
way troops in England can become unpopular, through
mere thoughtlessness, is by purchasing in the local shops
things which are scarce, so that civilians go short. In
the first months you will almost certainly find
in France such shortage that it will be up to you
not to try to buy anything, much less scrounge.
An unimportant comfort for a British soldier will be an
absolute necessity to some Frenchman. And buying food
at a farm may quite likely mean preventing some child
in the neat thave nothing to do with any black
market. Whatever the temptation, buying on this simply
means that the poor who need food will not get it, and
the return to normal distribution will be complicated
and delayed
I O
There is another kind of thoughtlessness, which some
of us may have to watch, though it is commoner among
British peace-time visitors abroad than among British
soldiers. It consists of airing the opinion that such and
such a foreign country or town or village is very lucky to
have chaps like us passing through. Of course, no one is
such a fool as to put the thing bluntly in words like that.
But it is amazing how many people (not all, of course,
British, or all outside their own country) can imply by
their whole manner that the world in general, and the
place where they have just arrived in particular, hardly
come up to their standards. Well, that kind of attitude,
however innocently silly, will be out of place in France.
The French accept foreign visitors, which includes us,
pretty readily, and they had before the war 3,000,000 for-
eign residents living among 39,000,000 French people.
But they were not particularly impressed by foreigners,
or very interested in them. What interested Frenchmen
reigners
was, and is, France: they think that France is a very great
country, with a great record of civilization and they
have every reason to think so.
