As you have been told so often, personal responsibil-
ity is the key-note of good security. On the individual
discretion of each British and Allied soldier depends the
security of the whole Army. This applies particularly to
your relations with the civil population. Do not forget
that far more Europeans understand English
than is popularly supposed. So be very careful
what you say—not only to civilians, but to each
other in their hearing.
Speech on the telephone may have special dangers.
Security of documents will be of more than usual im-
portance. Even the letters you receive from home, or
the addresses on letters you receive from your friends in
the same expeditionary force, may contain information
which the Enemy will want to know.
You should keep a particular look-out for suspects,
and report immediately any cases which you may come
across to your Unit Security Officer or to a Field Se-
curity N.C.O. Pay particular attention to the checking
of identity documents, and do not hesitate to detain, if
necessary by force, any suspicious individuals. Some of
these may be disguised as British officers or men; and it
is no unlikely that the beautiful spy will come into her
own again.
The danger of sabotage will also be considerable. This
means that when you are guarding material or equip
ment, your job will be particularly important; and that
you must continue to take great care of your personal
weapons and equipment.
You must expect that propaganda will be directed
to driving a wedge between the Allies, for instance, by
attempting to promote anti-Russian feeling. There may
also be attempts to organize sympathy for the Ger
man people. This propaganda, which may be in many
forms some crude and obvious, but some subtle and
hard to recognize will be directed by enemy sympathis-
ers and agents against your morale. Women are clever at
this sort of work, and will no doubt often be used. Do
not allow yourself to be affected by any of this. You have
a job to do and you must see it through with good will
and determination.
Life in ex-German Europe will demand your
vigilance, alertness and self-confidence. These
must be used in applying with common sense the
security principles you have been taught.
55
