-WHAT ARE THE FRENCH PEOPLE LIKE?
FRENCHMEN have, of course, a strong national feel-
ing a pride in being, as a united France, so long a
dominant force in Europe. But you may also notice among
them a regional loyalty to the part of France from which
they come. This "regionalism" is partly derived from the
old separate feudal principalities and dukedoms, partly
from racial differences. For the French nation includes
other groups as distinct from each other as the Bretons
and Normans
for instance the Basques of the South-
West, who have a peculiar language of their own, the
Catalans at the other end of the Pyrenees, and the people
of Provence, inland from Marseilles. Even in those parts
of France which have not a separate language of their own
there is usually a regional dialect called a "patois" which
the peasants prefer to speak rather than the French of
the grammar-books.'
This regional feeling does not imply any weakening
of the national spirit. Alsace and Lorraine (whose in-
habitants largely speak a kind of German dialect) joined
France less than three centuries ago, and were torn
away by the Germans from 1870 to 1918. None the less
the Alsatians and Lorrainers, to-day temporarily under
German rule once more, are chafing to become French
They understand "good" French none the less.
20
subjects again. It is even more remarkable that Savoy,
which joined France as recently as 1860, is the main
stronghold in which young Frenchmen in thousands have
held out in the hills for months to avoid being deported
to Germany as "factory-fodder". Evidently France cre-
ates French patriotism in its citizens very quickly. But it
does not run them into one single type, and it would be
surprisingly silent and dour. If you are in the South of
France, you are more likely to think of all Frenchmen as
very lively and talkative. Either of these first impressions
would be changed if you saw more of France.
ATTACHED TO THE LAND.-All the same, you can
make certain generalizations about the French, and the
first is their attachment to the land. Before the war over
half of the population lived "on the land" or in small coun-
try towns. Almost all countrymen, and many townsmen
as well, owned and cultivated a small piece of property,
even if they also worked for an employer. This widespread
ownership of land has given Frenchmen a distinct twist
towards individualism. This is helped by the fact that
though there are, of course, big industries in France, small
firms and independent craftsmen are very common.
