-FRANCE-
A NEW B.E.F., which includes you, is going to France.
You are to assist personally in pushing the Germans out
of France and back where they belong. In the process,
you will meet the French, maybe not for the first time.
You will also, almost certainly for the first time, be
seeing a country which has been subjected to German
occupation for several years. This is a point worth fixing
in your mind. You will learn what it means.
The pages which follow are devoted to the French
and not the Germans, who have incidentally behaved
far worse in other countries than in France. Indeed, the
individual German soldier has behaved, on the whole,
remarkably correctly in France. He was ordered to do
so. It was part of a plan for winning France over to the
in what the "New Order" means. Their one desire has
a Ner Order is are han long and pat de tes
been, and is, to get the Germans and the "New Order"
out. You will be left in no doubt that they welcome your
help in achieving this. But the results of the German
occupation are likely to be seen even in the way you are
- welcomed: the French will give you as good a welcome
as they can, but the last few years have made this difficult,
as you will realize as soon as you read on.
-WHAT OCCUPATION HAS MEANT—
Remember that continental France has been
directly occupied. In consequence it has been
stripped of everything by the Germans. Almost
all French civilians (including French children) are un-
dernourished, and many have died from exhaustion and
hunger, because the Germans have eaten the food. The
Germans have also drunk the wine or distilled it into
engine-fuel. So there are only empty barrels to roll.
You have known something of rationing at home, and
seen temporary shortages of various things to which you
were accustomed. But you have never known, as the
French, thanks to the Germans, have known, a lasting
dearth of the commonest articles. Food, drink, clothes,
tobacco everything has been rationed, but to have a
coupon has not meant to get even the meagre ration.
• Women have queued up daily for vegetables from four
in the morning till the market closed at 8.30 and gone
away without any because the Germans had robbed the
lorries on the way. Bread has often been unobtainable
and often nearly uneatable. There have been minute ra-
tions of a soap which will not wash. Simple necessities
like bandages or baby-foods or condensed milk have
been unobtainable. Cigarettes have been rationed to
three a day— when they were available at all. The towns
