the Danes, raided France but finally settled in a compact
body in Normandy. Though they adopted the French lan-
guage and ways, they remained for a long time politically
distinct. It was a Norman and not a French invasion of
England which was led by William the Conqueror, and
for two centuries the Kings of England, in their role
as Dukes of Normandy, where highly independent and
warlike vassals of the Kings of France.
On and off throughout the Middle Ages the Kings of
France were in conflict with Germans, Austrians, Italians,
Spaniards and Swiss and with independent principalities
inside France's borders. The long wars with England and
the recurrent invasions from our side of the Channel have
left the modern Frenchman with no grudge against us,
except perhaps for the burning of Joan of Arc.
BEFORE THE REVOLUTION.—You may like to
have some picture of what happened in France before the
French revolution of 1789. Here is a rough idea:-
16th century: Wars with foreign powers (chiefly the
Austrian Hapsburg Emperors). Then civil wars (Catholics
against Protestants).
17th century: Climax of French monarchy and great
age of French literature and art. Colonization abroad
and wars in Europe.'
Practically all the modern French Colonies have been acquired in the last 7o years.
16
18th century: More wars in Europe. Most of the French
colonies lost in wars with Britain. The monarchy collapses,
not through its tyranny but from its inefficiency.
During this period, France was not only the dominant
power in Europe, but the chief cultural and civilizing
The French Revolution was not, of course, a Com-
munist revolution or even mainly a revolution of the poor
against the rich. It was a revolution of the prosperous
middle-classes who have led France ever since against an
aristocracy which had already ceased to lead. Neighbour-
ing continental kingdoms with aristocratic governments
became alarmed and tried to restore the French monar-
chy. The Revolutionary French Republic retorted with
a general campaign against foreign monarchs. Britain
became involved in one more war with France. It went
on (with two short pauses) from 1793 to 1815.
FRANCE SINCE 1815.— Since Waterloo France and
Britain have never again been at war. They have fought
together as allies three times
in the Crimean war and
in the two world wars against Germany. After Napoleon's
fall in 181 5, the monarchy was restored in France. It was
unsettled and short-lived, and finally after a brief experi-
ment in constitutional monarchy beginning in 1830, it
collapsed in 1848. There followed the even short-lived
