17. NORMANDY
The recollections and experiences during the next period of the war, up to its
ending on May 8th 1945 (our second wedding anniversary), were many and
varied to an extent which defies recording them all. One can therefore only
select little incidents and details which tend to have become rather more
indelibly printed in the mind. Some of these may seem insignificant but at the
time left a lasting impression.
A Division was the smallest formation which was totally self-supporting. The
fighting formations such as tanks, infantry, artillery were supported by the
service elements supplying all materials, medical, replacements, engineers,
ordnance, these being replaced as necessary from supply depots at the rear.
Whilst our colleagues in the other three companies of the divisional RASC
were responsible for petrol, supplies (rations) and troop carrying, our
particular function as the largest of the four was carrying ammunition and
explosives. Some one hundred and fifty load carrying vehicles split into five
platoons were required for the purpose, carrying anything from small arms to
25pdr artillery shells.
These together with spare load carriers, workshop
vehicles, HQ and other admin vehicles made a grand total in excess of two
hundred. Finding locations to accommodate this number required some
organising whilst moving from one place to another, even when closed up to
forty or fifty vehicles to the mile in convoy, would cover some six miles of
road. As we were a very small cog in a vast organisation, the problems faced
by those responsible for traffic (movement control) as we advanced were
almost beyond understanding. The navy having seen us safely ashore and
having provided very heavy artillery support in the coastal areas, it should be
emphasised that the Allies had a virtual monopoly of the air. It was always
comforting that whenever aircraft were heard, a glance into the sky would
invariably identify Allied fighters on patrol. Near one of our early locations
was a temporary grave with the usual white cross and I recollect that it
contained a pilot officer.
Preservation being paramount, an order issued very early on required all
personnel to sleep below ground level. When moving into a new location,
this became a priority not only for sleeping but as a bolt hole at other times.
After landing, all loads had been checked and in so doing, freed many large
sheets for other uses. One such use was to line the bottom and sides of your
slit trench. It was usual to have something over the top but not always
the our not aliays
keeping the water out. Lying in the dry but hearing water squelching under
the waterproof sheet could have been the original waterbed.
As one of two sergeants in the HQ platoon, and not always being fully
occupied, I made some rumblings with a view to becoming more useful and
an answer was soon found. Whilst the division was in action, which was
most of the time, the procedure was to send into the forward area a
detachment of about twenty five lorries under the command of a subaltern and
one sergeant. This was set up in a suitable location being self-supporting
21
