occupied with sporting activities - one week I played one game of rugby, one
of soccer and three of hockey. In the evening we attended lectures on
tactics, theory, military law etc. Within a few weeks, weekend passes from
mid-day Saturday to midnight Sunday were available, unless 'dutied', full
advantage being taken since most people came from London. With all this
activity including early morning PT, it is not surprising that we soon reached a
high standard of fitness.
One experience not connected with training
concerned our lining the road outside the camp when King George VI was
driven by in an open staff car.
During this period, we all did a week's
motorcycling course. Some were already proficient but those who hadn't
ridden before, like myself, started from scratch.
At the first session (1 hour
each day) we had the controls and starting method explained and after
practice with the machine on its rear stand, set off round the parade ground
following our instructor. He was soon off up the main road to the heathland
adjoining the barracks and we were soon negotiating cross country riding.
This continued for the remainder of the week at the end of which we had to
complete a difficult course of steep dips and hillocks without parting company
with the machine (in my case a 500cc BSA!) This experience was to prove
very valuable as time went on.
At the beginning of January 1940, a disappointing and morale lowering
occurrence resulted in a substantial number of us, in which I was included,
being informed we were unsuitable for further training as cadets. We were
told we could transfer to any other branch of the army but not to the Navy
(senior service) or the RAF. As my father had been in the ASC, I applied
and was given a transfer to the RASC and served in that Corps until
demobilised. In our hut (no 21) there were about twenty of us one of whom
was a useful artist. He sketched a derelict hut captioned 'Somewhere in
France 1940' with all our names in neat script below.
I was able to get
enough copies for all to have one and the original sketch was later given to
the Westminster Dragoons museum.
6. THE RASC, EAST KENT
I was posted as a driver to a holding battalion at Aldershot, a garrison town
overflowing with regular and mobilised regular army reserves and the smallest
sprinkling of conscripts. Within a few days I was put on a draft for France
and sent on seven days embarkation leave.
The following day I received a
telegram recalling me, which I could only interpret as meaning an earlier trip
across the channel. However, on return I learnt that I had been taken off the
draft and posted as part of the permanent staff to an RASC Officer Cadet
Training Unit (OCTU) and off we went to Broadstairs on the Kent coast. Here
for three months or so I drove a Humber Super Snipe shooting brake (now an
Estate) with groups of RASC cadets on exercise. We were billeted on the
upper floors of a large empty convalescent home at Broadstairs with a view
over the channel and in March and April, as more magnetic mine dropping
