23. RESTING
The Division was withdrawn and rested but in the case of the RASC we found
ourselves turned into general transport companies.
This involved dumping
our ammunition in neat piles by the roadside and then concentrating our
efforts in helping to bring forward bulk supplies of collect coal, perhaps for the
civilian population, or shifting some other commodity. We had moved right
down to a position east of Brussels and our AP, although not required as
such, was billeted in a small village (Womersom) a couple of miles from a
slightly larger one called Oplinter which housed the rest of the company.
This area was interesting in that it was part of the country where both French
and Flemish were spoken. I had fairly close contact with the village
secretary, a very co-operative man who spoke German, Flemish and French
fluently, professed to no English but gave the impression that he understood
what was being said. His wife had died some years earlier and he had been
left with a ten year old son. He lived with his sister who also had a grown-up
son who spoke very good English. I could get by with French (he once told
me that if I had stayed for two months he would have me speaking fluently
because of my knowledge of French grammar), and all communications with
him were carried out in this way. On one occasion when we were in his
home one evening, all four languages were being spoken.
The one important event which took place whilst we were there concerned the
German offensive in the Ardennes at Christmas and although we were some
way from it, General Montgomery took command of the situation.
American 5*h Army, containing many new arrivals, had been attacked and
driven back, much to the concern of the local populations, and the Guards
that we had to provide vehicles with an ammunition back-up. At 4.30am on
Christmas morning 1944 we had details of this and the group was rapidly
assembled to move off. Preparations had been made for a Christmas meal
(the first and last for a lot of us) and those unfortunates were sent off with a
haversack ration. Happily the attack was soon stopped and our detachment
returned in due course to have a belated Christmas dinner.
One assignment not really associated with military tactics is worth relating.
One day the village secretary came and asked if we could provide a lorry to
help collect a fair organ which was stored in a remote farm and transport it to
the other village, where it was to be erected for them to have a celebratory
dance. Our officer gave permission and in due course, with some of the men
from the village and some of ours, we made our way to the farm. Here a
large flat farm cart was hitched up to the lorry and the various components
unearthed and loaded on to it. It was not surprising that they required a lorry
when we saw the size of it. The trip was successfully completed and
unloaded and later I saw it erected and working. I had seen these sort of
musical contraptions at London fairs in pre-war days but had never really
taken much notice of them. This one had a frontage about twenty feet and
30
