June 1944, we all knew each other pretty well.
When de-mob started to get
under way, it was decided to form an old comrades association.
volunteered to take on the job of administering it and was provided with a
nominal roll of all the names and addresses - some five hundred or so.
became known as the '81 Eye Club', eighty one being the divisional unit
number which was painted in white on a diagonally divided green and red
square on all the vehicles. The 'eye' was the centre part of the Divisional
shield sign and was also printed on the vehicles. (In this way, it was possible.
to identify any vehicle at a glance.)
The first re-union in 1947 was held in London and was a sit-down meal at
which just over two hundred sat down. The RASC being drawn nationally,
we came from all parts of the British Isles. I recollect that our two furthest
apart came from Penzance in Cornwall and Kirkwall in the Orkneys.
remainder came from somewhere in between (and included four or five from
the Channel Islands who made it before the German occupation.)
This first re-union was followed annually in London (in buffet fashion), the
numbers dwindling gradually until it was no longer held after the eighteenth
one. I had attended all of them except the last one and as attendance had
dropped to just a couple of dozen, the decision was taken to discontinue
Contact was maintained with several people over the years but at the
time of writing this, there are only about three or four.
29. REHABILITATION
Having married at Clevedon, I searched for a job in which I could apply such
pre-war experience as I had, so that we could remain in the area.
situation became rather desperate and urgent : the company I had worked for
in London (in the laboratory of a printing ink manufacturer) had been totally
blitzed and no re instatement rights existed! I did however find out that a
larger company had taken over what business there was and, after contacting
them, they gave me an interview. Having pointed out that I had no re-
instatement rights with them, they offered me a job which I accepted. I had
promised that given the chance, I would return to the West Country and after
only a year, managed to get back there, where I worked for the same
company until I retired.
