with a cook's lorry and workshop truck.
Units would come and collect
replenishments or, in the case of 25 pdr (the greatest tonnage carried), call for
the complete lorry which went off with its driver to the guns.
ammunition points (APs) became a regular detail for me and I only returned to
the company when the Division was rested and the AP withdrawn.
procedure in operation was quite simple as we had with us a Royal Corps of
Signals truck and when we required a replacement, we called up the signals
truck with the company using a code, for another vehicle to be sent forward
I usually had with me the same lance corporal issuer who was responsible for
the issuing and with whom I remained in touch after the war until his eightieth
birthday when he died. It is also worth recording that the sergeant who
usually accompanied us with his workshop truck also married at Clevedon
and was seen regularly in post-war times.
The tactics and battle plan had called for the British armoured units to attack
the town of Caen and concentrate the German equivalents in the area leaving
the Americans to advance inland and outflank them.
The ultimate result of this plan finally resulted in large numbers of the enemy
becoming trapped in what became known as the Falaise gap. The
disorganisation and casualties here were the start of the enemy's withdrawal
from Normandy and ultimate retreat back to the Rhine and their own country.
One particular assignment I had was to lead two lorries up to a 4.2 mortar
unit. I was leading in a 15cwt truck and we set off in the dark.
We had a
problem with a tank transporter carrying a bulldozer which got hooked up on
the hood framework of my vehicle. Having sorted that out we proceeded in
the dark, no lights and on a strange road. We crept carefully along until we
came by some harboured up tanks, being given the information not to
proceed further as we might not come back. We found our mortars whose
crews unloaded our vehicles with great enthusiasm..
They were a bit short of
ammo and were preparing an early morning 'stonk' (a barrage). As their
maximum range is not much more than three thousand yards, we were not all
that far away from the enemy. Our return journey was uneventful.
One of our locations about this time was a farm littered with dead cattle. It
became referred to with the unimaginative title of 'dead cow farm'. All the
animals were grossly inflated. A few rounds for a sten gun would deflate
them, accompanied by a hissing sound and a disgusting smell. One of the
many ravages of the war was the large number of domestic animals killed, all
so innocent as to what was happening. I remember on another occasion one
of our spitfires, a victim of a dog-fight going on high above us, coming straight
down amongst a herd of cows in the next field. Whilst we were momentarily
concerned as to its arrival amongst us, the cattle continued their grazing
unconcerned.
Whilst in Normandy we were several times the onlookers of the concentrated
bombing of the RAF four-engined bombers. These would fly over, perhaps
as many as four hundred, and we would watch them in the distance drop their
bombs, turn away and return on a different course.
22
