spread out in the usual dispersed pattern when we appeared to become the
temporary target of some mortar fire.
About half a dozen mortar bombs fell in
the area one of which was just a few yards begin a vehicle loaded with RE
explosives. We only had two in the whole company so loaded and one was
with us. The vehicle caught fire and the driver who happened to be in his cab
made a quick exit. Other drivers reacted quickly and moved their vehicles
away from it and we all took what cover we could. The mortaring stopped as
quickly as it started and it soon became apparent that the vehicle was going
to burn and not blow up. As soon as we could, as many as could work
around it started to shovel the sandy soil, on which it was standing, on to the
vehicle and gradually we got it under control. This was important because it
would soon get dark and we didn't want a beacon light to show where we
were. The biggest blaze came when each of the two thirteen gallon petrol
tanks (always refilled) went up. The lorry was facing the wind and it was
curious that our workshops were able to salvage the front wheels, axles and
engine afterwards. The driver's rifle which was behind his seat just had the
metal parts left. Earlier in the day we had watched some rocket firing
typhoons attaching this strong point and later there was an hour's barrage by
25 pdrs from behind us during which any conversation was quite difficult.
spite of all this, during the night there was still activity from the Germans firing
tracers in our direction. The next morning we moved out.
21. INTO HOLLAND
What followed in the next few days was crucial to the whole campaign.
Hitherto advances had been made on a broad front but now it was to be a
breakthrough on a narrow front (at times as wide as the road we travelled on,
so it was said). The armoured Irish Guards were to lead and as they and the
infantry made progress, so the services were to follow up, we being
particularly essential as we carried the ammunition replenishments.
we crossed the Escaut canal into Holland and proceeded up the road towards
Eindhoven, we saw the problem that the Guards had encountered. They had
run into a screen of anti-tank guns and we passed the wrecks of about ten
Irish Guards' Sherman tanks. In the division we had Grenadier, Coldstream,
Irish and Welsh Guards, each with an armoured battalion and an infantry
battalion. When going into action each armoured unit had its own regimental
infantry with it. A Coldstream Guards sergeant once told me that more than
once he had had the same section of six infantry with him on his tank. With
Guards discipline and training, this made for a little extra esprit de corps. The
sight of these tanks reminded me of the first ones I had seen in Normandy,
one of which still had a shaving brush stood on its side. They had been
taken severely by surprise. Close by were their temporary graves. Knocked
out tanks had an eeriness not associated elsewhere, especially when they
had been caught on fire.
25
