PART TWO: THE OBJECT OF THE EXERCISE
16. LANDING IN NORMANDY
The beach was flat and sandy and our LC ran aground, lowered its ramp and
the dozen or so vehicles drove off and ashore.
Fortunately the water depth
was only about three feet and although the exhaust pipe exits were under the
water the drivers followed the procedure of keeping up the engine revs and
reached the beach without incident.
Before the LCs grounded, they
sometimes dropped a rear anchor and, using a winch as well as their engines,
were able to haul off back into deep water, important if the tide was receding.
It was about 6am and the beachmaster who should have indicated our route
was slow to arrive and we drove along parallel to the shore. It was here that
we lost the first of the many vehicles we were subsequently to lose. One in
five of our load carriers were American left hand drive Macks with only rear
wheel drive.
Two of these which happened to be with us became so badly
bogged down in soft wet sand that one of the rear wheels was so submerged
that the opposite front wheel had completely lifted off the beach. The look on
the faces of the driver and passenger can well be imagined. Despite efforts
by breakdown vehicles stationed on the beaches for recovery both vehicles
were lost.
We had landed on Gold beach, the right hand one of the three
used by the British and Canadian armies, near Arromanche where later the
artificial harbour known as Mulberry was built section by section and was to
become the base 'port' for many months to come. On D-Day a beach head
nearly four miles deep had been established and gradually enlarged. This
was in contrast to one of the American beaches where they had encountered
a German division on full anti-invasion manoeuvres. Their initial landing and
subsequent progress off the beaches was very slow and costly in casualties.
For sustenance on landing each man had been issued with two 24-hour
individual packs. Each included concentrated food, chocolate, seven
cigarettes, toilet paper and a miniature cooker with special fuel tablets, and
cubes of concentrated tea, sugar and milk. These packs fitted the standard
mess tin and we were of course equipped with a full water bottle. After one
night bivouac, we reached our assembly area the following evening. Here
we remained for several days until sufficient of the Guards Armoured Division
had landed to participate in action against the enemy. The area already
occupied included the large town of Bayeux (famous for its tapestry, which I
never saw) and there seemed to be a build-up of butter and cheese which we
were permitted to buy with our French francs which helped down our biscuits.
It is a strange thought that only a few miles away there were French people
who were so short of food.
20
