short breaks at Christmas, the pattern was therefore three nights a week for
the first six months. Recruit drill was given relatively little time as many of us
had already had the basics. There were one or two variations; being ex-
cavalry, because horses moved in files of four, we did the same.
Being a
mechanised unit, much time was devoted to theory and practice of mechanics
with a fair sprinkling of weapon training. The term of service was four years
at the end of which an 'O' certificate was sat for suitability for a commission.
Various weekend camps were arranged with other TA units or more frequently
with regular soldiers.
Weapon training on outdoor ranges concluded with a
proficiency test which included the 303 Vickers Machine Gun. Success in
this test qualified for a weapon training bounty of 12/6! (62 ½p) During the
week-end camps, I had my first experience of driving light and medium tanks
under instruction on a tank training circuit. The medium tanks were
particularly hard work.
Each year concluded with a fortnight's summer camp under canvas,
supervised by regulars from the Royal tank regiment, these taking place on
Salisbury Plain. Evenings were free unless on guard or picket duty, as was
the middle week-end from Saturday noon to reveille Monday morning.
small group had a car owner and we were able to get away from camp.
This camp absorbed my fortnight's annual holiday but in 1939 | was allowed
an additional week starting on Sept 3rd.
The day before, the TA was
mobilised and as the sole member of any voluntary service in the firm, I
instead went off to war for the 'D of E'.
Leaving home upset my father because I believe that memories of his
experiences in WWl came back to him. He did make some enquiries about
service but at 53 no one wanted to know.
As a footnote to the TA, we were allowed so much per drill attendance and,
just before annual camp each year, attended H.Q. for what was known as
Bounty Night. We came away with on average five pounds for our year's
efforts. Conscription early in 1939 had a proviso of exemption by joining the
TA. The war subsequently rebounded on those that did.
5. MOBILISATION
On mobilisation the regiment became an Officer Cadet Training Unit (OCTU)
and we all became cadets.
We were graded into groups and the longer
serving were commissioned within two months.
•We occupied hutted
accommodation in Alma Barracks, Blackdown near Aldershot with units of the
Royal Berkshire Regiment in the barrack blocks. We gradually took over the
blocks as they made their way to France as part of the BEF. Our training
was geared mainly to tank tactics including, for the first time for me, radio
procedures, starting early am and finishing around 2pm.
Afternoons were
6
