was activated fram affanfold punched card. It was fascinating to watch all the
Various functional parts operating and it was a greaf success for the locals
soon we all move a to join the company at Oplinter and awaited the next
bomben, Flicht bomb or V1).
We were still seeing the odd Flying Bomb (Bombe volante, Fliegen
24. UP TO AND OVER THE RHINE AND TO THE END
This is recounted in rather scant detail as so much happened. Due to the
failure of the Arnhem campaign and lack of further progress, preparations
were made for an assault on the Siegfried line (German frontier fortifications)
and a direct assault eastwards into Germany.
a small village in Belgium which in addition to the normal damage from
We had been harboured up in
artillery etc. had been devastated by a V1 which had landed right in the
middle.
It was also here that a very old lady gave me some silver coins she
had been hoarding and which she intended to give to a British soldier.
In due course all was ready and the biggest barrage of the war was put down.
When Montgomery took command of the Eighth Army at Alamein, the battle
there was preceded by a heavy barrage which became well known as one of
the preliminaries to its success and so it was that the General always used
similar tactics.
sometimes referred to as 'Monty's magic'.
The 25 pdrs which provided a large proportion were
very small.
The Alamein in relation to this was
We crossed the Rhine by pontoon bridge at a place called Wesel.
Whilst in Germany, no-one on was particular what they took as they
progressed and this led to a rather unfortunate incident. Although still
proceeding north east, we crossed briefly back into Holland and in one of our
harbouring areas a local Dutchman's flat was broken into. Most of the
property was recovered but one of the men was subsequently charged with
being in improper possession.
There were further repercussions on this
incident which will be narrated later, and which involved me in one of the most
arduous motorcycle journeys I ever undertook. We moved gradually through
the German countryside with the ever increasing devastation and on
occasions saw Germans looting their own shops and property. This was
soon stopped by the Control Commission who were following up by the
impositions of curfews and threats of being shot. Eventually we were in the
area approaching Bremen.
On the day before the cease-fire, we had arrived
in a small village and I noticed one of the Divisional reconnaissance scout
cars had been knocked out (it was from the Household Cavalry) but there was
no sign of the crew whose fate was unknown. In a cottage nearby there was
laid out on the large table in the living room the body of a German soldier.
There was nothing really unusual about this but to see this healthy young man
about twenty who had missed survival by just one day left me with a lasting
memory. It was May 7th 1945 and the following day, the g'" and our second
wedding anniversary, the cease fire came into effect and we relaxed.
31
