so we were held up for a few days.
Each evening we waited but nothing
happened. Eventually we were off and, as there had been no reports of
convoys being fired on by the German guns on the French coast in the straits,
we felt fairly safe.
At dawn we were well off the south coast and our last view
of England was the Isle of Wight. We proceeded across the channel and
arrived among the biggest motley of shipping imaginable, from small launches
and landing craft to naval warships which had been involved in the initial
We proceeded to our mooring but, as it was nearly dark, no
unloading was started.
As soon as it was light, vehicles were unloaded over the side of the ship on to
Each man was ordered to watch for the
vehicle which he drove, or in which he travelled, to be off loaded and
immediately climb down the scrambling net to join it. This practice continued
all through the day during which some of us were occupied in manhandling
and off-loading a deck cargo of jerry cans of petrol. These were lowered on
to the landing craft by ropes. It is an interesting fact that for years the British
army had carried petrol in disposable four gallon cans (known as flimsies).
These were very prone to damage and leakage and various designs of a re-
useable container had been tried, none of which were entirely successful. It
was therefore interesting that, in the end, the one adopted was similar to that
used by the Germans. It held four and a half gallons and petrol being lighter
than water was sufficient to keep the whole container afloat it if went into the
water.
It was only as we unloaded that the thought struck me of being
pitched into the water surrounded by several hundred containers full of petrol.
The vehicle in which I was travelling was one of the first to be loaded and was
down in the bowels of the ship so it was not surprising that it turned out to be
the very last one to be off-loaded. One of our officers called up to me to
check that no-one had been left behind, which I did, and then proceeded over
the side. I was halfway down the scrambling net when he called to me to go
back as they were all coming back.
It was nearly dark and the skipper of the
landing craft decided to stay alongside for the night. Next morning we were
over the side at first light and almost before we'd cast off, the Sampep was
weighing anchor and back for another load. So we proceeded to the shore,
the first time I had set foot on foreign soil.
19
