small semi-detached house and, on hearing the siren or the guns first, the
family retreated here until the all clear, usually in the early hours of the
morning.
There was one period of sixty five consecutive nights of blitz, far
more than experienced elsewhere in the country.
Although much damage
seemed to be all round the area, our house and family survived serious
damage.
The proximity of four tracks of the main railway line from Waterloo
to the south and south-west on an embankment at the bottom of our garden
was not in the best interests of our location.
At Bristol I was immediately set to work as Pay Clerk to the HQ company of
the Mechanical Transport School of the OCTU. Within the first two weeks I
received my first promotion to corporal and on reaching substantive rank was
promoted sergeant.
This was an interesting, absorbing job since in addition
to the main activity of dealing with soldiers' pay, there were also the official
company account (known as the 'Imprest'), barrack damages and contingency
(regimental funds) accounts, all of which were recorded in double entry cash
books.
Although these were the responsibility of our OC who kept the official
books, he seemed to rely on the copy I kept, from time to time calling me into
his office to bring his up to date.
Each week I had to make a fairly close
estimate of our requirements and submit a prepared requisition for cash which
he signed before sending it off to the cashier southern command. On Fridays
I accompanied him to the bank to collect whatever amount of cash was
required, having broken it down into the required denomination values for
payment to the men. This was prepared on an acquittance roll which each
man signed. To the soldier, pay parade was the most important of the week.
Many and varied were the queries which arose over soldiers' pay. Records
had been lost in France and men were paid the wrong rate and some ran into
debt, a situation which resulted in the individual having to be underpaid until
the debt was cleared. Fortunately army pay was governed by an official book
(Pay warrant) where all rates and regulations were clearly set out. Our
evening leisure time was restricted once the siren sounded and for a period all
we could do was watch Bristol gradually being razed. When detailed as
guard commander, much of the night was spent with an empty guard room
since the men not on sentry duty were otherwise occupied with fire watching
duties.
One day a conversation with another soldier revealed that he had
no ty to an in not not parod al
visited a small place on the Bristol Channel coast called Clevedon, about
twelve miles away. He described it as a little quiet place where nothing much
ever seemed to be happening. This is mentioned here since some months
later, I found myself posted there. The nightly blitz finally stopped and
restrictions and movement eased much to the relief of all concerned.
Whilst at Bristol in April 1941, the arrival of an instruction for me to attend an
RAF air crew selection board in Oxford finally proved that my application had
ground through the system. I reported to the HQ in Oxford where I went
through a most stringent two days. First, the most exacting medical on all
parts of the body and faculties - here I learn how good my eyesight was -
followed by written tests on mathematics, logic and aptitude tests. The
proceedings ended with an interview by a board of RAF officers where
numerous questions were fired at me. At the conclusion and without leaving
the room, I was declared as a suitable candidate. I left Oxford with an official
10
