He had been at home with my brother-in-law (a fireman who had
experienced the blitz in London's fire service earlier in the war).
Fortunately
neither suffered injury and our house and the others were repaired. I was
glad when our advance had over-run the launching sites and this menace
The advance was slowing down since enemy resistance stiffened as they
moved back nearer their own country. I was still riding the motorcycle and on
one occasion we harboured up in a small village.
Apart from an odd
armoured car they had seen, we were the first Allied troops there. I had
stopped to direct some of the vehicles and when I was ready to move off, I
was covered with all the remaining flowers they had. One of the locals
produced a camera with a film (how he had preserved this I will never know)
and took a picture of me.
How I would have liked a print of it!
20. UP TO THE DUTCH FRONT
Moving northwards from Brussels we again encountered the V1s, the first
since leaving London.
The enemy had constructed ramps much further
inland and with apparent foresight had aimed them towards Antwerp which
was obviously a good base port for us. All our supplies were still being
brought all the way form the artificial harbour Mulberry in Normandy.
Although not really bothered by them, the V1s always seemed to be over the
routes which we travelled. Although the V1s had stopped on London, the V2
rockets had continued until we had advanced far enough to put them out of
range. Not requiring a permanent launching site, as they withdrew they were
redirected on to Antwerp to add to the V1s. One night in the pitch black we
heard a V1 with its engine cut out gliding over us but couldn't see it and
seconds later there was a blinding flash and bang as it hit the ground close
by.
We now reached a part of the campaign which subsequently became a
subject of great discussion and which concerned the advance into Holland
We always knew that it was the policy of General Montgomery to get
information right down to the individual units before any operation was
undertaken. So it was that we were conversant with the plan to drop
parachute troops along the route with our own sixth airborne the farthest
away. The Guards Armoured was to lead the break out with a final objective
well beyond Arnhem being a place named Apeldoorn which, as is now well
known, we never achieved. The purpose of the thrust was to divide the
German forces in Holland and isolate a large part of them on the coastal side.
Whilst we were waiting for the 'off our AP was situated behind a large factory
beyond which was a strong pocket of resistance.
In the factory behind our
forward units were some detachments of the machine gun regiment which
were firing long range bursts in the direction of the enemy. Our vehicles were
24
