1 EARLY RECOLLECTIONS
From my early childhood, memories of the first World War were much in the
minds of my parents' generation.
My father had volunteered early in 1915
and after fifteen months had been severely wounded. Although recovered,
having been brought back to England, he was honourably discharged as unfit
for further service
He used to tell of his experiences and there were still
items of memorabilia in existence.
Among these were two German helmets,
the origin of which I never established, but they may have been brought home
from the western front on the only leave he had.
One was of the standard
"coal scuttle" type worn by the infantry whilst the other was much more
elaborate, being polished with a spike on top: both these items formed the
basis of our playing soldiers.
We had been given two very good under-lever
BSA air rifles and when big enough to handle them I used to shoot at targets
and other articles in the "yard" behind the mews we occupied as the
chauffeur's quarter of my father's job.
With some nine acres of garden, our activities expanded to grey squirrels and
the occasional wood pigeon when the coast was clear.
As a young boy living in London, I often had the opportunity of being taken to
see much of the pageantry, with such events as changing of the guard and,
on one occasion, the trooping of the colour. One of my favourite outings was
to the RAF Air Pageant at Hendon which I was able to see for several years
until it ceased two or three years before World War II began. I had been a
wolf cub and scout and when just thirteen, as the result of a scholarship, went
away to a public boarding school at Framlingham College, Suffolk
2. FIRST STAGE OF THE "MILITARY"
At just fourteen I joined the college OTC. and as part of the 1930 recruit
platoon was introduced to military training for the first time.
The OTC was
under the charge of a master who, as well as being a qualified teacher, was a
retired infantry officer from World War I and a holder of the MC whilst the
college caretaker was a retired RSM. Our instructor was also a member of
the staff and a retired sergeant. Our training followed that of the regular
soldier with the exception that initially we trained with wooden replicas of the
standard shot Lee-Enfield rifle, subsequently being replaced with the genuine
article.
The ultimate aim of the last year at college was to sit what was called
'Certificate A', the holder of which was considered suitable for a commission.
The training and discipline were very thorough and in later years, during
forces service, I realised just how high a standard it had reached. As young
