unexpected since his father, a very old, retired army officer, was Lord
Lieutenant of Surrey.
The distance from the entrance gates of the estate to
the mansion itself must have approached half a mile and we were greeted by
the butler, staff and household.
The butler was instructed to look after me
and I fed as he did and enjoyed a bed with sheets for the night.
An incident
occurred which illustrated the human touch of the officer I was driving. My
mother had gone into hospital for an operation and at some stage i must have
mentioned it to him. As it was comparatively easy to travel from Farnham to
Wimbledon, where she was, in about an hour, he told me to write out a pass
which he signed. He had not driven the staff car before but after a meal,
drove me to Farnham station, told me to tell him on what time train I would
return and he would be there to meet me. I was therefore able to see my
mother in hospital thanks to his consideration. The next morning we
completed our journey.
At Bournemouth although cadet training resumed, the BM was much involved
in organising a second line of defence, manned by OCTU personnel to
support, as required, the infantry manning the coastline. I therefore became
very familiar with the geography around Bournemouth and Boscombe.
were billeted with subsistence - my only experience of this - in one of the
small hotels, where the proprietor was responsible for our meals to be cooked
and served in the dining room. The proprietor and his wife were very
considerate and are remembered for their providing cups of tea and cake at
very low cost on our return from an evening out.
Although Bournemouth was declared an open town, being within the active
area of the Battle of Britain, there were only the odd bombs dropped. At night
many German aircraft flew over on their way to inland targets. At this time an
Army Council Instruction was issued inviting volunteers to apply for transfer to
the RAF as air crew. I made an application which I subsequently discovered
was held up for a few weeks before being passed on, a detail which was to
have some significance at a later date. One duty, which has some slight
relevance to this, concerned driving two officers to the Salisbury Plain area
where we saw a demonstration drop by a small number of paratroops from
RAF Whitley bombers. This proved to be the nucleus of our airborne forces
and in due course had some connection with my original transfer application
which will be recounted later.
8. BRISTOL
As the requirements for officers for the RASC increased, a second OCTU was
to be formed in Bristol. I became a candidate for posting from Bournemouth,
being selected as a pay clerk. I learnt as much as I could from our pay
corporal and in due course moved with a draft to Bristol. The morning of our
arrival had followed a rather severe blitz which was to be the pattern for the
next few months. I had already been on leave from Bournemouth to London
and had experienced the night after night blitz they were experiencing there.
My father had endeavoured to strengthen the cupboard under the stairs of our
9
