form (which I have always kept) which declared me suitable to train as 'Pilot,
Observer, wireless operator/ air gunner.
The only proviso was a note that
(being short) I would be 'if pilot, subject to final leg length test'. This was
never put to the test for reasons which will be apparent later.
I returned to Bristol very satisfied with the result of my visit to Oxford and
awaited events.
At the end of October, a run down in the requirement of
RASC officers resulted in the Bristol and Bournemouth OCTUs being
combined and reformed at Southend, the unwanted 'halves' being posted. I
departed to a holding company at Guildford.
9. GUILDFORD AND HOLDING COMPANY
A holding company is, as its name implies, a pool of men which can receive
and distribute men as required.
Had I not been war substantive as a
sergeant, I should have had to revert to corporal.
Two events of note
occurred, the first only two or three days after my arrival.
I was warned to
parade on company office orders and was marched before the OC by the
sergeant major who then marched out. This indicated something unusual
and such was the case.
On the OC's desk was a document marked 'secret.
He referred to my acceptance for air crew in the RAF and asked if I was
aware that no further transfers were being made, to which I replied that I was.
(RAF air crew applications had been thrown open to civilians in reserved
occupations and a resultant surge had resulted in transfers no longer being
made.) He informed me that although this was the case, there was going to
be formed an army glider pilot regiment for airborne troops and that all
successful applicants to the RAF were being given first option to volunteer.
Training was in the rank of sergeant, pay 8/6 per day (I was getting 6/6)
promotion after six months from qualifying to staff sergeant, 10/6 per day.
Training was by the RAF but no transfer was possible to the RAF and in
general it was total commitment. He told me to report back the following
morning with my decision.
Taking into account that this was not what I had
originally volunteered for (RAF air crew), the general conditions and the fact
that I was substantive in rank, I reported the following day and gave him my
reasons for turning it down. His comment was "I don't blame you."
Two days later I was attached to a small RASC unit at Weybridge not far
away from Guildford, my brief being to sort out their pay. The pay clerk was
a young lance corporal doing his best but a bit lacking in experience. The
unit was under orders to embark on an unknown date and was equipped with
tropical kit.
It was about ninety strong and I set about getting it as right as I
could. Eventually I suggested to the OC (a captain) that he wrote to the
RASC Paymaster in Finsbury Square London asking if I could visit the office
and get all the men's accounts up to date. This was arranged and off I went
equipped as required It was only an hour's journey by train and setting off
early, I was able to spend the whole day there. The RASC was by now a
11
