The one regular relaxation was a weekly dance organised by the unit and well
attended.
There were some good professional dance band musicians in our
unit and those at neighbouring Weston-Super-Mare so we always had a very
good band
I moved to the HQ platoon where among other duties, I became the company
quarter master's deputy.
I was sent on a CQMS course at Woking for three
weeks. It was very much a lecture room course and I returned with a
satisfactory Q1.
Our OC made the comment that he would expect me to be
posted a promotion but this never materialised.
It was at about this time that the Germans started making isolated raids on
certain towns. These were referred to as Baedecker raids, the name being
associated with a German guide book available to German tourists before the
war.
Among these were Bath and, nearer to Clevedon, a short but rather
vicious raid at Weston-Super-Mare.
In November, we learnt that we were to move to Sutton Veny, a large hutted
camp on the edge of Salisbury plain. I was detailed as acting CQMS for the
advanced party and departed to our new location.
One particular event of significance whilst at Clevedon was our attendance at
a demonstration, at low tide on the sands at Weston-Super-Mare, of all the
Divisional weapons firing at targets far down the beach or in the sea.
This
was our first sight of the weapons for which we subsequently carried the
ammunition.
11. SUTTON VENY
Of all the locations at which we were stationed no greater contrast could have
existed than that between Clevedon, which we left, and Sutton Veny. It was
part of a large hutted camp and I was responsible for accepting, from my
opposite number of the outgoing unit, the buildings and inventories. We were
accompanied by the local clerk of works (a civilian) and the barrack officer
who settled any queries etc. In due course the main company arrived and
the routine of training resumed. Whereas we were the only unit at Clevedon,
with no other within several miles, the camp now accommodated all of the
Divisional RASC along with others including some of the Guards units. As a
consequence, any movement outside our own area might result in coming
face to face with a Guards officer, perhaps accompanied by an RSM or Drill
Sergeant - a rank which existed in the Guards between RSM and CSM and
which was very much concerned with discipline. This extended through the
other units in the division as did such variations as wearing peaked hats in
place of the normal field service ones.
13
