the whole of its history.
motorcycle. I doubt if anyone in the company had made such a journey in
With the cessation of hostilities, de-mob had gradually assumed the major
topic and interest. Many of us had been in since the start of the way more
than six years earlier.
Everyone had a de-mob number which was based on
day of enlistment or Sept 1939 and one's age, mine being 'twenty three'. The
very low numbers, containing much fewer men, had already started to go but
as the de mob number increased, so the number to be demobilised also went
up and each group took progressively longer to process through the system.
Much discussion centred on trying to calculate when one's time would come
and it became apparent that, with luck, I might make it just in time for
Christmas 1945.
So it proved and around December 12*h
through all the preliminaries, I left the company with the other '23's. We
made one overnight stop on the continent and another in the UK near
Reading where we parted company with more of our equipment. I had
chosen Taunton De-mob Centre, being closest to Clevedon and, having
reached there early afternoon, had hopes of being processed in time to do the
hour's journey to Clevedon later that day. Unfortunately a troopship from the
Middle East had arrived late and this had caused a build-up of personnel and
clogged the system. I finally got my de-mob suit and other gear about 11pm,
too late to leave. I spent the night there and, as Mr Bunyan, got away as
early as I could the next morning.
So on December 16h 1945, I left HM
Forces, eight years and six days after signing on and taking the oath, and
became a 'Z' reserve.
Everyone was entitled to fifty six days leave plus one day for each month
overseas. This qualified me for another nineteen days, so with seventy five
days paid leave and ration allowance, I had time to contemplate the future.
gratuity was paid according to rank and with this added on, the total was less
than one hundred pounds. I was twenty three when the war began and
twenty nine when de mobbed.
28. OLD COMRADES
In the services there seemed to exist a comradeship which I have never found
before or since. When I joined the Territorials at the end of 1937, it was at a
time when those who were enlisting were doing so simply for the thought of
volunteering. Discipline was self-generating and I recollect that a few weeks
after the war had started, one of the unit was placed on a charge, an event
which was regarded with great concern because of the 'uniqueness'.
Such
an event subsequently became daily routine.
I had joined the Guards
Armoured Divisional RASC at the beginning of January 1942 and was to
remain in that unit until I was de-mobbed, a period of nearly four years.
Although there were comings and goings, in the main the establishment
remained unchanged and when the time came to participate in the invasion in
36
