Other units were formed from the divisional REME, RAOC etc. The vast
majority of ours were genuine volunteers with a few going along for the ride
with a view as to what it might offer in the way of loot.
cooks' vehicle and its staff of cooks and orderlies.
We also provided a
We were to relieve a
battalion of the Somersets but they were to leave all their defence units,
mortars, anti-tank guns signal etc. as well as their battalion HQ (their RSM)
and staff. We moved to a building next to a lunatic asylum whose inmates
were very severe cases. It was not surprising that there were various
comments that we had less sense than they had! I had a busy time
organising extra equipment (gum boots, clothing, ammo etc.) as we were to
take over directly from the infantry their positions.
Our role was primarily one
of defence and it had already been established that we were opposite
German air force personnel. Our own forces were beginning to feel the
shortage of infantry and the German situation was appreciably worse.
In a couple of days we were on our way and after crossing the German border
arrived quietly at a small village called Gilrath, a name no one is ever likely to
forget. We set up our 'cookhouse' in a barn which had some concrete pens
in it and sheltered in a slight valley about half a mile back from the forward
positions. Our 'infantrymen' were quietly guided up to their positions by the
outgoing Somersets in the dark.
Routine required that a hot breakfast was taken up soon after stand-to at first
light and a similar meal provided in the evening after dark. Mid-day varied
according to availability and requirements.
Transport was by a vehicle known
as a 'weasel', a tracked amphibious vehicle which could take four. The hot
food and tea were carried in 'hay boxes' insulated to keep it all warm. We
had a permanent driver and accompanied by myself and one of our two cooks
(invariably the same one, who was particularly conscientious) off we would
go, calling at the Bn HQ who were on the field telephone to take anything
forward if needed and see if there were any messages.
The route took us
up a track through woods where we were sheltered from sight of the enemy.
On arrival at the Co HQ, a substantial dug-out, and being implored to switch
off our engine as early as possible - everything sounded exaggerated in the
complete silence - each section crept in from their positions in turn until all
had been fed. There was always a rum ration each day and we had to make
sure they had enough.
As soon as we had completed the meal we made our
exit as quickly as possible to minimise the noise of the vehicle. The route
nearest the positions was in places marked out with white tape to indicate that
it had not been cleared of mines. In the pitch dark this was not always easy
to see and on one occasion we ran through one. I called the driver to stop
and very gingerly reversed him back along his tracks until we were safely
back on the taped route.
The forward positions were in small groups and although in daylight each
could see the locations of its neighbours, in the darkness this was not
possible. Forward listening posts were put out but enemy patrols had been
known to penetrate to the rear. Passwords were vital in these conditions.
Movement at night was kept to an absolute minimum and any light was taboo.
One night we had a rum ration delivered which I felt would be very acceptable
28
