chocolate and other unofficial gifts. Occasionally the airborne Americans on
the ground were supplied by parachute drops and sometimes the supply
would 'accidentally' find it way into our sector. There was never any shortage
for the Americans and the 'K' pack variety was particularly acceptable.
I can
always remember the look on the mother's face when for the first time in five
years she tasted some real coffee in place of the ersatz ground acorns! The
Dutch were also very fond of tea usually drunk on the weak side with little
milk.
It touched one's conscience to see the Dutch housewives waiting at our
cooks' vehicle for all the tea to be drunk and on a word from our cooks, collect
the tealeaf dregs from the dixie and make off with it as if they had won a prize!
When we finally left them, they gave me a photograph postcard of the
Nijmegen bridge which they signed and I have kept.
With the failure of the Arnhem plan, attention was now turned towards the
eventual strike through the Reichwald forest over the Rhine and into
Germany. We moved out of Nijmegen and took up a location on the banks of
the Maas at a place called Grave.
The weather had got very wet and with a
steep back exit from the site, coming and going was something of a problem.
When we finally moved out, we had a breakdown vehicle with a winch pulling
the vehicles up the slope. I had witnessed plenty of recoveries of vehicles
but only once was I involved, when the lorry in which I was a passenger got
too close to the ditch on a narrow road and our back end finished up in it. By
good fortune a small detachment of our workshops platoon was going in the
opposite direction and before I had time to think about our predicament, they
had us out in next to no time.
Our next move took us right into the south east of Belgium in preparation for
the assault through the Siegfried line, the German frontier defences.
In order
to conserve and relieve as many units as possible, the forward positions were
held as thinly as possible and the next section of this narrative concerns a
unique situation for certain of our unit in which I was a part and is described
therefore in some detail.
22. INFANTRY EXPERIENCES
Within a few days of our arrival at our new location I had temporarily taken
over the collection of rations form CQMS and on return learned that the
company had been paraded that morning and had been told that an infantry
company was to be composed of volunteers from the service corps.
Volunteers were called for and, without difficulty, sufficient had been found to
form a platoon. Similarly procedures had taken place in the other three
RASC companies for three more platoons to form the basis of this infantry
company. As we were the largest, we supplied the OC (who was our second
in command, the sort of officer the men would have picked) and the CSM
came from one of the others. I had missed this activity but on my return I
was sent for by our OC who explained what had happened, added that an
acting CQMS was required and that he thought I would be suitable for the job!
27
