We were organised in a staging camp fairly close to the London Docks for two
or three days during which we experienced the arrival of more flying bombs
It was of course possible to follow their course which was in a straight
line and provided you were not on it you were comparatively safe. At night
time they were also visible since the jet engine emitted quite a bright exhaust.
In due course we made our way to the docks, an area of London with which I
was not too familiar. Our ship bore the name Sampep and we soon learnt
that it was one of the well known lease lend Kaiser ships which were being
produced at a tremendous speed by the Americans.
loaded into the hold, its occupants went aboard, the holds being filled up in
turn. The last level below the main deck was left empty and this became our
living quarters, hammocks being slung for sleeping. The deck was equipped
with ablutions and toilets, sea water being provided for both purposes.
water was only available for drinking. Around early evening we were loaded
and with some Royal Engineers as shipmates on the forepart of the ship (we
were aft) we were 'tugged' into the Thames and proceeded towards Southend
boom. On the way down there occurred an incident which must have been
witnessed by thousands of people although in fact it was something which
was happening all the time. A group of US Air Force Flying Fortresses were
returning from a raid and flying over the estuary. One moment they were in
formation and the next, two were on the way down. One had broken in two
just forward of the tail whilst the other spiralled down and crashed in a great
ball of fire on the north bank of the river.
came down in much the same way but the tail section twisted slowly, spiralling
down into the water. These aircraft had crews of ten and there were just six
parachutes coming down, one of which came from the tail section.
For rations we were organised into groups of fourteen men and each was
issued with a fourteen man pack (1 day's rations for 14 men). In actual fact
as there were seven senior ranks, we had one pack every two days. The
contents of these packs varied according to the identification letter on the
outside and of course some were better than others, so it was potluck which
one you had. In addition each man was issued with a self heating tin of soup.
These were very popular and tasty. The procedure was to light a wick in a
tube which went down the centre of the can : this burned and generated the
heat which heated the contents. There were very clear instructions to pierce
the top of the can before lighting and I witnessed the consequences of failing
to do this. The can was completely flattened with the two circular end pieces
still intact, the contents having been shared among anyone near enough to
receive it! The noise it made was quite an education.
These packs all
contained cigarettes, chocolate and toilet paper in addition to the food. They
were to form our regular diet for many weeks to come, before the arrival of
fresh rations. There was of course no bread so ingenuity in trying to modify
the biscuits was always a thought.
We had anchored inside the boom at Southend prior to forming up the convoy
and escort through the Straits of Dover and on down the channel to the
Normandy beach head. We expected to proceed under cover of darkness
that night but bad weather had hampered operations on the French coast and
18
