up front so about midnight I set off in the weasel with the driver (a very reliable
We called in at the Bn HQ and enquired if there was anything to go
The Somerset RSM enquired rather quizzically why I was going and !
told him about the rum. With a ""Just a minute" he called up the forward Co
HQ on the field telephone and after a brief conversation said "You need not
go up, they've got enough." It wasn't until later that I realised he didn't want
us to go and might well have ordered us not to.
Whilst wireless was used extensively, it could be monitored and field
telephones, which were much more secure, were run out by signals.
There
always seemed to be miles of wires along the sides of the roads which was
always left.
It was always possible to collect a length for a particular
requirement. On one occasion I remember one of our corporals getting his
back wheel of his motorcycle caught up and we helped him unwind about a
hundred yards from the back hub. We had 'acquired an exchange set in our
Co HQ and when in static location and signals had wired us into the system,
each platoon used to run a wire to it and so we were all connected.
Our first fortnight as infantry, despite the odd mortar or shell, was free of
casualties.
The versatile German 88mm gun was sometimes mounted on a
tracked vehicle and therefore very mobile.
They could fire a few shells and
then disappear.
It was one of these which gave me my nearest miss of the
war.
We were just proceeding near the Bn HQ in the dark with our evening
meal when without warning a shell arrived and hit the house right by the side
of us. We dived into the nearest cover but as nothing further arrived decided
we could proceed.
We had our three days rest back by the lunatic asylum and then returned to
the same area but in a smaller village called Hatterath (another name to be
remembered).
Here we were among the village buildings with our Co HQ,
the positions being beyond the village in covered locations. One of these
was in Panhandle Wood, another name well to be remembered as it was the
target for a bombardment on one of the other platoons who had the
misfortune to be there and which suffered the first casualties. One day a
major from the Westminster Dragoons (I recognised him and his cap badge)
came to carry our a reconnaissance for the forthcoming attack. I was able to
speak to him and he remembered me from our TA days when he was one of
the second Its in the company I was in. He was interested to know what the
RASC were doing there and I was able to explain our function. The
Westminster Dragoons had been reformed as an assault unit with specialist
equipment on their tanks (flails which rotated ahead of the tank to explode
mines, small bridges to cross large craters etc.).
Those of us who were involved in this experience were glad when we were
finally withdrawn. The sight of the Somersets returning to what was their
normal job made us all the more conscious of the infantryman's lot. Two
members of our platoon were subsequently awarded the M.M.
29
