18. OVER THE SEINE AND INTO BELGIUM
With the Germans in full retreat the Allies were pushing on many miles each
Our casualties had been virtually nil though, ironically, soon after we
landed our first fatality was a motorcyclist who came off and went under a
tank transporter.
One of our corporals had contracted a germ and rather
than lose him to a casualty clearing station, we bedded him down in the back
of a lorry. As he was unable to ride, I took over his motorcycle and rode it for
several hundred miles until we were well into Belgium. We crossed the river
Seine at a place called Vernon, a particularly memorable occasion as the
pontoon bridge built by the engineers had two separate tracks each about
three feet wide with a gap between. It was a strange sensation riding along a
three foot wide strip with water on each side!
Our advance contained no
more than straightforward movement. One of our overnight stops was very
near 'Vimy Ridge' (infamous in WW1) and although not on a sight-seeing tour,
I did get the chance of a glimpse of the Canadian war memorial with some
sixty thousand names on it. It was here that I came nearest to the area
where my father had spent so many months in 1915/16.
A feature of our progress was the way in which the local inhabitants all
cheered and welcomed us, having been occupied for about five years.
This
was particularly evident when we entered Brussels. Our overnight harbour
area was near Waterloo (of Wellington fame) and our CSM was approached
by a local resident inviting an officer to celebrate a meal with them. There
being no officer available, I was 'detailed' to accompany him to his house
where I met his wife and daughter. He was an engineer and he had obtained
some 'grey' market food for the occasion together with a bottle of long
preserved wine. He spoke English and interpreted the conversation for the
others but at one stage I recounted as best as I could in French our progress
since landing. In the general conversation he drew attention to the dark grey
bread being better than their normal rations and asked how it compared with
the bread in England. When told that ours was very much whiter he was very
surprised. He then asked how much the ration was and when told it was not
rationed (it was in fact rationed for a short time after the war had ended)
simply said 'Then no one can for hungry" - a statement which could not be
challenged and emphasised what their predicament had been. I returned to
our location and very early next morning we were on our way again.
19. BRUSSELS AND ON
It was about this time that a letter arrived from my father in London with the
disturbing news that a V1 had landed on the railway embankment at the
bottom of our garden and the damage from the blast was such that the
structure of the house and others in the row of semi-detached was
23
