3. PATRIOTISM AND JOINING UP
After leaving school, my interest in small bore shooting was rekindled about
three years later when I joined first the Embankment RC and later also the
Wimbledon Park RC, subsequently discovering that they were amongst the
strongest in the UK.
The Embankment being near my work place, I used to
visit and shoot during my lunch hour. The range warden (an Irishman) had
served his full twenty one years in the British Army and, with several of the
older members being World War I "old sweats", the conversation which I
listened to concerned many military matters and experiences. The
resurgence of Germany often became a topic and I resolved to offer my
services to one of the reserve forces.
A short distance from the range, which
was on the embankment by Blackfriars Bridge, was the RNVR ship 'HMS
President'. One evening I ventured across the gangway and read the
literature. I chose to wait and investigate other possibilities, one of which
was a TA unit of the Signals Corps. I paid a visit to enquire but picked the
wrong evening. However a week or two later, I heard that the Westminster
Dragoons, an armoured car TA regiment were expanding as part of the Royal
Tank Corps and were recruiting in particular those who had been members of
an OTC. Following enquiries, I completed the necessary preliminaries and
on gth of December 1937 was sworn in as a member of His Majesty's forces.
History of peace time as a territorial is recorded elsewhere but there was one
other event which might well have changed the course of my future.
I had always been interested in the RAF and in the summer of 1939 decided
to find out about entry. I paid a visit to the recruiting headquarters of the RAF
in Kingsway, London (where inspiration was fuelled by a full size Gloucester
Gladiator fighter being on show) and came away with all the necessary forms
for short service commissions for air crew. Six weeks later, during which I
had given careful thought on such a move, I was mobilised and as World War
Il began, any such move became impossible. Between 1939 and 1945 there
were other occasions for transfer and volunteering which are recounted
below.
4. LIFE AS A TERRIER
Territorial soldiers were sometimes referred to as 'Saturday night soldiers' but
whilst this did apply to week-end camps and activities, most of the training
took place on week-day evenings. As recruits, we reported on Monday and
Thursday evenings, parading at 7pm and dismissing about 9pm, this timetable
lasting until summer camp the following year. In addition, it was possible to
attend voluntary driving on Wednesdays for the same period and although I
had passed the civilian driving test, I took the opportunity of practice and
experience driving 15cwt trucks through London's busy traffic. Except for
5
