guard commander and as the drill procedures were somewhat different, l
made use of having a good look the previous day.
and accommodation were very modern and being on the banks of the Rhine,
the area was quite picturesque.
The buildings, equipment
In those parts which had been bypassed and
had been free of RAF raids there was little damage. I remember noting that
these was just one odd hole in a wall where a single shell had passed
through. On return of the regular sergeant from leave, I went back to the
company, back at Wahn.
THE MOTORCYCLE JOURNEY
Reference was made earlier to the pilfering of the Dutchman's flat and a man
being charged with improper possession of goods. About a month or two
after hostilities had ceased and the details had ground through the system,
the charge was returned to the unit with an order that the man was to be
charged with the theft. As this was a court martial charge, the presence of
the Dutch owner was required as a witness.
When the day for the convening
of the court was known, details had to be communicated to the Dutchman
requesting his presence. Someone therefore had to go back with a letter
explaining the procedure and the arrangements for collecting and
accommodation him etc., and I was detailed for the job. We were now one
hundred and sixty miles away so I was faced with a round trip of three
hundred and twenty miles to be done in a day. I sorted out my route,
arranged some rations and, having been provided with a 350ccRoyal Enfield
motorcycle, set off about 5am. The prospect of breaking down or having an
accident on such a journey was not a good prospect and with a top speed
around fifty five miles per hour, I imposed a maximum speed of forty which,
added to the other likely restrictions, meant I was in for a long day. To add to
the situation, it was raining steadily.
I had covered about thirty miles, when I was a bit slow in spotting a shallow
trench, about four inches deep and some three yards across, going right
The hole had probably been originally caused by a mine
and the filling in had gradually subsided. I instinctively hauled up the handle
bars and the front wheel just cleared the far side but the back wheel came
down with a hard bang right on the far edge.
Fortunately I stayed put,
stopping to inspect the damage.
Although the tyre and tube was intact, the
wheel rim had a large kink in it. I decided to ride on and finding no handling
or other faults continued the journey. The rain had stopped and I reached my
destination around mid-day and fortunately soon found the witness. He read
my letter and all was explained to him about the trip. Having eaten my ration
and had a short rest, I set off on the return journey with the same caution as
before. I had stopped for short breaks and continued to do so, at one point
obtaining some petrol ( and a cup of tea) from a unit en route. I arrived back
about 8.40pm, tired, very dirty and glad to be back. I reported to HQ as
mission completed. I told the corporal i/c motorcycles about the back wheel
and when he took the machine to our workshops the next morning they
decided it was beyond repair and fitted a new one. I had ridden three
hundred and twenty miles, the whole trip had taken some fifteen to sixteen
hours, about twelve of which I had spent sitting on the saddle of the
35
