seemed an intelligent man so l decided to make him a sort of foreman. I was
able to pass my instructions in French to him and he organised the Germans
who were in gangs of six, to get on and do it.
This worked well but my one
regret was that here was an opportunity to leam to speak fluent German in the
next five or six months which I never took.
We were all too interested
thinking of demobilisation which soon started.
Several hundred yards away
from the depot was a weighbridge with which we needed to be in contact most
of the time.
It was also necessary to have some sort of hut with a field
telephone to the weighbridge so l explained this to the 'Chef as he became
known and within a couple of days all was installed. I never enquired as to
the source of the materials!
As time went on, I began to get to know the
civilians.
For the most part they were older men who had not been in the
forces.
'Chef had sorted them into gangs and I noticed one group who were
rather surly and kept together.
They seemed to get all the more arduous
tasks and I later found out that they had all been members of the Nazi party.
28 THE LIGHTER SIDE OF LIFE
Leave had started back at the turn of the year. It was a morale booster with
seven days of uninhibited freedom. The order was determined by ballot and
my name came out half way down the list. The war was still very much on
and as we were in Belgium at the time we went to Brussels by lorry. The
ravages of war had done nothing to improve the condition of the trains with
their wooden seats and sometimes lack of glass in the windows but these
drawbacks were worth accepting with the ultimate thought of seven days at
home. Having journeyed via Calais, the trains at Dover were luxurious by
comparison.
Much emphasis had been made about taking firearms home.
Anyone found with a firearm was immediately returned to their unit but if they
surrendered it beforehand, all was well. During the Dunkirk evacuation all
arms were collected at a dump in Ramsgate and I had acquired a small®
automatic which I had taken home and with my father's knowledge had hidden
in the hollow top of a small cabinet with a couple of hundred rounds of
ammunition. Neither of us really understood why we had it but it
nevertheless remained hidden until my first leave from the continent. I took it
back in the opposite direction and invariably from then on, used to keep it with
a full magazine in my trouser pocket.
It was ultimately bartered with an
American soldier, after the war ended, for two khaki American shirts which
were rather better than ours and had collars.
This leave is remembered particularly for the three days we spent in the hotel
at Boscombe, now restored to holiday use, and which I had previously
booked. On arrival we were greeted with "Hallo old chap, l've put you in
number so and so, you know where to go" and pointed upstairs. It was nice
to renew an old acquaintance.
33
