With little off duty pastimes available, for the first time we had official vehicles
laid on in the evenings to take personnel on pass to larger towns like
Trowbridge and Melksham for cinemas and hostelries. These vehicles were
always referred to as 'Passion wagons.' Training cannot be described other
than in detail but one interesting visit, which complemented the weaponry
demonstration at Weston-Super-Mare, took us underground to an arsenal
near Corsham where we were able to see all the range of ammunition used
by the army and become more familiar with those which we were to carry.
In October the company moved off to participate in a very large exercise
called Spartan, lasting several days and finishing at a new location in Norfolk.
I was detailed to remain with a rear party and perform the reciprocal duty of
handing over as opposed to having taken over several months before. Our
small rear party, which I accompanied on a motorcycle, set off on a rather
long journey to a small village called Shipdham near East Dereham in Norfolk.
With about thirty miles to go, our small convoy divided and, having searched
and failed to find it, I remember finishing the journey alone, just making it to
the company location with about half a pint of petrol left in the tank! So we all
arrived at Shipdham to continue our preparations for the second front.
Whilst I was at Sutton Veny, I was selected with several others to attend a
three day pre-OCTU course for a commission. We went to a large house in
north west London (Hampstead). On arrival I was buttonholed by a
lieutenant from the administration who turned out to be the father of a friend I
had grown up with. He had seen my name in the list and had watched for my
arrival. He advised me to have a second choice to the RASC and suggested
the Royal Artillery. Practically all the course revolved round total initiative
with no directing assistance but included interviews and questioning.
When
the result was received at the unit, I was referred back for six months.
12. SHIPDHAM
Our particular part of the company was billeted in a very large country
mansion called Letton Hall. It had its own generator and storage batteries, its
own water tower, contained a lift and was just outside the village. The US
Army Air Force were now established and operational and the whole area was
dotted with bomber airfields from which regular sorties were being flown, there
being regular evidence of this from the condition of some of the returning
aircraft. Our own activities followed the same pattern as before but on one
occasion we went to Sandringham Park to line the route for the King and
Queen, with the two Princesses, to pass in an open car. In May 1943 | went
on leave and was married at Clevedon. Whilst at Shipdham the whole unit
was inspected by the Inspector General of the RASC. He was a Major-
General, the only general officer in the whole of the RASC, a situation which
existed generally in the corps as a whole.
14
