They were overlapping the back of the vehicle, with the other end resting on
the front of the body behind the cab. Although our vehicle missed the back of
it, the protrusion of the big steel body caught some of the girders and pushed
them right through the cab.
Fortunately the driver was standing on the other
side of the road, otherwise the consequences night have been fatal. We
stopped and exchanged details, our vehicle comparatively undamaged and
his more or less wrecked, and we finished the journey without further incident.
The next phase of preparation involved waterproofing the loads and vehicles.
The loads had to be treble-wrapped in three tarpaulins in case the vehicle
landed in too deep water whilst the vehicles themselves had to have their
electricals (ignitions etc.) sealed and the air intakes modified. Nothing was
done to the exhaust pipes, the emphasis being on keeping the engine high
revving and preventing water entering the pipe; the time in which this could
occur would be relatively short, from entering the water to reaching dry land
This waterproofing was supervised by a sergeant with a team of tradesmen
who worked very long and hard hours. He became known as 'Bostic Bill', the
name deriving from the proprietary brand of the sealant which was used. He
was one of a large number of seasoned troops who were exchanged in a
scheme whereby replacements were sent to the near east for occupational
duties. By this time we had lost any men who were not A1. Whilst
performing our early morning PT we were often accompanied by large
formations of four-engined bombers assembling before moving out across the
channel. We assumed they were softening up the enemy defences but in
actual fact they were concentrating also on the flying bomb sites, which as yet
we had not heard about. And so we were ready.
15 LONDON AND NORMANDY LANDING
The landings on the Normandy coast having been started, we moved from
Rottingdean in the direction of London for embarkation.
We travelled in
normal convoy routine and about halfway had a normal ten minute halt.
During this period we heard what sounded like an aero engine but with a
slight difference. Suddenly it stopped and shortly afterwards there was a
loud explosion which was assumed to be the end of an aeroplane. When we
resumed our journey and reached Caterham on the outskirts of London, we
met up with a group of police motor cyclists. Their task was to take about ten
vehicles across London to our harbouring destination and we heard from them
that there were arriving over the capital some sort of flying bomb. These
motorcyclists drove in the middle of the road and, with traffic controls at all
major junctions, we more or less had an unobstructed run. The population
seemed to be lining the route and any slowing down resulted in cups of tea
and cakes to accompany the cheering. Little did they realise that having
endured so much long and continuous blitz, they were soon to be subjected to
an onslaught of these new missiles and later the rockets, both of which could
arrive unannounced, with relatively little defence especially from the rockets.
17
