unit behind the assault troops whose purpose was to supply petrol. He had
taken part in a landing with such a unit on the French coast as a
reconnaissance exercise and they had all got away, having blown up the
dump, and were picked up by motor launches. Whilst awaiting some
development, I was sent with an escort to Scotland Yard, London, to collect a
deserter. With the escort, my collecting authority and handcuffs we set off
early by train. The corps of military police are always very strict and those at
Scotland Yard were of course exemplary. I reported to an RSM and in due
course we set off on our journey back but not without signing for the prisoner
or leaving until he was firmly handcuffed to the escort.
This was indeed a
unique assignment. A few days later I had to travel to Swansea where | was
informed that there was no establishment for a sergeant in the units being
formed and the next day I returned to Yorkshire.
Whilst still in Yorkshire there was a follow-up to my pre-OCTU visit to
Hampstead. More than a year had passed and when asked if I wished to
proceed with it, I decided not to. As I was now trained and part of the
company, which was almost ready for whatever the future had in store, it was
right for me to stay put and the powers that be seemed pleased with this
decision.
A battle school had been set up adjacent to one of the villages on the way to
Scarborough and all ranks were put through a severe battle training course
which lasted a week. This was probably the last major effort in bringing the
unit to its peak.
The only other event of note was our being transported to Driffield some miles
north of our location where we were inspected by General Montgomery. It
was not his practice to walk along rows of troops set out in strict lines so after
we had formed up we stood easy and he walked casually past us looking at
every individual. He had always said that this is what he wanted to do and he
did just that.
14. ROTTINGDEAN NEAR BRIGHTON
As we were now fully equipped and trained, an expected move to the south of
England materialised and not surprisingly I moved off with the advance party.
Our destination was Rottingdean, a few miles along the coast from Brighton.
It was an area with which I was familiar, as, in the days before the war, we
used to go to the coast for the day and it was this stretch that we often made
for. I had also been for holidays to Brighton. The journey from Yorkshire
was eventful for me as it proved to provide the only time I ever became
involved in an accident involving an army vehicle. We had started very early
and around midday we were approaching the outskirts of London. The driver
of the vehicle, in which I was a passenger in the front seat, had a momentary
lapse of concentration due to fatigue.
He failed to pull out in time to steer
past a stationary small lorry which was loaded with small angle iron girders.
16
