activities by the Germans gathered momentum, we watched the daily
increase in the number of wrecks appearing in the straits of Dover and the
efforts of the RAF Wellingtons with their large circular magnetic activators
trying to set off the mines harmlessly.
Our training activities suddenly ceased very abruptly when we were paraded
one day in battle order, issued with fifty rounds of 303 ammunition and
organised into small sections.
These were set out at defensive points, mine
being with those around Manston aerodrome. We were relieved after twenty
four hours then, after a rest, retured to the position, a procedure which
After a few days, this activity ended for me and I was detailed to
take my Humber the five miles to Ramsgate to the OCTU HQ where I became
driver to the Brigade Major of the Colonel Commandant. Here began a
period of service where, because of the duties of the Brigade Major, I became
very much aware of what was to be expected during the next few weeks of
The build-up of cigarettes, chocolate and jerry cans of water soon
indicated the withdrawal and rescue of the BEF. I drove the Brigade Major,
usually at very short notice, to whichever part of East Kent he required to go
and on one particular occasion, once the evacuation had started, drove out to
the end of Ramsgate harbour, a ship having arrived including some German
POWs. As a young boy my sister and I used to go and stay with an aunt in
Ramsgate; little did I know of my future experiences at that time.
I have many recollections about the thousands who were safely brought back.
In particular the wonderful welcome from the local population, the sight of the
little flotillas of boats setting off yet again across the channel and the tireless
efforts of the OCTU medical officer and his staff who had set up a casualty
clearing station on the site of the old railway station on the front. Here
innumerable wounded casualties were dealt with, along with those suffering
from exposure, effects of oil pollution and malnutrition. Eventually we were
relieved by more infantry units and soon heard that the OCTU was to be
moved to Bournemouth.
As a postscript, a little incident from the height of these activities was the
arrival of a large sack in a room at our HQ. On enquiring as to its contents
and being invited to have a look, I discovered it was full of rotor arms removed
from vehicles abandoned by the BEF!
7. MOVE TO BOURNEMOUTH
The journey from Ramsgate to Bournemouth provided two days relief from the
previous hectic weeks. I had earlier exchanged the Humber for a small
civilian (khaki) Vauxhall saloon which was more suited to the purpose. The
Brigade Major told me before leaving Ramsgate that although the journey was
not all that far, we would be travelling via Farnham in Surrey and breaking the
journey for the night at his father's home. This proved to be something rather
8
