My second leave was after the war had finished and as we were in Germany
occupied rather longer in travelling.
We spent a few days in a local near
Okehampton on Dartmoor then Clevedon and London before retuming. The
next journey would be the one for de mob.
My only other leave' occurred early in the year and followed the publication of
a notice conceming a 60 hour pass to Paris.
We were in Belgium at the time
and applicants had to have compassionate grounds for applying.
My mother
had a cousin who had married a Frenchman many years before the war and
had gone to live in Paris.
Her husband died and once the German
occupation had been complete, no further information became available as to
her welfare.
My application was allowed and off I went in a special train full
of soldiers to Paris (via Brussels). On arrival in Paris, we were very well
accommodated in requisitioned hotels very close to the Champs Elysees -
one of the main thoroughfares of Paris with the Arc de Triomphe at one end. I
immediately found my away to the district where she had last lived and on
enquiry was pleased to leam that she was working in a food office about five
minutes walk away. I enquired for her at reception and off someone went to
fetch her. I shall always remember her face when she appeared and saw who
it was.
My mother had a much younger brother and she thought it may have
been him as well as me.
She had married again and the next day her
husband took me on a sight-seeing tour of Paris. I was able to give her some
money and had taken some chocolate which she had not had for years.
Altogether a very happy occasion and I was able to write home and reassure
everyone that she was alright.
27. WAITING FOR DEMOBILISATION
During this post war period, much time was spent by the army's transport, and
that included us, in fetching and carrying for the Germans, who were very
short of transport, and our drivers spent longs hours fetching and carrying
from as far away as Belgium but with no longer any danger. Apart from a
leave to the UK, my only other diversion was to stand in for our ration
sergeant at the Divisional Rehabilitation Centre. This had been set up in the
University of Bonn (later to become the administration centre of West
Germany), situated at Bad Godesberg a few miles up the Rhine from Bonn.
The purpose of the establishment was to train servicemen in various trades, in
preparation for their return to civilian life. Apart from the usual ration duties, I
used to go out into the countryside with a lorry and driver, armed with some
tins of bully beef. The object of the exercise was to supplement the rations
with such farm produce as we could locate, in exchange for the bully which
was always very acceptable to the local population. With the necessary
stock questions in German, we would go off in search of potatoes, fruit, eggs
etc.
This in fact was not officially sanctioned: the fratemisation ban was not
lifted for some months and in the populated areas, the beady eyes of the
Military Police were very strict in enforcing it. Whilst there, I was detailed for
34
