30. THE OPTIONS THAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN
Looking back over the years of this record, it is interesting to note the number
of times that circumstances could have changed the course of events. The
most significant of such a variation would have been never to have married at
Clevedon.
A brief precis of the 'might-have-beens' is as follows :
1. The completion of the application forms for short service commission in
the RAF, before the outbreak of the war.
2. Choice of voluntary service (RNVR, Signals and finally Westminster
Dragoons)
3.
4.
5.
Option to transfer from Royal tank regiment, choosing the RASC.
Draft posting to France in 1940 and its subsequent withdrawal.
Volunteering for RAF aircrew and being accepted (transfers being stopped
before my name came to the top.)
6.
Option to join the formation of the Glider Pilot regiment (turned down)
7.
Selection for pre-OCTU for commission in RASC (not pursued).
8. Volunteered for special petrol unit in RASC (no establishment for
sergeant)
Had any of these materialised, one may only contemplate the consequences.
31. FINAL AFTERTHOUGHTS
Looking back in retirement after half a century one can peruse this critical
period with a mellowed attitude. As an early teenager, I used to view a
situation when things went wrong as that it could be a lot worse but that I
would not die! Although I had volunteered in 1937, I hadn't given too much
thought to the future but in 1939, this became a reality.
Although I had lost more than six impressionable years (from twenty three to
twenty nine), rather than feel any grudge, I had more the satisfaction of having
given what I could as a patriot.
The most significant event as a bonus was marriage and as regards re-
employment, despite a few hiccups initially in trying to rehabilitate, it is fair to
say that I caught up on the lost years.
There were some minor benefits from
my service years.
One lasting thought is the comradeship amongst one's fellow servicemen,
particularly in the latter stages of the war when actively involved, and is
something never experienced before or since.
On the annual Remembrance
Ray, those whom I knew who didn't make it often come to mind. Although I
never knew him, this includes the young German who missed by just one day.
38
