teenage boys, physical fitness was of prime importance, not the least when
performing arms and ceremonial drill with a twelve inch bayonet fixed.
participated in field exercises with other OTCs, were inspected by regular
officers, shot regularly on long ranges and had a band (more of that later).
I took Cert A, passing the practical fieldcraft in the morning but failed the
written exam in the evening.
For this I make no excuses but having fractured
my wrist playing hockey in the afternoon, did find difficulty with my arm in a
sling.
During the time at Framlingham, the school chaplain who was also my
housemaster, ran the college scout troop.
This included a small bore rifle
club using target rifles and, as a member, I shot regularly for the team,
culminating in a visit to Bisley where we won a team trophy. The OTC also
ran a team in competitions using standard Lee-Enfield rifles fitted with small
bore barrels. In my last year I managed to win the cup for the best indoor
average but in the summer was disappointed in not making the full bore team
which went to Bisley to compete in the Public Schools Ashburton shield
competition. I did not seem to be big enough to control the recoil of a full
bore rifle, something I subsequently put right.
I became a bugler in the OTC band and graduated to the position of orderly
bugler on parade days. On Armistice Day I was called upon to sound the
Last Post and Reveille for the two minutes silence, standing on the terrace at
the front of the college overlooking the own of Framlingham. I was once
detailed to accompany the local British Legion to a neighbouring village
church for the armistice service and in uniform, surrounded by many ex-
service men, sounded the same two calls in front of the war memorial by the
altar.
My OTC experience ended when the contingent went for summer camp to
Tweseldown near Aldershot where we joined many other OTCs under bell-
tented canvas for training and manoeuvres under the guidance and discipline
of the Scots Guards. Here the most memorable event concerned my
participation as part of the guard as bugle orderly on one of the days. I had
to report to the Guards HQ where I was required to sound all calls as required
that evening and the following day. (Before camp, I had been given a book of
the army calls which I had to learn and did in fact give a 'recital' of them to the
contingent before we went to camp.) As a sixth-former I started learning
German as a member of a small group. The master who used to teach us
would occasionally spend the last few minutes discussing the political
situation in Germany. It was at this time that Adolf Hitler had removed
Hindenberg from the presidency. The master warned of the possible dangers
of the situation which was developing and how right he proved to be.
4
