very large corps, having grown in some sort of proportion to the size of the
It was something of an experience to see the size of the organisation
operated by the Royal Army Pay Corps and I was given every assistance as I
moved alphabetically from section to section.
It is worth mentioning that
when I got to 'Smith', the name was in a separate section all of its own and
contained seven thousand accounts.
Small wonder that the occasional
muddle can occur. The Welsh Guards have their Jones, Davies, Rees and
Thomas etc but they were unlikely to match the RASC 'Smiths'. I returned
with the satisfaction of knowing that each man's account was as correct and
up to date as possible and in due course they moved off to an unknown
destination. I had spent Christmas with them.
I returned to Guildford and
very soon afterwards was posted to the RASC Guards Armoured Division
joining the armoured brigade company at Clevedon, the place referred to
briefly earlier.
This was my last encounter with army pay. In the main, the
lowest rank was poorly paid. The rate was two shillings per day at the start of
the war if married, half of this was compulsorily allotted to add to the wife's
seventeen and sixpence.
There was a very small minority among those
mobilised and conscripted who had part or all of their pay made up. If
mustered as a tradesman, rates were very much better.
10. CLEVEDON
This unit was the first field force unit I had joined and as part of the Guards
Armoured Division, although this was a long way ahead, was ultimately
destined to participate in the second front, almost certainly somewhere across
the channel. We were engaged in getting up to strength and training all
personnel, particularly in driving and maintenance.
Clevedon was apparently
the quietest place in which they had been stationed, having come from
Sussex which earlier had been much in the Battle of Britain zone. I joined C
Platoon, one of the newer parts of the company and without any vehicles.
Much of my early days were spent taking small convoys of lorries on driver
training. With the qualified drivers as instructors, we would move out on a
country route and I would change from one vehicle to another to assess the
learner's progress. The call up about this time was high enough for civilian
intakes to have to be trained in units rather than the Initial Training
Companies. We therefore received a direct intake comprised almost entirely
of eighteen year olds from South Wales. As conscription was also creeping
up the other end of the age range, there were one or two around forty,
including a schoolmaster. They were kitted out and given the usual six
weeks initial training before being allocated to platoons for driver training.
sideline to this training was the reaction of some of the elderly Clevedon
ladies who objected to the strict discipline being instilled into these young
men. Leisure time resulted in many friends being made with the local
inhabitants, several of the unit, including myself, being married.
12
