In August we moved up to Yorkshire and I was again on the rear party. We
handed over to a Canadian unit who we found very friendly and co-operative.
I was one of the last four to leave, late in the afternoon, and after a tiresome
journey reached the new location about midnight. It was a hutted camp three
miles out of Helmsley up a minor road which led up to the moors.
totally dependant on its own generating and water supplies and sewage
facilities were somewhat primitive. The huts were carefully planned between
fir trees and in the pitch dark it was not the easiest of places to negotiate.
Our first impressions were not very favourable and so it proved
One event whilst at Shipdham concerned a talk given to senior ranks by an
officer who had been captured twice and escaped successfully the third time.
His experiences and advice, together with demonstrations of useful gimmicks
available after escape, gave food for thought.
13. CARLTON HIGHWOODS CAMP -- Nr HELMSLEY
The less said about this location the better.
It was certainly the bleakest and
as we spent mainly the worst of the winter months there, we had to make the
most of what we nad. we shared the camp with a divisional REME unit and
apart from a NAAFI, there was nothing else to entertain the troops off duty.
An attempt was made by using certain of the workshop platoon's equipment
and expertise, some interest was generated in encouraging a bit of woodwork,
metalwork or other craft. On rare occasions a 'Passion wagon' was
organised for trips to Scarborough where one of the other RASC companies
and the RASC HQ were situated, otherwise off duty time was left entirely in
the hands of the individuals. As a sergeant I always had the benefit of the
sergeants' mess which had some comfort. Occasionally one of the hundreds
of fir trees was illegally felled to provide fuel for the fires.
Week-end passes
became more sought after and the ticket touts and forgers were much in
demand! I had one four week break but whether this was an advantage or
not is questionable. I was sent on a four week course at the RASC school in
Aldershot. This was a regimental course of the strictest discipline where rank
meant nothing - warrant officers being drilled by corporal instructors and
taken to task if not reaching the required standard. Reveille was at 6am with
kit laid out. Adjutants parade started off the day and finished with the arrival
of a certain Major Merrison. He had been the senior RSM in the RASC at the
start of the war, was commissioned and rose through the ranks. He used to
arrive at the rear of the parade and take over the drilling! I obtained a Q1
pass and returned to the wilderness of the Yorkshire moors. About this time I
saw a notice calling for volunteers who had any experience with petroleum
products. This had been a slightly fringe part of my pre-war job so I applied.
In due course I was sent to Barry Island, South Wales, to a RASC holding
company. On arrival and telling the sergeants' mess caterer my reasons for
being there, he immediately told me l'd done the wrong thing. He thought it
was for what were known as D type petrol depots - a sort of quick follow up
15
