25. SORTING OURSELVES OUT
Our AP rejoined the company for the last time and the whole unit motored to
Cuxhaven on the North Sea coast.
boats in the North Saw.
It was a naval base operating mainly 'E'
We were not involved in the disarming of the
German forces but their discipline remained as strict as ever.
over their equipment I was later told that when the Guards accepted it from
When handing
the parachute regiments, it was all laid out and drawn up as for inspection.
We had at times confiscated civilian weapons such as shot guns from farmers
post.
as a precaution and these invariably had their barrels wrapped round a tree or
During our advance there was a tendency to 'acquire' extra vehicles
and in particular I can remember at least two large Mercedes staff cars,
normally used by the German top brass, and several BMW motorcycles.
had acquired a Matford (German Ford) van which I used until someone burnt
out the clutch and which I substituted for a small General Motors equivalent.
Immediately hostilities ceased, all these vehicles had to be returned to central
collecting centres where they were immediately pressed into service for
domestic uses.
After a couple of weeks, the occupational zones for each
country had been established and we made the long journey southwards to a
place called Wahn, a few miles from Cologne. This journey was a real eye
opener as to the devastation of German towns and cities. One particular
recollection was the vast flattened area of devastation around Cologne
Cathedral, itself damaged but still standing. One town we passed through
was Wuppertal with its unique overhead transport system of suspended trams
which travelled high over the centre of the road supported by arches.
It had
sealed' stations at intervals and at one place, ran high above a narrow river.
At Wahn we took over a large depot and with tradesmen from the other
companies set about supplying all service units within a twenty mile radius
with rations and other daily requirements of life. Adjacent to the depot was a
displaced persons camp (not to be confused with the extermination ones such
as Auschwitz and Buchenwald etc.) The nationalities were many and they
were administered by the US forces. These moved out and a detachment of
the Irish Guards took over. Those in the camps were very much out of
control, breaking out at night and generally making a nuisance to the local
population but the Guards soon got this under control though not before it
became necessary to put an armed escort on the vehicles which went out
early in the morning to bring in locals who were employed by the occupying
forces in the depot. My particular assignment was to look after an enormous
coal depot (the responsibility of an officer). A continuous supply of large
general transport lorries delivered daily until we had large stocks of all types
of solid fuel, the largest being about two thousand tons of coke. I was
provided with about fifty German civilians from among the local population to
do the manual work. At one stage we had a few of our own Pioneer Corps
men but the idea of our soldiers shovelling coal with German civilians was
taboo. Amongst the Germans, I discovered one who had lived in France for
many years before he had to return to Germany. He spoke fluent French and
32
