When darkness fell, we harboured up for the night and continued our dash,
the next morning reaching Nijmegen and setting up our AP on the outskirts.
En route we had passed numerous small detachments of the two airborne
American divisions who had been dropped to secure important features on
the road such as bridges, road junctions etc.
At this time our main company, which was following up, had arrived in
Eindhoven and, after passing through, received a message that a German
force of tanks was approaching the road from their left flank.
• A decision to
turn back into the town was taken and successfully achieved, remaining there
for the night. It was at this point that the Germans made one of the few night
air sorties and decided to bomb the town which contained the large Phillips
electrical factory.
The attack caused several fatal casualties and around
fifteen vehicles were burned out, those containing ammunition being
particularly dangerous. It was ironic that one should have been the driver of
the HQ CQMS lorry which when being loaded back in England had resulted in
light hearted and humorous remarks when the white crosses were packed
away. Little was it realised that one would be his.
The company did move up to its allotted location the next day but the effort of
the Germans, cut off to the east in their efforts to break across towards
Germany, became quite a nuisance and fighting units were continually having
to return back down the road to clear it. In our location it was not unusual for
a battery of guns close by us to turn round and pound away a few rounds in
the opposite direction!
Although the road bridge over the Rhine in Nijmegen
was eventually captured by the Grenadiers, we had come to a halt and were
unable to join up with the British 6*h airborne division at Arnhem as history well
knows.
The disruption in rear caused a hiccup with supplies and on one issue of
rations we found ourselves eating German tinned bread.
When we supplied
a load of ammunition to the artillery, the empty lorry would report back to us
prior to returning to the company and then back to base for a refill.
It was
discomforting to learn that a driver who had been sent back empty should lose
his life through the road being cut as happened on occasion.
With the
Arnhem epic finished and a change of plan and direction, we all moved into
Nijmegen to await further developments. It was decided that we should be
permitted to billet in private houses and I was set the task of organising these,
not particularly easy with no knowledge of Flemish.
I was fortunate that at an
early stage a young girl about seventeen was enquiring if she could have
some soldiers in their house. She spoke quite good English so I immediately
asked her to be my interpreter and from then on the job became easy. A
payment per man was authorised and we were soon billeted. Along with two
other sergeants, we settled ourselves in the house where the girl lived.
Although the house was only a small semi-detached, it had a cellar and the
family, which comprised the mother, father, daughter and ten year old son, all
slept in it to avoid the 'shells'. As a consequence we were offered the used of
their bedrooms (not their bedding) and found the situation very friendly. We
even managed to play cards with them and of course managed a little
26
