ZEZZILLLOM
BEE
333
War Diary
Copy No.
ADST (I) Secon
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
of mobilisation or
ordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
c. 36), and personal
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
his representatives.
war diaries will be
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
L, - Fee to should be entered up, not in the edes a riven ah eit he the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(1) one of ect fed retion it. is the pet. reed ayed of euch portine of
he war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
oF or per fir should he made die, thot the oficer who is to the entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
(See PASt. A diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
preparing a d Ty so far as they are applicable, the following points should be icorded when
(*) Ind deast os tas, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) Pay in evement dur the pat renty fourhour and present dispositions.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the un Co. No. The The in chered should to the ting the given tri her ox
Mothol of dospoton -
Dato, timo of signatur
Gony To
3R
1220007
BEIN
Month and Year. SuP 44e.
ETAMPES.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Acute shortage of petrol in FlAMES area Coys only sufficient to move vehicles to
ID MANS. Major Taylor this HQ obtained authority in IE MANS for release 3000
galls Sep 2. All Tpt concentrated in IE MANS and 108 and 217 U.S. Hospitals
loadod. CRASC and 21/c carried out recce of CHARTRES area and reported on
operation of Red Ball Route by U.S.A. Ipt. CRASC stated no tpt or Column
Control. Vehicles lost for 3 days. MP's did not exercise authority ana
often directed tpt wrongly. CRASC received D.0. letter stating 3 Coy and.
711 Coy might be recalled in near future. Orders issued for rapid comletion
Army Form C.
118.
UniQ 21 Transport Colum RASC.
Commanding Officer It.Col. Iut.Col. HOECRONT.
References to Appendices
c. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
68 Nopero
Hospital details.
CRASC, 21/c visited BEAJON Hospital and IA FBIRE Hospital PARIS
and ensured
rapid off loading vehicles. Major Crey
from
SAT Directorate 21 Army Gp
brought copy of order sent to ADSEC
on 31 Aug.
for return of Coys to British
sector by 1800 hrs 2 Sept. He arrived this HQ 1630 hrs 2 Sept. All tot still
out on detai1. Capt Swan sent Prom this IQ to obtain 8,000 gallons Fettes,
Domestic vehicles 3 Coy and 713 Coy taken to collect POL. Col Bonhan Carter e
чалу.
Name:
Order table:
dated 12/9/44.
XIN.
Date:
¿ to be nihisned ar
finished:
Bulk Order are guaranteed to be available
rested, or they may have special viewing
your documents have special viewing
• Enquire at the information Desk to arrange access
fe documents are in use elsewhere - Enquire at the
on Desk for full details
