pg_0045.pdf:
V10326 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
38
26. Rules for the passage of bridges and defiles
1. A staff officer will usually be detailed to supervise the
passage by a column of an important bridge, defile or obstacle.
This officer will regulate the flow of traffic and will make any
arrangements necessary for the further action of units on the
far side of the obstacle. An officer of each unit will remain
on the near side of the bridge, defile or obstacle to control the
movement of the unit until the whole of it has passed. Troops
and transport awaiting passage must not close up and if
forced to halt for any length of time must clear the road. If
the locality is particularly favourable to air attack slit trenches
should be prepared in the neighbourhood of the road. To
facilitate traffic control, control posts placed at a suitable
distance on either side should be in telephonic communication
with the bridge or defile.
2. Where engineer work on the passage is necessary, the
staff officer will issue his orders in co-operation with the
engineer officer in charge of the work. The responsibility of
the engineer officer for the crossing arrangements extends
only between the extreme limits of the bridge, or between the
banks of the river when the crossing is by raft or ferry.
The maintenance of a bridge remains the responsibility
of the engineer unit which constructed it, until further orders
are issued.
3. The classification of military bridges is given in the
supplement to Part I. Since each type of bridge is designed
to carry a specified load, careful arrangements are necessary
to prevent the passage on to the bridge of any load greater
than that which it is designed to bear. Unit commanders are
responsible that the normal loads of vehicles are not exceeded.
To facilitate the allotment of vehicles to suitable routes all
bridges and vehicles are classified in similar weight groups.
The figure indicating the group is marked on the front of every
vehicle and on the approach to every bridge.
4. The passage of military bridges involves single line traffic
and a speed not exceeding 10 m.p.h. There is likely also to be
a limitation on the number of vehicles that can be on the
bridge at one time. This may affect the density of traffic:
27. Movement of troops by M.T.
1. Reserve transport may be allotted to formations for the
carriage of marching personnel. Used tactically there are very
great advantages to be gained. Compared with a train,
however, movement by M.T. is less economical, congests the
V10326 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

