pg_0021.pdf:
V10326 (20) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
14
6. Orders for moves by road
Whenever possible, marching and mechanized columns
should be allotted separate roads.
When this is not possible,
arrangements should be made for mechanized columns to move
forward after the marching columns have reached their
destination, or to move through the latter while they are
halted clear of the road:
2. A warning order giving the approximate earliest time of
start should be issued as early as possible. Orders for the
move of reconnaissance or advance parties, or for the establish-
ment of control posts for M.T. moves, which will asually have
to be issued in advance of operation orders, may be combined
with the warning order.
3. In an operation order for a move by road, troops will
normally be detailed in their order of movement. If, however,
a separate commander is appointed for a body of troops,
e.g. an advanced guard, he will be specified and the troops
placed under his command will be detailed in order of
seniority of arms and units, thei. order of march being left to
the commander to arrange.
The detail of troops will be shown either in the body of the
order or on a separate march or movement table attached to
the order as an appendix.
A specimen march table is given
at Appendix II.
Separate tables should be prepared for
mechanized and for marching columns. If both types of
column are using the same road a cross reference must be made
showing the total time and space taken up by the other
column. A specimen table for use when troops are moved
by M.T. is given in Appendix 111.
The preparation of orders for the move of mechanized
columns requires a knowledge of certain technical con-
siderations which are discussed in Appendix VII.
To keep operation orders for a move as simple as possible,
matter that applies generally to all moves of a formation or
unit should be included in its standing orders. Many points,
however, are adequately dealt with in Field Service Pocket
Book, Pamphlet No. 6, Mechanized Movement by Road.
4. When a formation is to move, a starting point, which
the head of the main body is to pass at a certain time, is laid
down in the operation order. If troops are not all quartered
together it may be necessary for the commander to fix more
V10326 (20) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

