pg_0018.pdf:
V10326 (17) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
11
messages the appointment and formation will not be given
after the signature.
Detailed instructions for drafting orders
and messages are given in Chapter Ill.
• 3. No matter how complete, how appropriate and how
correctly drawn up a written order may be, it fails of its
purpose it it does not arrive in time. The commander who
issues an order is responsible that it reaches his subordinates
in time to enable them to make all the necessary preparations,
including reconnaissances and the framing and issue of their
own orders, before troops are committed to action in execution
of the order. When detailed operation orders cannot be issued
in sufficient time to enable the troops to make these necessary
preparations, a " warning order"
should be issued, which
should givesufficient information to enable preparations to begin.
4. In deciding upon the form of orders the recipient must be
considered; and also the possibly adverse conditions under
which he will have to read orders.
Matter affecting only some
of the addressees should be shown in an appendix with a
correspondingly limited distribution.
5. A recognized form and sequence should always be
followed as closely as practicable, since this makes important
omissions less likely, and assists subordinates, who can more
easily grasp the meaning of an order issued in a form with
which they are familiar.
The form is as follows, though headings which are not
relevant should be omitted, particularly when orders are sent
by telegraph or wireless.
SECRET.
Operation Order No.
Copy No..
Date .
...
(Formation or Unit)
Ref. Map...
INFORMATION
Regarding the enemy.—A summary of the information on
which the plan is based, so far as the recipients require to
know it, and any reasonable deductions from the information
so given.
Regarding our own troops.—A summary of the situation and
intentions of any neighbouring troops, whose action may affect
V10326 (17) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

