pg_0093.pdf:
V10326 (92) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
86
is not readily visible to the driver of the vehicle in
rear, a man will at once be dismounted from the broken
down vehicle. He will move towards the vehicle in
rear and signal it to PASS. He will continue to carry
out this duty until relieved by a patrol from a T.C.P.
iv. Turning.—When tactical conditions allow, vehicles
should not normally be turned about on a road less
than 25-ft. wide. Suitable fields can sometimes be
use with advantages for this purplete cie generally
v. Concealment.—At all halts use must be made of available
cover. If cover or camouflage is not possible, vehicles
must be scattered in irregular formation.
3. Halts
i. Frequency of halts.—For administrative convenience
vehicles should halt for short periods at least every
three hours, and for a longer period after seven hours.
This allows maintenance to be carried out and the
necessary rest and meal times for personnel. In
practice, owing to the necessity of seeking cover from
the air, long halts will have to be arranged in localities
where cover can be found. Such localities must be
reconnoitred beforehand; they must, if possible, be
occupied without being observed, and must be so
organized that movement can be restarted smoothly
and without delay. When unforeseen halts have to
be made, for tactical reasons or because the route is
blocked, it is essential to avoid congesting and obstruct-
ing other traffic. Vehicles should be halted off the
road when possible, or if that is not possible, well into
the side.
ii. Action of troops at halts.—All personnel may debus
during any but emergency halts. No unnecessary
movement will take place. Personnel will re-embus
two minutes before the advance is due to begin. At
all halts A.A., L.M.Gs. and A.Tk. weapons will be sited
and manned.
iii. Inspection at halts.—At short halts junior and non•
commissioned officers and drivers will carry out
inspections. If vehicles are closed up, the N.C.O.
at the rear of each group will work forward and report
correct or otherwise. In independent running each
driver will inspect his own vehicle when he halts.
V10326 (92) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

