pg_0028.pdf:
V10326 (27) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
21
7. The text.—This will begin with the originator's dis-
tinguishing letter and number in the appropriate space.
Distinguishing letters are given in Appendix IV.
may employ any combination of letters up tetters are allotter
provided they have not already been allotted and do not give
any indication of the identity of the sender, his unit or
formation.
8. The distinguishing letters will be followed by a number
which will be the serial number of outgoing messages from the
office or appointment held by the originator. A series will be
repeated on reaching the figure 9999.
In the date space the day of the month only will be given.
The month and year will not be shown.
9. In the text each of the following will be written in one
space :—
i. A word, letter or figure.
ii. An abbreviated word.
iii. A combination of letters or figures meaning one thing.
iv. A cipher group (up to five letters or figures).
v. The sign indicating the full stop (see para. 12, below).
10. Roman numerals and mathematical signs (e.g. those for
yards, feet, inches, degrees, percentages, plus and minus)
cannot be telegraphed and must be replaced by words or
recognized abbreviations (e.g. yds., ft.).
11. Letters, letter-ciphers and important words will be
written in block letters; otherwise capitals will not be used.
Underlining and the use of dashes and oblique strokes should
be resorted to only when absolutely necessary, e.g. " W/T"
" night 2/3 sep."
The use of parentheses is forbidden, i.e
" Area HARTLEY ROW 2076-PHOENIX GREEN 2075"
and
not "Area HARTLEY ROW (2076) - PHOENIX
GREEN (2075) "
12. Punctuation.—A full stop will be indicated by o but
when the message is typed the ordinary full stop "
" may be
used. In neither case must anything else be written or typed
in the space.
No stop is required at the end of the text.
Other punctuation signs are not transmitted in signal messages;
care must be taken that their omission does not alter the sense
of the message.
13. Acknowledgments.—If an acknowledgment is required
from those who have to take action on the message the
expression "ack" will be written at the end of the message.
V10326 (27) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

