pg_0015.pdf:
V10326 (14) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
8
inform the intermediate authorities concerned and neigh-
bouring formations likely to be affected. The recipient of the
order will inform his immediate superior of its receipt and of
the action taken on it.
7. Occasions may arise when orders are lacking, but when
it is evident that some action is essential. Success will then
depend on the initiative and powers of decision of subordinate
commanders,
who must always be ready to accept
responsibility.
4. The issue of operation orders
1. The success of an operation will depend largely on the
speedy preparation, issue and execution of orders.
In order to minimize delay in the preparation and execution
of orders the following points require attention :—
i. All those required to assist the commander in the
preparation of his plan, with advice, or by
reconnaissance, must be immediately
available
when wanted.
ii. Since the preparation of orders in all formations and
units is to some extent dependent on the receipt of
orders from above, every commander must
endeavour to keep his subordinates supplied with
sufficient information to ensure that the work of
preparation proceeds simultaneously throughout
the chain of command.
iii. Where troops have to move a considerable distance to
their battle positions they must, consistent with
the need for secrecy, be given early warning in
order that the move, particularly of commanders,
may begin in advance of final orders allo ting the
actual tasks in battle. This principle applies
equally to preliminary moves of ammunition and
other stores.
Time will nearly always be saved by the issue of a short
warning order. Such an order can often direct troops to
move to rendezvous preparatory to deployment. It should
generally give a brief warning of the operation to be undertaken,
orders as to any preparatory action necessary and a statement
as to whom operation orders will be issued. It will usually
be telegraphic in form and should start with the words
" Warning Order."
2. A commander can save time, and can impress his will and
inspire confidence in the success of an operation far more
V10326 (14) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

