pg_0040.pdf:
V10326 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
33
when the message is urgent and it is considered that the
information is likely to be of little value by the time the enemy
can act upon it.
The possibility of a message containing
valuable information for the future use of the enemy must
always be considered. Apparently harmless administrative
messages sent in clear may enable the enemy to deduce the
presence of fresh troops in an area or the nature of future
plans.
4. The following rules are given for guidance in the use of
wireless : —
i. Wireless telegraphy
(a) Messages by W/T will normally be sent in cipher.
All headquarters in the field which may require
to use cipher are provided with the means of
enciphering and deciphering messages. The use
of any unauthorized cipher is forbidden.
(b) In rear of and between brigade headquarters,
messages may be franked to be sent AS WRITTEN
by officers
authorized to frank
"emergency
operations " messages, when speed is vital and it
is considered that the enemy cannot take effective
action on the message if intercepted.
(c) In front of brigade headquarters, messages dealing
with operations in progress, when contact with the
enemy has been made, may be franked by any
officer to be sent AS WRITTEN. Code names will
however be used (see para. 4, below) and
precautions taken to prevent the enemy obtaining
information.
ii. Radio telephony
(a) In rear of and between divisional headquarters,
R/T may be used only by officers authorized to
frank " emergency operations" messages.
(b) In front of divisional headquarters, all officers may
use R/T, provided that they observe
the
precautions described below.
(c) The use of R/T requires considerable attention
and practice to avoid giving away valuable
information by the careless mention of times,
places and names of units.
The danger can be
largely overcome by thinking out the wording of
the message, and making notes of it, before starting
a conversation. References to the paragraphs of
V10326 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

