pg_0016.pdf:
V10326 (15) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
easily through verbal orders, if well issued, than by pages of
written orders. He will, therefore, often find it desirable to
assemble his subordinate commanders before an operation to
explain his plan and issue his orders. If all subordinate
commanders cannot be assembled at the same time, he must
issue his verbal orders more than once.
Conferences at which orders are issued must not be allowed
to eves that o ay besionired should be held before the
orders are issued.
When issuing verbal orders, commanders will employ the
same sequence as written orders (see Sec. 5). Indefinite or
badly delivered verbal orders may do much to destroy confi-
dence in success.
When there is adequate time, verbal orders will be confirmed
in writing. It is, however, a waste of time to confirm in writing
orders on which action has already been completed.
Verbal
orders should be checked before the recipients depart from the
conference whenever possible. This can be done by checking
marked maps and notes and especially in the case of units
and sub-units by making recipients in turn repeat portions
of the order.
3. The method of issuing orders will vary in accordance
with the nature of the situation. Commanders and staff will
adopt the quickest and surest method applicable to the
circumstances. The following are some of the methods which
may be employed :—
i. Orders may be sent by liaison officers, due care being
taken to ensure that marked maps do not fall into
enemy hands. Orders to armoured formations
and units may often be issued by R/T.
ii. Orders may be issued in more than one stage, an outline
plan being issued first to allow
subordinate
commanders to begin their preliminary arrange-
ments, followed later by either verbal or written
orders.
iii. Outline orders can sometimes be issued in writing
immediately before verbal orders are given out.
Ample space should be left between paragraphs in
which details can be filled in.
iv. Orders given out verbally can be taken down by a
staff officer and, if suitable arrangements for
V10326 (15) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

