pg_0043.pdf:
V10326 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
36
of well disciplined troops can be expected to cover greater
distances should the necessity for a forced march arise.
Large bodies of horsemen, such as a cavalry division, will
average 25 to 30 miles a day, and can cover 40 miles a day as a
special effort.
24. The responsibility of the staff
1. Staff arrangements which affect the comfort of the troops
are the hour of starting, the selection and marking of the route,
traffic control, the provision of halts, good quartering
dispositions and the regulation of the movement of maintenance
echelons, so that the troops receive their food, baggage and
blankets with the least possible delay.
2. In fixing the hour of starting, time should be allowed,
if the situation permits, for the men to have a meal without
hurry. It must be remembered that, with a marching force,
troops will have to begin preparations some two hours before
the time laid down for passing a starting point. Where a force
has to take up tactical dispositions on completion of a march
it will be necessary to arrange the hour of start so that
sufficient daylight is left at the other end ; where, on the other
hand, a force is required to move into a staging or concentration
area at the end of a march, it is often advisable to arrange the
hour of start so that troops arrive at their destination just after
dark and thus escape air observation.
The danger of air attack will often make it necessary for
some or all of a move to be carried out by night.
3. March formations
Normal march formations Road space when threatened
on a road
by air attack
i. For all vehicles, column
Density of 10 to 20 v.t.m.
of route, i.e. single file.
ii. For cavalry, column of
half sections, i.e. two
horses abreast opened out
on either side of the road.
iii. For infantry, column of
route, i.e. threes, opened
out on either side of the
Two yards per horse in
the ranks.
Distances
of 10 yards between
troops.
Two yards for three men.
Distances of 10 yards
between platoons.
road.
iv. For cyclists, half sections
i.e. two men abreast,
rule of the road side of
Three yards for two men.
Distance of 10 yards
between platoons.
the road.
V10326 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

