pg_0013.pdf:
V10326 (12) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
3. Operation orders
The object of operation orders is to bring about a course of
action in accordance with the intentions of the commander
and with full co-operation between all arms and services.
Further rules for their issue are given in Secs. 3, 4 and 5.
4. Operation instructions
Operation instructions are used instead of, or to supplement,
operation orders when it is necessary to place a subordinate
commander in a position in which he must act on his own
judgment. These instructions will give the subordinate
commander all
available information likely to affect the
performance of his task, and will state clearly the object to
be attained, but will leave the methods to his discretion.
They should include a brief statement of the courses open to
the enemy, and of his probable action, as well as a forecast of
the action of the commander issuing the instruction.
Operation instructions should be sparingly used. They will
usually be couched in less formal terms than orders. When
special considerations of secrecy demand it, such instructions
may be addressed to a commander personally. If it is essential
that a commander should be informed of the scope of an
operation instruction issued to another commander, a copy of
the instruction may be issued to him for information.
5. Administrative orders
The matters on which administrative orders may be necessary
are given in Appendix I. The staff is responsible that heads
of services and their representatives are kept informed of so
much of the intentions of the commander as it may be necessary
for them to know in order that they may carry out their work
eftciently.
3. Orders for operations. General principles
1. An order must contain only what the recipient requires
to know in order to carry out his task. An attempt to prescribe
to a subordinate commander at a distance anything that he,
with a fuller knowledge of local conditions, should be able to
decide on the spot will be avoided.
2. In framing orders for operations, the general principle
is that the object to be attained, with such information as
aftects its attainment, will be briefly but clearly stated: the
actual method of attaining the object will be given in sufficient
detail to ensure co-ordination of effort, but so as not to interfere
V10326 (12) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

