On 23rd February, 1941, before planning for the arrival of the British
Army force, the brigadier in charge of administration (designate) arrived in
Athens to explore the general situation and possibilities.
task since it was, indeed, not yet certain that British Army formations would
be sent and, for reasons of secrecy, all preparations had to be made under
the guise of providing additional units for the R.A.F. (There were in fact
Army units already in Greece.
They were ancillary to an
which had for some time been located in Greece under the
" Barbarity".)
The commander-designate (General Sir Henry
Maitland Wilson) arrived about a week later and the brigadier General Staff
did not arrive till 7th March, so for some days, there was not even a
responsible General Staff officer with whom the chief administrative officer
could begin his planning.
Contact with the Greek authorities had to be
made through the Greek element of the British Military Mission in Athens-
a most laborious procedure but direct contact was expressly forbidden. H.Q.,
"Barbarity" Force) was in buildings in Athens but the British
naval staff elements ashore, under a rear-admiral who was also joint com-
mander of the British Military Mission, were scattered in the Piraeus port
area, several miles from Athens.
Until the G.O.C. arrived it could not even be decided whether his com-
paratively large headquarters should be located in Athens itself or outside.
Inside Athens, convenient accommodation was
available, with
communications, and close contact was easy with the Greek G.H.Q.
disadvantage was the certainty that if Athens were bombed, civil communi-
cations would immediately vanish; on the other hand if G.H.Q. had to be
on a bivouac basis outside Athens, communications would be most difficult
to instal and necessarily meagre.
In preparing to obtain the decision of the
GO.C. on this point, every endeavour was made to persuade the R.A.F.
authorities that, whichever solution was adopted, the primarly operational
and administrative staffs of the Army and of the R.A.F. should be housed
their services accommodated as near as possible in outlying
It was hoped first to reach
R.A.F. and then subsequently to request the rear-admiral to conform, with
his immediate staff, or at least his sea transport officer.
arrived he decided that Army H.O. should be in a hotel in Athens itself,
but the effort to get the R.A.F. operational staff to join them failed and they
remained a considerable distance away in another quarter of the town.
The Greek Army depended on pack transport, some carts and a very
It was lacking, judged by British standards. in weapons of all
natures, and the ration was little more than black bread.
Even so, away from the railway, or from a port, its maintenance was labori-
compared with equivalent British formations.
ous and out of the mountains, its mobility, except by rail, was that of a snail.
It was therefore suitable only for mountain warfare.
In early March, 1941,
there were some 200,000 Greeks fighting the Italians on the Albanian front.
Half of these were maintained by coastal boats trom Athens to small ports
on the west coast and thence by road.
tained from Athens and Salonite bu the railway to Floring which ran round
The remaining 100,000 were main-
the north of Mount Olympus and the Aliakhmon position.
The Greek plan
156
WO2T7
18
was to stock up depots at Florina by rail with 30 days for 100,000 men but
they were not hopeful of achieving even this small amount owing to shortage
of both material and rolling stock.
The Greek divisions facing Bulgaria on the Macedonian border were also
maintained by rail, largely from Athens, and this railway ran dangerously
close to the Bulgarian border.
The few remaining Greek troops in the
centre were for the most part dependent on small depots at Larissa which
were maintained by rail from Athens.
The Greek Army was therefore using its railways almost to maximum
capacity, the country had already been denuded of every animal, cart and
motor vehicle which was fit for use, the military authorities had taken con-
trol of all small ships and practically all caiques and finally, the available civil
labour (men, women and children) were nearly all employed on road mainten-
ance.
The civil population, moreover, was already short of food; there
was no meat and flour was short and the Army even had to feed wheat
pack animals owing to the shortage of barley.
The British Military
Mission had placed large orders for equipment, stores, food, coal, etc. on the
United Kingdom but although occasional ships were arriving from Britain
their arrival could certainly not be predicted with any confidence.
From
the Greek point of view, therefore, the cupboard was nearly bare of local
resources, while from the British, nothing at all was available.
Early Administrative Arrangements
Before there was either command or General Staff, or even a plan, G.H.Q.,
Middle East had laid down that the main base would be in the Piraeus-
Athens area, that Salonika would not be used, and that the advance base
would be at Larissa some 200 miles from Athens by road or rail (see
There was a strong probability that a defensive position on the
"Aliakhmon Line" would be manned but, in the early stages, administrative
action could not possibly extend as far as putting anything on the ground
As it was most difficult to obtain rail capacity from the Greeks, and
as troops and stores would soon be competing for such space as was avail-
able, the first action taken was to send forward to Larissa such small stocks
of supplies,
ammunition etc.,
as "Barbarity"
Force had already avail-
able in the Athens area.
These were dumped alongside the railway at
Larissa until such time as advanced depots could be sited, transport provided,
and railway sidings constructed with materials imported from Egypt.
Action was then taken to
review
the somewhat "hit-or-miss" plans
made in Cairo for the lay-out of both base and advanced depots, to organize
the reception of the troops, to endeavour to get hold of caiques, and to
explore
the possibilities
of using other ports to save congestion and as
alternatives in case the port of Piraeus was put out of action by bombing.
It also
seemed obvious that some first-line pack transport would have to
be provided for fighting in the mountains.
It was not necessary to order stores because G.H.Q. Middle East had
already arranged to ship all essentials for the whole force for 90 days and
demanding provision
was
not normally to be the responsibility of force
H.Q. until it was properly established.
157
