The instructions to the Brigadier commanding
the troops which were
to make the initial landing at Narvik, contained in
" Avonmouth " Operation
Order No. 1 dated 12th April, included the following terse administrative
paragraph: —
" It is not possible at the present moment to issue any definite adminis-
trative instructions for the force."
The Brigadier together with his brigade, however,
diverted to Namsos, so it was perhaps just as well that no further points
of administrative responsibility had been imparted to him.
Furthermore,
on arrival, the " Q
" staff, neither hampered by paper nor having to issue
involved written instructions, were able to deal with the very fluid situation
by means of short conferences and verbal orders. Thus, albeit fortuitously,
an immense amount of time was saved because problems could be solved
on the spot by common-sense decisions taken only on the basis of the
conditions prevailing at the moment.
The decision to divert certain troops of " Avonmouth" to the central
Norway operations was made because it was still thought that little or no
opposition would be experienced in effecting a landing at Narvik.
On the
other hand, the re-capture of Trondheim
was now considered the major
task in Norway for both political and military
Trondheim meant a safe harbour with quays and docks upon which an army
of 50,000 men or more could be based. Nearby was an airfield from which
several fighter squadrons could operate.
opened with Sweden, which would greatly improve the chances of Swedish
intervention or the degree of mutual aid if Sweden herself was attacked.
From Trondheim alone the northward advance of the German invasion from
Oslo could be securely barred.
stormed or reduced at leisure, and would all the while be protected.
In fact even when the expedition left the River Clyde it was not known
that the enemy had occupied Narvik where the force was to be established,
and not before the military commander (Major-General P. J. Mackesy) landed
and made contact with the Norwegian Army at Bardu (North of Narvik)
was it learnt that the enemy were holding Narvik itself in strength.
As his depleted force had embarked for a peaceful landing at a friendly
and organized port General Mackesy, despite naval pressure,
re-organizing it before he would undertake active operations.
• to carry out this re-organization at Harstad, which was a port in the Lofoten
On 14th April contact was made with the civil authorities at Harstad
and it was found that, although the port suffered from many disadvantages,
it would be possible to use it not only for this purpose but also as a base.
The staff had, of course, little choice in the matter and it was a relief
to find that the facilities available were somewhat greater
On 15th April, the first steps were taken to set up the base organization,
and a small H.Q. was installed at the Grand Hotel.
was later dispersed around the town-
The main headquarters
by a bomb.) Three things were essential.
-just before the hotel was demolished
(a) To clear the transports as soon as possible.
(b) To get everyone cover by night.
(c) To be as tactful as possible with the Harstad authorities and avoid
causing unnecessary hardship to a small town which had never before
been visited by British troops.
The local inhabitants were generally helpful although they showed no
signs of enthusiasm at the projected activity. The fact that the enemy had,
the day before, machine-gunned the town from the air, rather tended, how-
ever, to soften the blow of the British landing.
It was quite impracticable to proceed on the ordinary lines and allot so
much of the town to different units or installations. Only a small party could
go ashore in the first instance.
The distances between the shore and the
various ships were considerable and there were no communications so that
it was not possible to call reconnaissance parties forward from the units.
Further, the many changes in the composition of the expedition since leaving
Scotland had resulted in the almost unbelievable situation in that the H.Q.
staff could not determine with any accuracy what units were actually in the
convoy and available for the force.
to proceed upon unorthodox lines.
The laying-out of the base had therefore
Each individual in the advance party
was given responsibility for the accommodation of various units, and it was
hoped that should these units finally materialize on shore, some sort of
accommodation would be waiting for them.
On 15th April the convoys began to ofi-load the personnel, transport and
stores. No time had been available for any preliminary organization because
the Royal Navy insisted
on immediate disembarkation.
All stores and
supplies were ferried to the shore by local craft and destroyers, and unloaded
on to the three small quays in complete confusion without regard to sorting
or destination of the goods or to the capacity of the quays.
The small move-
ment control staff ashore had had no opportunity to organize any dock work-
ing, and the almost entire absence of civilian transport made it inevitable
that the docks soon became congested with a mixture of all kinds of baggage,
supplies and stores which had to be sorted and cleared as soon as possible.
The scarcity of civilian vehicles accentuated the lack of military transport
in possession of units with the result that any vehicle military or civilian—
which drove within view of the docks was immediately misappropriated by
the nearest unit with complete disregard either to the ethics of the urgency of
the situation.
Organization of the Base and L. of C.
However, after two or three days hard work, various base units gradually
took shape, although they were much overworked with receiving their stores
in such confusion.
No attempt had been made to load craft from ships by
commodities and it was thus impossible to check stocks or to keep any tally
of quantities receive was large number of cases were broken by unnecessarly
rough handling.
Already some bombs had been dropped on the port and on
roush handling. Arcady so any consequence had been reported, although.
inevitably some delay in off-loading had resulted.
By 18th April, unloading of the transports had been completed and the
quays almost cleared. Force H.Q. had been installed in the town and the
