however, the perpetual shortage of transport which increased the unavoid.
able difficulties arising out of the
use of a port with no adequate shore
facilities such as cranes, a marked shortage of lighters, no ship-repair facilities
and, above all, a hurriedly assembled and inexperienced staff.
As in Greece, air alarms in the port were abolished and work continued
until an attack took place, each small detachment or working party taking
cover when they thought it essential.
At a later stage, however, the scale
and suddenness of dive-bombing attack became so great that the presence
of enemy aircraft in the neighbourhood resulted in the stoppage of all work.
Resort was made to night work, but in the absence of an elaborate, well-
system this could not be expected to yield much result.
particular, a large proportion of the ships being discharged were damaged
by hits or near misses and in nearly every case the engines ceased to function.
were no auxiliary engines in working order for the winches and
no ancillary lighting system, power had then to be provided by putting a
small ship alongside.
However, the civilian crews generally abandoned
their ships, and soldiers acting as winchmen and stevedores found great
difficulty in organizing their work in the dark without assistance.
There were also many other questions such as the slow turn-round of
transport in the depots as well as in the port, provision of guards and
military police, provision of hot tea and meals for labour, stevedores and
transport drivers, and the organization of air defence, medical arrangements
and fire-fighting
In Suda, as formerly in Piraeus, it was found
necessary to appoint a senior combatant officer for general supervision of
the port area without interfering with the technical working.
It had been hoped that a clearance figure of 30,000 tons a month might
be attained, and this was indeed set as the target, to meet essential current
needs and build up reserves.
At the same time the inherent difficulties were
fully appreciated and it was recognized that some 20,000 might have to
The first plan to have a fortnightly convoy was amended to clearing
two fairly fast ships of 2,500 tons each weekly, with an additional specially
loaded ship cleared at Heraklion fortnightly, chiefly for Greek needs.
To the greatest possible extent supply to sectors was made by sea rather
than by road owing to the shortage of transport, but this alternative gradually
fell away in capacity-Greek crews would not man their ships or caiques,
and lighters broke down and were sunk. Volunteer military crews were
called for, and some were actually employed, but the difficulties were legion.
Tymbaki and Selinos were the only places on the south coast served by
Owing to enemy action Tymbaki was only accessible to the Heraklion
sector and Selinos was rendered completely inaccessible.
Hopes of getting
through to other places-notably Sphakia—by the
quick construction of
new roads were doomed to disappointment.
was typical of the
south coast of Crete; the road ended at the top of an escarpment leaving
five miles of mule-tracks to the coast.)
When shipping losses at Suda became acute, anti-aircraft defences were
concentrated in an " umbrella" over the pier and quay.
But the majority
of ships sent from Egypt were either sunk on the way or burnt out in
Bay, and it soon became evident that maintenance through Suda
with the type of ships available was not possible.
As in Greece the only
208
WO217
1
alternative was a daily delivery of small quantities by fast ships, arriving,
discharging and escaping under cover of darkness, but for this neither the
ships nor their escorts were available, and for the delivery of much-needed
vehicles it was not a feasible proposition at all. As a last resort it was
planned to run one convoy of three ships ashore in Suda Bay, relying on
fire-fighting squads to prevent their destruction by burning while night clear-
Suda Bay had to be abandoned to the enemy before
this plan could be tried, but it is doubtful whether it would have succeeded.
The Heraklion sector never ran short of food and was, it seems, success-
fully supplied by air on a very small scale with some ammunition and
medical stores after the first delivery had dropped in the sea.
every effort the situation at Retimo was not retrieved owing to the enemy
post in the churchyard astride the road just west of it.
at air dropping failed, and delivery by caiques and lighters was also attempted
The New Zealanders, although reinforced by troops from the Suda sector,
were gradually driven back, Force H.Q. itself had to withdraw into Suda,
and it became apparent that Suda Bay could not be held and that evacuation
The rescue of the garrisons at Heraklion and Retimo
would, however, have to be controlled by G.H.Q. Middle East, there being
no routes by which they could join the rest of the force.
was, in fact, successfully evacuated by the Royal Navy, who boldly sailed
round to the port and got away, albeit with considerable casualties at sea.
The Retimo garrison, on the other hand, could not be reached in this way,
and a plan for them to withdraw and cross
the island to the southern
beaches could not be carried out owing chiefly to poor signal communica-
In the end they were forced to capitulate.
some 20,000 strong, composed on the whole of ill-armed or unarmed
individuals, withdrew south from Suda Bay with evacuation from Sphakia
Except for the formed fighting units, the retreat developed
into a continuous day-and-night march by small parties, in an orderly but
The enemy, in hot pursuit, managed to cut up many
of the successive rear-guards but his air attacks were luckily confined to
the daylight hours and were not pushed home as strongly as might have
In the Suda-Maleme area distribution of food and such ammunition as
existed was achieved until the very last although the sudden orders for with-
drawal precluded adequate preparation.
The last consignment of supplies
and ammunition delivered by warship to Suda was cleared to the first planned
staging area. Here some rations and petrol were also brought back from the
Suda Bay depots, but the lack of proper control of M.T., and the rapidity of
the withdrawal which passed through the base depot area made it impossible
to form any dumps further south on the Sphakia road either from stocks
existing in the north or delivered at Suda.
All withdrawing fighting troops
were told to bring back three days' rations with them and this, in the main,
It was hoped to get supplies ashore at Sphakia from the ships arriving to
evacuate personnel and 15,000 rations were asked for in this manner, but
