In July, 1939, approval was given for the embodiment of the Reserve
and the outbreak of war with Germany found the Somaliland Camel Corps
composed of two camel companies which included two pony troops, and
one (Nyasaland) rifle company.
This tiny force was disposed so that the
towns of Burao and Hargeisa could be covered by mounted units while
the Sheikh Pass and Tug Argan Gap were held by dismounted companies
and machine guns.
In October some valuable reinforcements were received
from Southern Rhodesia, but apart from these, no more were received until
mid-May, 1940.
A request by the British garrison to the War Office for
the enlistment of fifty additional men in the Camel Corps was made in
September, 1939, but not approved till the spring of 1940, while General
1940, that the two camel
companies be mechanized was not approved until May, 1940.
In December, 1939, the Chiefs of Staff were informed by Middle East
Command in no uncertain terms that our present plan was hardly consistent
with our obligations to the French, who had constructed strong defences
at Jibuti; and was detrimental to our prestige.
in principle to alter the defence policy of British Somilaland to the defence
and in the last resort to Berbera, and instructed General
Wavell to make the plans necessary to implement this policy, in conjunction
with the French.
This mandate was, however, accompanied by the proviso
that no troops were to be moved into the protectorate without prior sanction
from London, " in order that the effect of such a movement on our relations
with Italy can be studied, and the necessary notification can be given to
the Italian Government" (sic).
As a natural corollary of this decision, on 13th January, 1940, the troops
in British Somaliland came under full operational control of G.H.Q., Middle
Responsibility for administrative control remained, however, with the
Colonial Office,
whose only contribution to the defence plan had been the
aforementioned £900.
of his assumption of operational command
Somaliland, General Wavell visited the Protectorate and also discussed the
question of defence with the French commander, who incidentally had been
General Wavell was convinced that, with relatively
small reinforcements, both the French and British territories could be held
and that such a course would be a distinct advantage since, by so doing,
the roads and railways would remain in our hands and would constitute the
best line of invasion when operations were
subsequently began against
At the same time he recommended the reinforcement of British
Somaliland by one rifle battalion at once and, in the event of worsening
relations with Italy, of a further battalion and a battery of artillery.
authorized by the Colonial Office had now been spent and
the defences were far from complete, so he also recommended further sums
for defences and roads. It seemed to him that the weak points in the
Allied plans were the passes of Dobo and Jirre in French Somilaland from
which roads led down to Zeilah.
Should the enemy penetrate these passes
he would be in a position to split the British and French forces.
the French commander was unable to obtain permission from the French
Colonial Office to fortify both these passes, on the grounds that Jirre was
WO2T7
too far away from Jibuti, so that all he could do was to place a detachment
at Jirre without constructing defence, while preparations were made to block
the road through the Dobo defile by demolitions.
Approval in principle by the War Office of General Wavell's recom-
mendations was one thing but achievement quite another, and reinforcement
Although approval in principle for reinforcement by
one battalion had been given in January, 1940, it was not until 9th March
that authority was received for it to move.
Then difficulty in providing
shipping intervened, so that it was not until 15th May that the reinforcing
troops began disembarkation at Berbera.
Various other difficulties arose
to hinder the move of the second battalion and the battery of artillery, and
although approval in principle had been given on 20th April, they did not
arrive until 12th July.
Finally, there was no sign of the special equipment
and authorization for the further expenditure on roads and defences sought
by the garrison commander from the colonial office many months before.
Fortunately administrative control passed to G.H.Q., Middle East, on lst
June, 1940, and so the necessary urgent steps could be taken.
Up to the end of July operations were confined to raids on our part on
the enemy's frontier posts. As elsewhere these raids were almost uniformly
successful in spite of the numerical superiority of the Italians. On 17th June,
however, news arrived of the French armistice, and assurances were quickly
sought and obtained from the French in Jibuti that they would fight on.
These assurances were reiterated in July and they would no doubt have been
honoured had it not been for the Vichy Government's action in sending out
a replacement commander with orders to cease hostilities.
had considered our position, in such an event, untenable and had ordered
plans to be prepared for evacuation in such a case; but the garrison was
confident that, with the promised reinforcements in sight the position was
by no means hopeless. However, on 23rd July, the new French commander
arrived in Jibuti and assumed office as Governor of French Somaliland, and
the whole of the Italian Eastern Army thereupon became available for
operations solely against the British Territory.
decision whether to evacuate or stay and fight. If the garrison was increased
to five battalions, there was a good chance of holding our positions, and in
view of the fact that withdrawal without fighting would be more detrimental
to our prestige than withdrawal after attack, the decision was taken to rein-
The fifth battalion was ordered to the Protectorate, and
two 3-inch A.A. guns were sent from Aden to Berbera, where anti-aircraft
protection of the port was sorely needed.
The Italian attack began on 4th August and, in spite of considerable
losses inflicted upon him by the delaying elements of our forces, the enemy
Then began a series of gallant delaying actions, but the eventual
Our artillery consisted of only four 3.7-inch
howitzers and our anti-tank armament against Italian medium tanks was
one naval 3-pounder gun against which the Italians could muster four groups
of pack artillery and two groups of medium guns, of which they made the
On 11th August, Major-General Godwin-Austen arrived to take
over command, but four days later it was clear that a retreat on Berbera and
subsequent evacuation was the only solution unless the probable loss of a
large proportion of the force was to be accepted.
