miles by short sea route the distance from Cairo to the following places are:
Port
Sudan 1,460 miles, Mombasa
3.600 miles,
Khartoum
1,350 miles,
Tobruk 450 miles.
Present Situation
The following factors are paramount in the situation as it now exists.
(i)
British
Forces in Egypt are operating in a country
which is a
sovereign state but is not at war with Germany.
Egyptian Govern-
ment controls railways over which our base movements are made
and to a great extent also the port at which our stores are dis-
embarked.
(ii)
The closing of the
Mediterranean for all practical purposes has
greatly increased the length of voyage from Great Britain to Egypt
and thereby has automatically
accentuated both the need for im-
provisation and the shortage of resources referred to above.
(i) The possibility of a heavy scale attack on the Canal, thereby putting
it out of action for considerable and increasing periods, will have
the effect of robbing Egypt of two of its three ports.
case congestion will be unavoidable as, for the time being at any
rate, ports available in southern Egypt and/or the
be unable to unload all shipments.
(iv)
The labour question presents
There is ample civil
Egyptian labour available in the Delta Area for use in ports and
depots in Egypt.
By agreement with the Egyptian Government,
Egyptians were not
recruited for general service in labour units though they were willing to
allow Egyptian Army labour companies to be raised for use in Egypt only.
Labour units for general service have therefore had to be raised and
imported from Cyprus and India and
proposals are on
additional units from East and South Africa.
Egyptian civil labour is liable to panic under bombing as instanced at
Alexandria a few days ago.
Until sufficient uniformed labour is available
the working of the ports may be liable to periods of interruption under
bombing
Further it must be borne in mind that should a
policy of non-co-operation be adopted on the part of the Egyptians at any
time, we should have the utmost difficulty in unloading vessels and in
transporting the cargoes by rail or road.
(v) In the face of these factors which in their cumulative results may be
very serious, it is my opinion that the degree of efficiency that is
reached in the disembarkation of stores and the transportation of
same is higher than might be expected.
There are a number o
other points which are worth while to mention.
other points which are worth se in lover Egypt depend to a greater
or lesser extent on sea communications, e.g.
Tobruk, Haifa, Matruh
Hence the arrangements to be made involve not
only the Army but also the Royal Navy and the Ministry of War
Transport which is closely concerned in
General Headquarters Middle
with a number of inter-Service activities such as the feeding of the
East is also concerned
civil population in several surrounding territories.
WO2T7
1 p
Deductions
Deductions to be made from this are: -
(i) The root of the administrative problem is not within the Army
or peculiar to it.
(ii) It lies in the relationship between the Royal Navy, Army and Royal
Air Force and representative Government Departments both with
each other and with the Egyptian Government.
For these reasons it
is clear to me that the solution of the present difficulties and the
development of a long term policy cannot be confined to the Army
alone but must be expanded to cover those administrative activities
of the Royal Navy, Royal Air Force and the civil Authorities which
are common to two or more of them. Machinery for the co-ordination
of these activities is already developing by way of a number of repre-
sentative committees dealing with various aspects of rearward services.
Proposals
In order to carry out the directive policy set forth in the Prime
Minister's telegram the Intendant-General must be given powers to set
up and control a system of administrative co-ordination of all the
elements concerned which, while leaving the execution of the day to day
administration in the hands of commanders-in-chief, will control their
administrative relationships with each other and with the external authori-
ties with whom
they
now deal individually.
Immediately under the
Intendant-General there would be a committee which would include
representatives of the three Services and the Ministry of War Transport
together with a member of the staff of H.B.M.
Ambassador in Cairo
which would co-ordinate existing and proposed organizations through
the appropriate channels.
My present idea is that the staff should consist
of a central co-ordinating secretariat assisted by
experts to ensure
that projects are framed in accordance with the best modern practice
and that they are
pushed to perfection, and by representatives from
the United States
of America, to exploit the material assistance being
provided by them in the Middle East. Initially I do not think that the
staff need be large but I am not hopeful that G.H.Q. Middle East will,
in the present circumstances, be able to provide much in the way of
officers from the existing
headquarters.
In addition the functions
the Intendant-General will
include
such re-organizations within
the
administrative staff and service
directorate
of
General Headquarters
Middle
East as may
prove
desirable on
further
investigation more
especially in connection with the problems of maintenance and servicing
and of manpower.'
At the time this report was written there existed no central co-ordinating
authority in the Middle East and political or diplomatic questions underlay
many of the principal administrative problems.
The British forces there
operated in and from a country-
-Egypt-
-which was a sovereign state not
at war with the Axis powers.
This was a complicated position little under-
stood at home.
187
