the elementary needs of a mechanized force.
The Germans, to whom petrol
was even more valuable, had correctly appreciated the problem and for some
years before even entering the Desert had met the needs of detailed petrol
distribution to their mechanized and armoured forces by the introduction
of that excellent container, the 20-litre returnable can popularly known as
the " Jerrican". Admittedly it resembled in some respects a petrol container
made by the U.S. Forces as far back as 1935 but it was so near perfection
that when later it became the standard container of the British forces it was
impossible to improve upon the original design.
By the time plants had
been set up for its manufacture in the United Kingdom, the U.S.A. and the
Middle East enormous stocks of captured cans had been amassed.
Once the offensive had begun the administrative plan depended on contact
being rapidly established with Tobruk and the maintenance of part of the
force switched there.
Tobruk was also an essential for any subsequent
advance until the ports of Derna and, in particular,
Benghazi could be
captured and brought into use.
The garrison
was to establish a supply
point (F.S.D. No. 3) for Eighth Army troops within the perimeter once contact
had been made.
The reserves in Tobruk were by no means large and the maintenance of
additional forces could only be undertaken if the port could be freely used,
but naturally this condition could only be satisfied if all danger of land
attack had been
removed and the
possibility of
sustained air attack
minimized.
At this time the stocks in Tobruk included roughly 400,000
gallons of petrol (including 87 octane for A.F.Vs.) the average consumption
for the garrison being about 6,000 gallons a day.
Stocks of ammunition
included nearly 80,000 rounds of 25-pr., 10,000 rounds of 4.5-in. medium
and 11,500 rounds of 18-pr.
Some 3.000 tons of supplies were also held.
A shipping programme was drawn up scheduled to begin three days
after the relief of the garrison.
The first shipment was to be of 400 tons
plus bulk petrol to the capacity of the storage available.
A week later a
second shipment of 600 tons with bulk petrol as before would follow and
thereafter four further weekly shipments
were planned of 700, 800,
and 1,000 tons respectively.
kly shipments he tonnage was exclusive of bulk
petrol.
Tobruk had been carrying
Tobruk had been carrying out and exten lorries for troop-carrying over
out an extensive programme of M.T. over-
and above meeting local maintenance and port clearance requirements.
West of Matruh there were four main reserves of water in reservoirs.
These were at Kilo 58 on the Sidi Barrani road, Bir Abu Mazhud and a,
third at the escarpment near Abu Mazhud and known as " Escarpment
Each of these held 300 tons and at the Desert rail-head at
was a reservoir of 1,000 tons.
reserves of water on the scale of & gallon each man vehicle were held in
44-gallon drums at No. 2 Forward Base for each of 13 and 30 Corps.
the reserve for 30 Corps was to be moved forward by H.O. Eighth Army
to a point near Maddalena as soon as possible after the beginning of the
214
WOLT
18
Quite apart from this stored water was the pipe-line up to the rail-head
along which a number of water points were established.
At rail-head some
200 tons a day were required for locomotives, while consumption by per-
sonnel was roughly 350 tons a day.
A few local sources of water at Buq-Buq
and at Kilos 94 and 103 on the Sidi Barrani road were allotted to 13 Corps.
With the capture of Tobruk the water position would be greatly eased.
Production from wells, distillation, etc., was about 400 tons a day and
storage held some 8,000 tons.
With the relief of the garrison it would be
introduce additional plants to raise the daily output to 700
tons which would more than suffice for all the troops in the area. It was
therefore essential for a switch to Tobruk water points to be made by
of water from the pipe-line.
all units as soon as possible in order to save the carriage by motor convoy
The " Oasis" group previously mentioned as being directly under control
would cease.
It was expected that this period might last up to 30 days,
for which there were more than ample stocks held.
The role of "Oasis"
group was primarily to protect the air forces which were to harass the enemy
in the coastal sector south of Benghazi and to cause confusion amongst
advancing and retiring enemy columns.
west of Giarabub and a second at Jalo. At the same time the group was
to continue with a deception scheme to make the enemy believe the force
was much stronger than it was and to induce him to react accordingly.
Both 13 and 30 Corps had now been allotted the newly authorized
F.M.C., H.Q. staffs.
These had been formed by divisions and were desig-
nated by letters.
For the operation 13 Corps were allotted "A" and "B"
while 30 Corps had "D"
Similarly water issue
sections formed in the same way were allotted.
generally established on the basis of at least one to a division and frequently
maintained only one division.
It took some time for the new nomenclature
to become familiar and for a while installations were not unnaturally known
both as F.S.Ds. and F.M.Cs.
Preparations for air evacuation of casualties were made on a more
generous scale
than hitherto known.
Air evacuation was by far the most
satisfactory
method under desert conditions,
for evacuation by M.T. fre-
quently meant long delays owing to
surfaces.
the
distance over often appalling
The possibility of air supply being necessary was envisaged, and prepara-
tions were made for a small quantity of supplies and P.O.L. to be held
pre-packed at Matruh.
Medical stores and ammunition were also held
ready for packing, but difficulty arose over the provision of water, which
was very likely to be needed if air supply was at any time necessary.
The
difficulty lay in the choice of a suitable container.
Finally it was decided
to drop the water as ice, and suitable quantities of ice were held in readiness.
Individual loads were limited to 120 lb.
For day-to-day special require-
ments, a daily air service from Matruh to the advance landing ground was
available while a weekly service existed between Matruh and Giarabub.
215
