by other French, and Polish and Norwegian reinforcements with the possi-
bility of
still further reinforcements, made it necessary for an extension of
the base facilities to be considered.
On 25th April a reconnaissance had been made of Skaanland, a small
port on the mainland, opposite the island of Hinnoy, with a view of establish-
as an alternative or a secondary base.
Reconnaissances of
various other areas had also been carried out but without success, and it
was eventually decided, during the first days of May, that the base could
best be extended by establishing three base sub-areas:
Harstad : Temporarily for British and French.
Skaanland : Temporarily for British and French.
Ballangen : Ultimately for French only.
(Harstad and Skaanland would, of course, be superseded by Narvik
The town of Tromso was to be reserved as a medical area, but the con-
Harstad became so acute that it was subsequently decided to
warehouse area there, in addition to the medical installations.
request was forwarded to the War Office for additional
staff the new bases, and work on the preparation and stocking
of Skaanland began immediately.
The Independent Companies
At this stage, operations in Central Norway began to affect " Rupert-
The troops operating around Namsos and
Andalsnes were being
withdrawn, and it was recognized that it was most important to delay the
enemy advance northwards from Trondheim as much as possible, and, parti-
cularly, to deny him the harbours and landing grounds at Mosjoen, Mo and
consequence " Rupertforce" was ordered to send a detachment to
Bodo, which landed there on 30th April.
It was also decided to use five independent companies of infantry which
had been formed in England for irregular operations in southern Norway.
These companies were all composed of volunteers, mostly from Territorial
and were, incidentally, the forerunners of the " commando"
The five companies were under command of a small headquarters
and were collectively known as " Scissors Force ".
"Scissors Force" contained an administrative group and a camp recep-
tion station, and the whole force was self-contained, each unit being able
to operate independently for about 30 days.
Each company carried 30 days
rations and 5 days special mountain rations (pemmican). In addition the
administrative group carried 30 days rations and 5 days pemmican for the
The men were equipped with such special items as alpine ruck-
sacks, snow shoes, arctic boots, and sheep-skin coats.
They had no transport
but were in possession of ample funds for hiring vehicles.
The Admiralty provided a small flotilla of ten trawlers and drifters to be
attached to the force for maintenance and operational assistance.
The original
intention of the administrative group was to set up a small base at Bodo
for "Scissors Force" but the rapidly changing
action and, in the event, the companies
situation precluded such
Harstad.
were wholly
maintained from
74
WO2TY
1 0
By 9th May the independent companies were in action at Bodo, Mo and
on 11th May.
Mosjoen, but the enemy reaction was strong and Mosjoen had to be evacuated
British troops had been despatched from " Rupertforce".
Operations continued at Bodo and at Mo where further
Arrival of Lieutenant-General Auchinleck
On 11th May Lieutenant-General C. J. E. Auchinleck, together with an
advance party from Headquarters 4 Corps, arrived at Harstad. On 14th
May, General Auchinleck assumed command of all military troops operating
in Norway (including the independent companies of "Scissors Force") and
" Rupertforce "
was amalgamated with H.Q. 4 Corps into the (second)
At this stage, despite the many difficulties, the force had organized itself
remarkably well as far as administration was concerned.
were arriving regularly, if inadequately in some respects.
were collecting supplies from Harstad and delivering them
to the several points on the mainland where troops were established, supply-
ing them with their rations, clothing, ammunition and petrol, ete. Two of the
smaller personnel ships had been converted into hospital ships. One of the
fastest " puffers" ran an express service twice a week, calling at all principal
places with mail, M.F.O. and any small urgent stores and was able to carry
about 20 personnel. This ship was affectionately known as the " Harstad
Belle " and ran to a specified schedule like clockwork.
" Bodoforce "
Concern now became felt as to the security of the Harstad base area
upon which the success of any operations in or around Narvik depended.
The enemy was, admittedly, a long way away, but the enemy success at
Mosjoen enabled him to increase his northwards pressure towards Mo and
Bodo despite the efforts of the independent companies of "Scissors Force".
General Auchinleck thereupon decided to transfer the British contingent
(24 Guards Brigade) of his force to the Bodo area and to use only French
and Polish troops assisted by the Norwegian Army to continue the pressure
on Narvik.
On 14th May s.S. " Chobry" sailed from Harstad to Bodo carrying the
Irish Guards and other troops.
The ship was attacked and set on fire
by German aircraft when nearing its destination.
to the escorting destroyers and returned to Harstad with very little loss of
life but having lost practically the whole of their equipment. There were,
however, sufficient reserves in the B.O.D. to carry out the greater part of
the re-equipping which was completed within two days of the return of
the battalion.
Three days later H.M.S. " Efingham" carrying the South Wales Borderers
to Bodo struck an uncharted rock and became a total loss.
the base was called upon to re-equip a complete infantry battalion.
stocks were not sufficient to allow this and the battalion could only be
equipped at the expense of base troops from whom all web equipment,
binoculars, compasses, etc., were withdrawn.
Even then the unit could not
