The mountain sides are very steep and covered with large boulders and
were no paths up them before the troops arrived.
time of the fall of Agordat the garrison of Keren was known to be only of
brigade strength, and it was hoped that by moving rapidly the town might
be reached before reinforcements could arrive.
However, by 2nd February
it was discovered that a second brigade and part of a division from Addis
Ababa had been brought up.
The storming of the Keren position was no light task.
It meant a struggle
numbers, observation, air
strength and above all in terrain.
Each day, to add to our difficulties, the
temperature was steadily rising, and before the issue was settled hard fighting
and casualties were inevitable.
However, there was no practicable alterna-
Wide reconnaissance was made, but there was no possible gap save
that at Arresa where the route was incredibly difficult and, by the time a
road sufficient to maintain the force could be built from Barentu, the enemy
could have so strengthened his defences there that it would have become as
formidable as Keren itself, but without the same advantages in the event
Barentu and Arresa would cease
Suffering from the handicap of having our administrative areas overlooked
by enemy O.Ps, and every single movement observed, the British launched
the first attack on Keren round the right flank through Happy Valley and
Acqua Gap, but in spite of great gallantry and heavy casualties the first
attack came to
nothing and a second attempt was made.
This attack, how-
ever, also failed and it was clear that Keren could only be taken by a major
operation and that administration would be the most important factor limit-
ing the size of the operation.
February, Kassala became the rail-head for both divisions.
4 Indian Division had been based on it from the time of its capture and
repair, but 5 Indian Division had used Malawiya.
Each division had been
in control of the third line transport allotted to it.
reliant on Kassala, it now became essential that co-ordination be exercised
by the "Q" staff of H.Q., Troops, Sudan, who now assumed control of the
Kassala-Agordat L. of C., up to and including Agordat.
Sudan also took over all third line transport.
The main factor determining the strength of the attack on Keren, was, as
usual, the shortage of transport.
" set-piece" operation that would
be necessary, reserves of rations, petrol and, above all, of ammunition would
have to be built up, but transport resources could not stretch to the main-
tenance of both divisions at the same time.
The decision was therefore made
5 Indian Division, less one brigade at Barentu, to an area
between Sabderat and Tessenei.
5 Indian Division could then maintain itself
from rail-head with first line transport, while ail second line transport could
be withdrawn and placed under control of H.Q., Troops, Sudan for third
line work on the L. of C.
The Italian narrow-gauge railway started at Biscia, and ran through
Asmara to Massawa.
Every effort was now made to make use of it.
diesel engines were sent up by the Sudan Railways from the depot at Arbara
tonnage they could move.
modification, worked well, although the gradients limited the
Rail-head for the diesels was Hummet, and
WO2T7
1 0
rations (for which this service was chiefly used) were sent forward from
there by trucks of trollies drawn by an " engine" improvised from a 30-cwr.
lorry, or even simply by manpower. Much use, too, was made of mules.
By good fortune a number of these had been captured from the enemy,
and were immediately put to use forward of the railway for supply work.
Their numbers were increased by two Cypriot mule companies.
Throughout the period every available lorry was continually on the road
between Kassala and Keren doing a regular 48-hour turn-round between
dumping area and rail-head.
These were manned by R.A.S.C., R.I.A.S.C.,
and Cape personnel and though they presented perfect air targets, the enemy's
air force confined itself to attacking the forward troops. The main task was,
of course, the dumping of the necessary ammunition, and it is to the credit
of "Q" that the gunners were never short throughout the battle.
The whole time during this preparatory period, however, 4 Indian Division
were in the embarrassing position of having all the administrative areas of
their forward units overlooked by the enemy who was gradually extending
his right flank further and further to the west. This was a constant source
of anxiety, and caused a steady drain of casualties.
factor was the continued hot weather which imposed further strain on the
In spite of the fact that the administrative staffs were managing to provide
the forward troops with oranges and fresh fruit, there were a number of
minor casualties from cuts and scratches going septic. With the addition of
the daily average figure of 25 casualties it will be seen that 4 Indian Division
was being severely drained.
The possibility of 5 Indian Division relieving
4 Indian Division during this period was, however, over-ruled by inadequacy
Relief and dumping could not be carried out simultaneously.
Consequently 4 Indian Division had to remain and " take it"
of morale was unable to withdraw from its overlooked position.
THE ADVANCE DOWN THE RED SEA COAST
At the time of the enemy's withdrawal from Kassala, a sinister thinning
cut in the Karora area on the coast had been noted and the local commander
bad requested permission to start a minor operation down the Red Sea coast.
The chief difficulty was the availability of water, but after consultation with
the Royal Navy it was decided to direct a force of approximately a brigade
group from Port Sudan via Suakin- Karora-Nakfa, and so on to Keren
was remarkable for the fact that a completely
deserted town stood on an island joined to the mainland by a short causeway.
The houses were by no means the usual native huts, but substantial two and
three storeyed buildings, with many wooden balconies and carved shutters,
mostly in a fair state of repair. On the mainland, in pitiable contrast to the
island town, stood the few native huts and ramshackle houses that constituted
It is interesting to speculate as to why the locals
shunned the island, and various theories have been put forward to account
The plan was to move the troops in barges, dhows and small ships first
to Aqiq and later to open a small port at Marsa Taclai.
come the administrative difficulties of an advance over the difficult country
along the coast.
In fact all went well, Marsa Taclai was captured on 10th
133
