With the increase in Malaya Command as the defences developed, went a
Estrel
corresponding increase in the strength of the headquarters.
The brigadier
i/c administration, who, as was customary,
was directly responsible to the
War Office for the control of expenditure in regard to administration, was
relieved of all "A" duties by the appointment of a deputy adjutant-general
only for the growing
After the outbreak of war with Genmany the filling of vacancies on the
staff was becoming more and more difficult as the initial supply of trained
staff officers in the Far East became exhausted.
in Malaya were called upon to supply such officers as possessed qualifications
for staff work until it became dangerous to weaken them any further.
1941 voyages from the United Kingdom were taking two to three months,
so that there was a long delay in filling staff vacancies from home.
consequence of all these difficulties, the strength of the headquarters
usually much below establishment, and, in fact, upon the outbreak of war
was little greater than the headquarters of a corps.
before war broke out with
Malaya was particularly heavy, including, as it did, the planning and pre-
paring of a country for war, in addition to administering and training a
command for battle.
functions of a local War Office and those of a Headquarters of a Field
Force.
150853
In peace-time the defences of Malaya were, broadly speaking, developed
controlled.
Approval had to be obtained for all expenditure of over £50
to the shortage of funds, demands were often heavily cut.
It was for this
reason that it had been possible to construct only part of the Kota Tinggi
defence line in Johore.
After the outbreak of war with Germany, the
G.O.C. (Lieut.-General A. E. Percival), was authorized to carry out a limited
amount of work on defence as Part II services, provided the cost did not
exceed £500.
For major services, War Office approval was still required;
hand with regard to such expenditure.
Under the circumstances it is surprising that much wider powers were
not delegated to the G.O.C. Malaya who would, naturally, have taken no
action without consulting his financial adviser.
Authority for the raising of new units and for all increases in establish-
ments had to be obtained from
the War Office.
With the pressure
war-time business, delays naturally
occurred, some of which had serious
consequences.
An instance of this was the delay in connection with the
raising of two additional labour companies which,
of labour in Malaya, became desirable in the autumn of 1941.
owing to the shortage
All arrange-
with Japan intervened, and the project was rendered void.
Their presence
286
WORTY
1
Administrative Position
The scale of reserve stocks to be held in Malaya was based on the
"period before relief" which, as has been stated, stood in 1941 at 180 days.
Initially these stocks had been held entirely on Singapore Island, where
bomb-proof magazines had been constructed for the ammunition.
With the increase in the garrison, however, and the extension of the defences
to cover the whole of Malaya, new problems were presented.
was complicated by the fact that the base at Singapore except that it was
more heavily defended was no less immune from attack than more forward
areas elsewhere in Malaya.
It was therefore necessary to distribute some of the reserve stocks through-
out the country instead of holding them all in one area.
In this way
it was hoped that transportation problems would, during active operations,
be reduced and all areas would be, to some extent, self-contained.
"Matador" was another factor in the problem.
To meet the require-
ments of this operation, should it be ordered, it was necessary to hold
certain reserves well forward.
It was therefore decided that the main
reserve stocks should be held on Singapore Island, that reserves, on a scale
appropriate to each case, should be held in the forward areas, and that
the balance should be held in advanced depots in Central Malaya.
On the
west coast, the Perak River, which was crossed only by one bridge, presented
the main difficulty.
The contingency that the bridge might be broken by
air attack had to be provided for, and therefore a proportion of the reserves
had to be held forward of the river.
The full plan was thus as follows :-
(a) The full 180 days for the garrisons of Singapore and Penang to be
kept on those islands.
(b) 60 days for all the troops north of Singapore (except those at
Penang) to be kept in Singapore.
(c) On the west coast, 60 days to be kept north of the Perak river,
and, on the
east coast, 90 days in Kelantan and 60 days in
Kuantan.
(d) The balance of the 180 days for the troops in the 3 Indian Corps
area to be kept in the Kuala Lumpur, Ipoh and Jerantut areas.
In the Singapore Island area, a policy of dispersal was naturally adopted,
partly owing to the congestion in the town area where denot space was
difficult to obtain, and partly owing to the obvious desire to avoid heavy
loss from air attack.
Bearing in mind the disposition of the main reserves, as shown above.
it is now possible to study the resources of the main administrative services
at the beginning of hostilities with Japan.
Early in 1941 the scale of armament had been dangerously low.
low scale of weapons.
particular, all Indian formations and units arrived in Malaya with a very
The position improved during the year, but it was
issued with 25-pr. guns.
not until November that formations received the higher scale, and wer
Even then many units were below establishment
in light automatics and rifles, and there were never more than a few of
This lack of licht ar ament considerably affected the
raising of local forces, for which recruiting became almost impossible.
