activities of Nazi Germany and the increasing tension in Europe gradually
ended much of the financial apathy that for some years had threatened the
efficiency of the armed forces, and the ensuing armaments race of the years
1936 to 1939 threw new and increased problems of magnitude and complexity
on the War Office departments concerned with the provision of equipment
and supplies.
In September, 1936, an additional Civil Member, styied the
Director-General of Munition Production, was charged with the administra-
tion of business affecting the production of munitions and assumed certain
duties previously carried out by the M.G.O. The latter office was suspended
and the M.G.O. was superseded by the Deputy Master-General of the
Ordnance who was made, under the D.G.M.P., responsible for the duties
formerly carried out by the M.G.O.
It does not seem that any advantage
was gained from this change and, indeed, in later years the gap left by
the disappearance of the M.G.O. from the War Office hierarchy was to prove
a source of constant difficulty.
In June, 1939, there was a further change when the Director of Ordnance
Services was transferred from the D.G.M.P. to the Q.M.G. who became
responsible for the design, provision, distribution and storage of personal
and general equipment and the distribution and storage of warlike stores,
including mechanical transport and ammunition. Responsibility for the issue
of warlike stores, including mechanical transport and ammunition, remained
with the D.G.M.P. who also retained control of the directorates of Artillery,
Mechanization, Army Contracts, and Industrial Planning.
Two months later it became apparent that war was inevitable and the
Ministry of Supply was created relieving the War Office of all design, pro-
duction and inspection responsibilities, thus making the department of the
D.G.M.P. redundant ; the Q.M.G., through the
Director of Ordnance Ser-
vices, assumed full responsibility for the provision, storage and distribution
of ordnance stores of all categories. In order to relieve the D.O.S. of broad
policy and planning, a new appointment of Controller of Ordnance Services
(C.O.S.) was superimposed over the D.O.S., and, for the same reason, a
Controller of Engineer Services (C.E.S.) was placed over the Director of
Fortifications and Works (D.F.W.).
The lay-out of the Q.M.G's. Department as at 3rd September, 1939, is
shown in Diagram 1, which includes the various re-organizations that have
been briefly described in the foregoing paragraphs.
Of the branches shown,
only that of Q.M.G. (O), under the D.M.Q., exercised purely staff functions.
The remainder were, in effect, heads of services who, under the direct
guidance of the Q.M.G. himself, from time to time exercised certain staff
functions in addition to their service responsibilities.
If this organization is compared with the field organization it will be
seen that, apart from this deficiency of policy forming brancatio, certain ser-
vices were wholly represented but certain others were represented in embryo
only.
or Hirings.
There were no directorates of Labour, Salvare, Are Postal Services
The Fire Service was embryonic and represented inside a staff
section, as was the directorate of Transportation.
was a concern of a civilian War Office branch.
Printing and Stationery
Kinematography and R.E. Stores had also been omitted.
The directorates of Army
Q(A.E.) had not been foreseen, and these only came into being by force of
Finally, the necessity on the staff side for such branches as O(Ops.) or
circumstances. Their evolution is more fully described in the next section.
WO27
1 ф
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE QUARTER-MASTER-GENERAL
SECTION 2-THE WAR YEARS
The structure of the organizations which maintained the Army in peace
and during war had never been uniform. In peace the administrative organiza-
tion at the War Office as a whole derived from
the report of the Esher
Committee of 1904, although inevitably in the passage of years it had suffered
considerable
variation.
The corresponding
structure
in commands
was
based fairly closely upon the field organization which, deriving as it did
from war experiences of 1914-18, was considerably more modern than the
Esher organization.
During the Second World War, the organization of the
War Office tended to approach more closely to the field organization than
However, as will be seen,
it never completely reflected it.
The essential feature of the War Office organization in peace was that
the policy of the Army Council and of the individual heads of the military
departments was implemented by
General Staff directors
under the First Military Member of Council, the C.I.G.S., were staff officers,
but the directors in the departments of the Adjutant-General and the Quarter-
Master-General were, for some part, staff officers (e.g. the Director of Move-
ments and Quartering), others were heads of services (e.g.
Supplies and Transport), while others (e.g. the Director of Fortifications
and Works and, later, the Director of Movements) combined both staff and
service functions.
This complicated system of direction coupled, as it was,
with a complex civilian organization is difficult to grasp, and it is probably
true to say that an Army officer can seldom comprehend the full chain
of military administration until he has served at least two years in a War
On the other hand, the structure of the organization which administers the
Army in the field is essentially simple.
It consists of three components:
the commander-in-chief of the theatre, or expeditionary force, who deter-
mines the policy; the staff at his headquarters which interprets his policy
and co-ordinates all activities to implement it; and the services which bear
the responsibility for
executive action within their respective spheres.
will be seen that the final stage of development left the Quarter-Master-
General's department in the War Office approaching the field organization
although it could never wholly adopt it.
Much of the work of the War
Office, a Department of State, was governed by political requirements, and
the War Office organization tended to produce a specialized staff leaving
certain services to perform with limited specialized staff guidance,
staff and service functions.
The initial planned expansion of the War Office, in war, was supposed
to be governed by a document brought up to date in 1939 and known as
" The War Office War Book".
Although the War Book definitely stated
that the plans it contained were only for initial expansion, there is no
evidence to show that the initial planning was in any
way related to
operational requirements or, indeed, that it was successful in foreseeing any
of the needs of modern warfare.
As far as the Department of the Quarter-
Master-General is concerned, the War Book envisaged an expanded "Office
of the Quarter-Master-General" and the introduction of a Deputy-Quarter-
Master-General (D.Q.M.G.) to whom directors would report direct. In the
