ons of Greece the bulk of the force consist of telence.
all arms, all evacuated from Greece ("W"
i and as Australian brigade H.Q. with a number o
of readiness for wat in Crete the best of the "y
the Dominion infantry battalions, which had mangy.
cally all their rifles and Bren guns, plus some an e
ne guns, some without tripods. The bst equint!
oat and their personal equipment, the was, noting
up in. Above all, they possessed no unit eins.
dever, much less any transport. This mean the
ped units many men, having no mess tins, had to
kind of ration tin and eat it with their fingers wil
arrowed spoons or forks. Morever, a large propria
s, and members of the ancillary services, as ill a
an picncer clements. Some of these were le by thi
e cases had more or less complete unit H.s, but s
ver were leaderless and remained so for a considerable te.
and with rifles, some had only a bandolier of ammurin
the best formed of these "W" Force elements nest
I parties or as individuals. A few had even been shipwreat!
inceptice of such troops would have taxed a well-equiped ogie.
station an improvised one, but Crete Force H.O. staf di t
would, considering that they had no transport availabl a l!
nguipmcnt, only a few accommodation stores and no penced
tall reception camps.
Areas had been selected where then
ad alive tree cover, to which all arrivals were directed not
look. The first of these was about two miles from Sud pr
and tinned rations were available.
Thence, men were dirts
arras for Australians, New Zealand and other trops. g
nd bodies of men led along the road to the apons.
cicer. la general there was a stream find ans
recuperate from the strain of the short campin d
cases, a tendency to slight "bomb-happines" Al
attacks by enemy aircraft.
Occasionally, amonger de
rained men, there was an active revulsion again tien
cago was taken of the opportunities offered to anot hat
la consquence, for the first ten days a let ther
men at large, many armed with rites, ling as bef
olive groves.
At night there were frequent sos i h
late time to be lost and some sort of order at lo hey
Camp stutt were improvind, some from among hot
once for whom there were at first no guns.
the principal that all trogs should bare it ey
normal scale of blankets for troops in the l
do one for each man and in this way suiciat
are one.
WO217
1
The problem of bringing all the loose elements under control was much
more difficult, largely owing to the impossibility of giving the military police
any transport for rounding-up.
However, a curfew for troops at 1800 hours
daily was introduced in the Suda-Canea area, and it was promulgated that
all men not in formed units or not under camp control would be treated as
deserters. Moreover the gradual organization of some of the gunners into
artillery units and of others into improvised units armed with rifles only,
helped to clear things up.
Everything possible was done to simplify the
procedure for disposing of serious disciplinary cases.
Every effort was made by the C.-in-C., Middle East, to send stores and
materials from his limited resources to increase the means of defence and
a few infantry and light tanks, a number of captured Italian guns and a
certain amount of transport and other arms and equipment were shipped.
Inevitably, a considerable proportion was sunk on the voyage, for the scale
of the enemy attack on shipping was now rapidly increasing in intensity.
equipment, etc., sunk included about half the Italian guns and more than
half the engineer stores required for constructing defences.
Every effort was also made, as much to ease the maintenance problem
as for any other reason, to get rid as soon as possible of all surplus British
personnel, and all prisoners of war of which there finally remained some
16,000 held on the island. A few had been despatched to Egypt but nothing
like enough, from the maintenance point of view, owing partly to lack of
escorted shipping and partly to it being found possible at a late stage to
equip a fair proportion of the surplus British personnel with captured Italian
guns, or to turn them into improvised rifle units.
When some measure of reorganization had been achieved it was found
that the total strength of British troops to be maintained was, as it remained
approximately 28,600, although the fighting strength was
actually less than that of a division, and equipment and transport for even
the operational portion of the force was woefully lacking. In addition, there
were also the following numbers to be maintained: —
Greek Army: 14,000.
Prisoners of war: 16,000.
Local population: 400,000.
It was apparent at the outset that the supplies needed for all these had to
be imported by one authority, and that "Q" at force "H.Q. would have to
co-ordinate all requirements if there was to be any hope of G.H.Q., Middle
East, finding a successful solution of the problem.
The Greek Army units in Crete, being mostly recruit units, had no
organization, no transport, no arms or equipment and no resources of food.
It was therefore arranged that the Greek depots and ancillary services were
to be re-organized under the guidance of a small British staff, but the German
attack opened before the plans agreed upon could be put into operation.
British liaison officers were, of course, to act in respect of the needs of the
Greek civil population as well as the Greek Army.
Unfortunately, as the
harvest was not yet gathered, the food situation of the civil population was
at its worst.
To add to the difficulties, there was no effective civil govern-
ment and therefore no organization for clearance of food landed at Suda, nor
