" list of the department, branches and inter-departmental committees to be
labour or transportation, or even indicate how
staff control was to be
exercised in these matters.
This, in itself, is remarkable, for throughout the
pre-war planning for the field force (B.E.F.) the need of the War Office for
both directorates had become amply apparent.
An account of the growth of the Q.M.G's. Depantment from its compact
and austere pre-war establishment to the vast organization that was headed
by General Riddell-Webster at the conclusion of the war will be found in
the next few pages. It is written, however, from the point of view of the
staff rather than of the service, and is intended merely to present the reader
with a broad picture of the expansion of the Department and not of the
more detailed development within the various directorates.
The Quarter-Master-General's Deputies
By the end of the war the Q.M.G. was exercising his functions through
a number of deputies, viz.: —
Q.M.G.
D.Q.M.G.
(A.E.)
D. of A.P.
V.Q.M.G. D.Q.M.G. D.Q.M.G. C.G.E.
(M)
Q(Economy)
Chairman
N.A.A.F.I.
Q(L)
Q(A.E.)
Q(Ops.)
D.P.
D.F. Branches
Branches (Stats.) (O. and M.) Branches
Mov. Mov.
The V.Q.M.G., an appointment which came into being during the early
part of 1943, evolved from the original D.Q.M.G., the holder acting both as
vice for
the Q.M.G. in his dealings with heads of services
and as the
co-ordinator of the three deputies.
By this means, the service directors
were able, in theory at least, to retain their right of direct access to the
Q.M.G., while their activities were given stafi guidance by the appropriate
as will be seen, abolished.
The system of grouping directorates under director-generals was,
This method of control was perhaps rather better than that which
developed in some overseas commands where
the "O" staff was broken
down into a number of watertight groups such as Q(Maint.), Q(A.E.), etc.,
each acting as the supervising staff branch for certain specific services.
This system, which was, of course, employed in the War Office when the
director-generals existed, apart from being irritating to the heads of services,
led to a lot of unnecessary duplication in so far as it usually
in all dealings and correspondence affecting a service even if originating
from another stafl branch- being channelled through the staff branch
vising" that particular service.
In the War Office after the new system was
adopted it was usual for the V.Q.M.G., through Q(Ops.), to co-ordinate,
on behalf of the Q.M.G., the efforts of all the administrative services as far
maintenance was concerned and for the other deputies to
perform a similar function in accordance with their respective responsibilities.
WO27
1 Ф
The circumstances surrounding the creation of D.Q.M.G. (M.) and
D.Q.M.G. (A.E.) are described later on in this section while the office of
D.Q.M.G. (Liaison) is more properly covered in Section 4 of Chapter V
which deals with the requirements of the U.S. forces in Great Britain.
Controller General of Economy was appointed in 1941 in order to "
The
•.. see
that the utmost economy consistent with efficiency was secured in the storage
and distribution
and use of all stores and equipment and that its great
importance in the national interest was fully appreciated throughout the
Army", but, his duties being almost wholly
advisory, the creation of his
small staff branch, Q(E), did not materially affect the development of the
The Chairman of the Board of Management of N.A.A.F.I. joined the
War Office in May, 1940, after a large scale reorganization had taken place
both within N.A.A.F.I. and in the dealings of that Corporation with the
N.A.A.F.I. had previously been controlled through a branch
of the directorate of Quartering, but this, although suitable for routine matters,
was not satisfactory to the higher management of the Corporation who found
it difficult to obtain information and policy guidance on a high level without
The Chairman of the new Board of Management was there-
fore given the status of D.Q.M.G. and occupied a position in the War Office
somewhat similar to the D.Q.M.G. (Canteens) of 1918.
below that despite the introduction of the executive head of N.A.A.F.I. into
the higher direction of the department, routine staff matters continued to
be dealt with through the Directorate of Quartering.
The Origin and Development of Q(Ops.)
As will be seen from Diagram 1, a small branch had been formed in
Q.M.G's. Directorate under the title of Q.M.G. (O) to prepare specifically to
meet the problems which would arise on mobilization in the event of war.
This branch was absorbed into the Movements and Quartering Directorate
On the formation of Home Forces as an operational command after the
return of the British Army from France in 1940, the command of the Army
in Great Britain was centred in the C.-in-C.,
administrative staff responsible for operational administrative planning for
the defence of Great Britain and for co-ordination of the administrative
arrangements made by home commands to meet invasion.
judged impracticable for Home Forces to assume complete responsibility
for the administration of the Army in
As will be seen from
Chapter V, this would only have resulted in a duplication of work between
the War Office and Home Forces, and it was arranged for the War Office
to act as the administrative agent of the C.-in-C.
the Q.M.G. was to give effect to the creation and working of those adminis-
trative facilities which the C.-in-C. considered necessary for the defence of
the country, and this obviously required the closest contact between the
administrative staffs of the War Office and G.H.Q. Home Forces.
Up to this date the forces in France and Norway had been the only
operational British formations in the field and the D.Q.M.G.—under whom
operational administrative planning and executive work was centred-was
thought capable of dealing with such problems which arose by direct contact
