decided that the vicinities of Port Sudan and Atbara should be developed
for the storage of 20,000 tons of packed P.O.L., and the Port Sudan, Atbara
and Khartoum areas prepared to hold other G.H.Q. reserves.
The policy for the distribution of G.H.Q. reserves in July, 1941, was as
Alexandria and westwards—10 per cent.
Palestine-
east and north of Suez Canal-20 per cent.
Cairo and Canal Zone base area—
Sudan (Port Sudan,
Khartoum and
Atbara), Massawa,
Asmara—
25 per cent.
By August this policy was far from being implemented and steps were
taken to examine the maximum monthly tonnages of balanced reserve stores
that the southern ports could accept.
It was finally agreed that 15,000 tons
a month could be accepted in this manner, and certain ships were selected.
By the end of the year, however, the situation had so improved, with Syria
occupied, the rebellion in Iraq crushed and the Germans and Italians being
pushed back into Tripolitania, that the need for holding reserves in the Sudan
and Eritrea was reviewed.
The General Staff were asked to approve a new
policy whereby one quarter of Middle East reserves need no longer be held
in the Sudan and Eritrea but that all would be moved direct to Egypt and
Palestine.
The capacity both of ports and storage in Sudan and Eritrea would
be maintained with a minimum of storage personnel to receive the surplus of
stores which could not be handled at the Egyptian and Palestinian ports.
This
change
of policy
was approved in December and the necessary
instructions issued.
The Import Programme
It is now opportune to consider the planned tonnages involved in the
maintenance of the actual (as against the planned) strength in the Middle
East with military stores only (excluding cased or uncased M.T., oil and
coal).
On the basis of thirteen divisions (less two in the Sudan) an approximate
estimate of such stores expected to arrive daily in the Middle East base in
June, 1941, was 5,000 tons or the equivalent of 455 tons a division each
day.
If shipping and stores were available to complete Middle East reserves
to the scale of 90 days plus 30 days working margin in addition to normal
maintenance, the tonnage would increase to 7,000 tons a day or equivalent
to 640 tons a division each day.
The figures given in these calculations are based on the actual shipping
programme.
If the daily maintenance tonnage plus tonnage to complete
reserves plus tonnage for constructional material, etc., were calculated, the
result would be as follows : —
Tons
(a) Daily
maintenance
division
(including
allowance for R.A.F.)
(b) Towards completing reserves (daily) ...
(c) Required for R.E.
constructional work (including
Transportation)
236
2,020
3,000
178
WO277
18
coal and oil, both military and civil, to be considered.
There still, however, remained the tonnages of civil requirements and
Excluding coal and
oil, civil requirements in Egypt and Palestine amounted to 1,500 and 1,300
tons daily respectively, in addition to which the requirements of Malta and
Cyprus (450 tons) had to pass through the same ports. Essential require-
total of 2,750 tons a day.
ments of coal including Army, Navy, shipping and railways, amounted to a
If the purely military daily tonnage, excluding coal and oil, of 5,000
tons a day is taken and the essential civil requirements and those for Malta
and Cyprus added, a daily total of 8,250 tons is reached. With coal
included the total becomes 11,000 tons a day. On the basis of a greater
number of divisions (as eventually envisaged) this would rise to just short
of 13,000 tons a day.
In so far as P.O.L. was concerned, if it could be imported in bulk no
problem arose for it would not reduce port capacity.
If, however, it had to
be imported packed, an additional daily tonnage of between 1,050 tons to
1,350 tons (dependent on the military strength) together with 200 tons for
civilian rationed needs would be required.
Thus a further 1,250 to 1,550
tons might be added to the daily load which now becomes 12,500 tons.
So far no account has been taken of the anticipated arrival of about 200
cased vehicles each day and the necessity of landing up to 60,000 reinforce-
ment personnel every month and a daily average of 200 vehicles on wheels.
Although these have been disregarded such arrivals could not fail to affect
the handling and clearance capacities of the port and its commitments
generally.
Port Capacities and Discharges
In June, 1941, the daily port capacity in Egypt and Palestine excluding
personnel, M.T., cased M.T., oil and coal, but allowing for a minimum
number of exports was as follows: —
Port
Alexandria
Port Said
Haifa
Fanara (Great Bitter Lake)
Suez
4,000
2,500
1.500
800
3.200
12,000 tons a day
As long as the Suez Canal remained open the capacity was ample.
Were
the canal closed by enemy action intermittently, it was still considered that,
even with the resulent reduction in tonnages which could be handled at
Alexandria, Port Said and Haita, the capacity would be sufficient for the
normal tonnages expected in the immediate future.
On the other hand, the
permanent closing of the canal, even for as much as a month, would rule out
the use of the three northern ports for the whole period. Under these condi-
tions it was three northern ports foe possible still to use Fanara by the
employment of native wooden craft for certain cargoes, but the Egyptian port
daily capacity native wooden 1o 800 tons at Fanara and 3,200 tons at Suez.
179
