During the period of the siege the Royal Navy and Merchant Navy had
been responsible for maintaining supplies to the garrison.
they transported 72 tanks, 92 guns, 34,000 tons of stores, and carried out
the relief of 9 Australian Division by 70 Division making a grand total of
34,113 fresh troops brought in to 32,667 brought out.
7,516 wounded had
been evacuated together with 7,097 P.W.
All this at a cost to the Navy of
25 ships sunk and 9 seriously damaged and to the Merchant Navy of 5
ships sunk and 4 seriously damaged.
The bill for Tobruk's eight months
siege was thus 43 ships.
When the relief came many units, particularly
administrative ones, had remained in Tobruk throughout the investment.
88 Sub-Area now took over administration of Tobruk and responsibility
for the base installations, while 70 Division came under army control. 13 Corps
was instructed to run forward from rail-head to Tobruk 400-600 tons a
day to supplement maintenance by sea which, after a curtailment of seven
days due to the Sidi Rezegh battles, was to be resumed at a rate of 800 tons
The enemy's withdrawal was opportune in that it provided a welcome
opportunity to re-organize supply lines using Tobruk as the forward base,
although the rail-head at Mischeifa could not be completely dispensed with
13 Corps commanded operations in the forward area while 30 Corps went
back to direct operations against the enemy garrisons in the frontier positions.
It was essential that these positions be cleared as early as possible because
their continued existence entailed an extensive detour by transport moving up
from rail-head to Tobruk, considerably increasing the turn-round.
reserves in Tobruk were
sufficient until regular sea supply could be established.
13 Corps began a new advance on 11th December. To support the advance
F.M.C. No. 52 was established at Sidi Muftah some 20 miles west of Tobruk
and opened for issues on 15th December.
As the enemy decided on 16th
December on a further retreat all energies were bent on a relentless pursuit
and F.M.C. No. 53 was opened on 19th December at Tmimi and F.M.C.
H.Q. Eighth Army opened a forward base at El Adem.
This was also known as F.M.C. No. 100 and was valuable in obviating the
need for convoys both from Mischeifa Rail-head and from the forward areas
The enemy had divided in his retreat, part of his force going by the
desert through Mekili and Msus and part by the main road through the
13 Corps accordingly split, and sent 7 Armoured Division
by the desert route and 4 Indian Division by the Jebel.
By 19th December
7 Armoured Division was being directed on Benghazi.
It was becoming
difficult to provide sufficient transport now to allow the division adequate
radius of action, and second line transport of a South African brigade and
a water tank convoy were sent forward as third line to operate from F.M.C.
Tmimi had been opened as a water point and it was hoped shortly
to establish F.M.C. No. 54 at Msus.
This entailed a seven day turn-round
from Tobruk and allowed a daily lift of 250 tons delivered to F.M.C. No. 54
which eventually opened on Christmas Eve.
By 26th December all organized resistance in the Jebel had ceased and
4 Indian Division were stripped of as much second line transport as possible
and were maintained from a forward base stocked by Eighth Army and
WORTY
1 p
established at Derna. Efforts to repeat the performance in the earlier campaign
of cutting off the enemy on the coast road south of Benghazi were doomed
to failure largely owing to maintenance difficulties. The period was one when
shortage of petrol was affecting the whole operation and restricting every move
on the part of 13 Corps.
On 26th December, the enemy finally withdrew
to Agedabia, our troops having entered Benghazi on 24th December despite
heavy rain; but further attacks around Agedabia failed and it was clear
that reinforcement of troops in the forward zone was essential before
operations could continue.
The bringing up of reinforcements was, however, dependent on an im-
provement of the administrative
Transport resources had been
stretched since Mekili and now the limit had been reached.
There were
practically no reserves west of Tobruk and, as usual, no substantial enemy
dumps had been found to supplement our deficiencies. It seemed that although
the enemy could and did live on our supplies we could never return the
Re-grouping and Re-organization
The opening of 1942 found the enemy preparing his positions in the
marshes at El Agheila with a covering force at Agedabia which had success-
fully withstood all attempts to dislodge it.
been training east of the Egyptian frontier was now ordered forward and
it was decided to bring forward 4 Indian Division from the Jebel as soon
Meanwhile 30 Corps, left behind on the frontier, had been reducing the
enemy strongholds at Bardia and around Halfaya.
The sooner this was
achieved the better because the main road route through Sollum to Tobruk
from Mischeifa Rail-head was badly needed again and its re-opening would
effect a considerable economy of transport.
of effecting the capture of the strongholds with the minimum of casualties
and was soon successfully achieved, Bardia surrendering on 2nd January.
the fate of Bardia lack of food and water made the surrender of Halfaya
inevitable, and the exhausted garrison eventually capitulated on 17th January.
It had been hoped to put in a small coaster to Derna shortly after its
capture, but it was not until 9th January that it opened as a port.
Eighth Army had replaced the forward base there by F.M.C. No. 101 and
was responsible for stocking it first by road from Tobruk and later by sea.
87 Sub-Area was installed and made responsible for the F.M.C. An Additional
commitment was the necessity to provide approximately 50 tons of civil
supplies a day for distribution to the local population through the Occupied
Enemy Territories Administration.
Until the port of Benghazi was opened 13 Corps was responsible for
the maintenance of all troops in the Benghazi area, and drew requirements
in third line transport from F.M.C. No. 101.
The only exception was that
army headquarters undertook responsibility for delivery of A.A. ammunition
-on occasions a fairly heavy commitment.
Considerable delay ensued before Benghazi (now under H.Q. 91 Sub-Area)
The first convoy arrived on 7th January, but bad weather
and the lack of lighters made unloading a slow business.
fifty tons were unloaded on 8th January, but only 90 tons on 9th January.
The urgent need was for more tugs and lighters when it was conservatively
