available to Headquarters, Western Desert Force for the
7 Armoured Division
4 Indian Division
16 Infantry Bde. (under command of 4 Indian Division)
One Battalion R.T.R. (Infantry Tanks Mk. II)
Matruh Garrison Force (variously known as Arthurforce, Selbyforce,
The total strength of the force was approximately 31,000 men, 120 guns,
cars and 275 tanks of which more than half were light tanks,
and the remainder cruiser and infantry tanks.
Matruh Garrison Force was
a small composite column based on a motorised infantry battalion, with
25-prs. and sixteen dummy guns, a M.G. Company, an additional
company, and R.E. and service elements.
however, other than some dummies.
As only light forces of 7 Armoured Division were in contact with the
enemy round Sidi Barrani, it was necessary
the main force located
round Matruh should make an approach march of 60 or 70 miles during
which the advantage of surprise might well be lost.
Furthermore, the coast
road was ploughed up and heavily mined as far as
70 kilometres from
Matruh, and no reserve of supplies existed forward of Matruh.
as always, was limited; in this case, extremely so, and it was obviously
necessary to form advance dumps of ammunition, supplies, water and petrol
in the desert, between our lines at Matruh and those of the enemy.
meant that some five days requirements for the force had to be stored
some twenty or thirty miles in advance of our fortified lines, covered only
by advanced patrols, and that the dumping of these stores had to be done
in such a way as not to attract the notice of the enemy and betray our
At the same time the secrecy of the operation was of such a
high standard that only some dozen senior commanders and staff officers
knew of the plan until very shortly before its execution, and the explanation
given for the establishment of the forward dump
formed in connection with a programme of major exercises then starting:
The first exercise held at the end of November, south and south-west of
Matruh was in fact a rehearsal of the proposed operation, although this
was, of course, unknown save to the chosen few, and it was given out that
a second exercise would be held in December.
Indeed, it was only when
many of the troops had, as they imagined, begun this second exercise that
they were told that they were actually in the process of undertaking an
active operation against the enemy.
The excuse given for the move forward
of 4 Indian Division was that it was to relieve 7 Armoured Division.
The plan involved a preliminary movement of some 70 miles for the
majority of troops over open desert.
This was to be covered in two marches
on successive nights (the whole force was motorised) and the attack was to
place in the early morning following the second night's march.
would thus be necessary for the whole force to spend one day in the open
desert, not more than 30 miles off the enemy and it was naturally to be
feared that the enemy might well make heavy air attacks with his numerically
WO 217
superior air force if he observed the movement. This was, however, an
essential risk, and
in the event it proved justified since the enemy made
no attack whatsoever.
As the attacking infantry had to be concentrated within reach of their
objective, it was necessary that they should be lifted forward in M.T. The
only M.T. available for this purpose were the improvised reserve M.T. com-
panies doing third line duties for 7 Armoured Division. To remove these
companies for troop carrying would disorganize the normal system of supply
during the operations, because, even if rail-head for 7 Armoured Division
and 4 Indian Division were brought forward to Matruh, this would still be
beyond second line reach of the troops taking part in the operations. Thus
came about the decision to establish forward (or field) supply depots
(F.S.Ds.) (the forerunners of the present day field maintenance areas although
in this operation there was an F.S.D. for each division). The locations of
the F.S.Ds. which were opened during the operation are shown on Map 12.
The targets for the orginal depots were designed to cover the duration of
the expected five-day operation and consisted of :—
Supplies: Five days " vehicle scale" with hard scale for Indian
Petrol: 100 miles for all vehicles.
Ammunition: Two lifts of second line scales.
In order to provide sufficient transport to stock these dumps, the rail-head
for 4 Indian Division was moved to Gerawla, from which the division could
draw direct in first line transport, while rail-head for 7 Armoured Divison
was moved from Fuka to Qasaba within second line reach.
second line transport of 4 Indian Division and the third line which had
been maintaining 7 Armoured Division became available for dumping opera-
The necessary stocks of petrol and supplies were railed forward
to Qasaba, where an advanced depot was established.
delivered at Sidi Haneish for 4 Indian Division and at Fuka for 7 Armoured
No. 3 F.S.D. and No. 4 F.S.D. were located to serve 4 Indian Division
and 7 Armoured Division respectively for the opening stages of the battle,
and stocking with petrol and supplies began on Ist November, by which
date the necessary guards and unloading parties were available.
Owing to the necessity for siting these depots in very advanced positions,
careful precautions had to be taken to conceal them from air observation.
This was effected by very wide dispersion in small stacks.
limited to one hundred cases of petrol or supplies stacked in irregular shapes
The cases were then smeared with waste oil and coated
When the stacks were located
camouflaged with scrub and weighted down.
Each stack was at least 150
yards away from the next.
Never more than one lorry was permitted to
unload at each stack at one time, and lorries which were waiting to unload
or had completed unloading were sent to a dispersed rendezvous well away
4 Indian Division in some cases buried their stacks,
but this method of concealment was not so effective and often made issue
to second line vehicles very difficult.
As regards water, arrangements were
