Unfortunately, complete figures of the tonnages handled by
Ordnance
during the period 1939-1942 are not available,
but after 1941 the steep
rise in war production and the intensified mobilization programme necessi-
tated a further expansion in the service, and the existing and projected
command depots were again found to be inadequate.
This state of affairs
was aggravated by the fact that several depots in the coastal regions had
had to be hurriedly evacuated.
To meet the deficiency, schools, warehouses and factories, all over the
country were requisitioned for service as satellite depots.
although inevitable, resulted in a large unwieldy organization which could
only be operated with considerable administrative difficulty; difficulty which
was further increased by the continual opening, closing and re-grouping of
the satellites.
For instance, in May, 1941, the C.O.D. Cambridge was given
command of sub-depots at Norwich and Thetford. The Cambridge depot
was itself unsatisfactory, consisting as it did of several scattered buildings,
and was subsequently
closed and transferred to Ely.
Later the Norwich
depot was evacuated and transferred to alternative premises.
In some instances.
and rail facilities and thus bore no relationship to the boundaries of areas
or sub-areas.
dispersion and the use of whatever accommodation was available.
the depots were too small and widely scattered in the majority of cases.
Consequently overheads were unjustifiably large, and the lack of a satis-
factory central provision organization in the early stages complicated the
issue of stores which were in short supply.
Issues were made, according to local circumstances, direct from depots,
from command dumps, rail-heads and road-heads.
The increased use of
divisional ordnance dumps eased, to some degree, the load on the depots
which were unable to make bulk issues to the A.D.O.S. of the division-
an
A simplified audit and accounting procedure was
introduced into the larger depots with a consequential economy in effort
and
Indenting was simplified for units by
the introduction
of a new system of presentation of the War Equipment Tables (A.F.G1098).
which enabled the G1098 to be used both as a scale and a ledger.
The passing of the majority of Vote 9 stores to General Staff control
in 1940 left the Q.M.G. concerned only with their storage and issue. and
thus the history of their provision will be found elsewhere.
In those exciting days of 1940 it is doubtful whether
anyone
at any
time was aware of the exact number of rifles held by the fighting services
and the Home Guard.
brought home by the B.E.F.
There was certainly no knowledge of the number
The rate of new production was in the
region of 8,000 a month and was supplemented by consignments of Ross
rifles from North
America.
It was found possible to re-equip the five
regular divisions almost immediately, but subsequently the necessity
arm the territorial divisions, A.D.G.B. training and static units,
with the enormous demands
coupled
from the L.D.Vs.
slowed down the
rate of
issue until it was little more than a trickle compared with the deficiencies.
All stooks were issued to commands for issue to troops and Home Guard,
leaving only a small reserve.
248
WO27
1 p
The haste in which issues were made is illustrated by the fact that on
and 37,000,000 rounds of .300 ammunition.
arrived at Liverpool containing 196,000 rifles
The Prime Minister charac-
teristically directed that these should be unloaded and delivered to L.D.Vs.
(The normal procedure was for them to be delivered to
the Ministry of Supply for de-greasing at a maximum rate of 20,000 per
The Q.M.G. directed that they should be unloaded and delivered
immediately on a
system, and that the de-
greasing should be left to the L.D.Vs. In this manner the entire consign-
ment was in the hands of the Home Guard by the 13th July.
a good effect on the morale of the Home Guard, but as de-greasing had
to be carried out with an insufficient number of pull-throughs by uninstructed
men who were in most cases quite unfamiliar with the .300 rifle it would
be an exaggeration to claim that the 196,000 recipients were properly armed
as soon as the issue was complete.
A number of 75 mm. field equipments were imported from the U.S.A.
or evacuated from France and Norway, and were distributed under War
Office arrangements with considerable difficulty.
Almost all of the ammuni-
tion supplied with the guns was found to require re-conditioning and such
parts as dial sights were often sent in separate consignments,
causing delay in assembly.
the middle of July, 1940, the
total number of equipments in the country was over 400-a most valuable
The modifications in the field force system of ammunition supply to
meet conditions at home were: —
War Office Central Ammunition
Base Ammunition Depots.
Ammunition Sub-Depots.
Advanced Ammunition Depots.
Command Ammunition Depots.
Corps Ammunition Depots.
Corps Ammunition Parks.
Ammunition Companies (2nd line).
First line with units.
Before the evacuation of the B.E.F. ammunition was only held in bulk at
the War Office depots such as Corsham and Bramley, issues being made to
units on mobilization either direct or through mobilization centres.
Dunkirk it was evident that ammunition trough mobilization centreat naily
and dispersed to meet invasion conditions.
Ammunition sub-depots, command
and corps ammunition depots were therefore formed, sited by the Staff and
A.S.Ds. were located, if possible, outside probable operational areas and
were controlled by the War Office, although stocks in excess of War Ofice
reserve were under command control.
might have been put completely under commandse
In the event of invasion the A.S.Ds.
command A.Ds. were incorporated with A.S.Ds.
Otherwise command and
corps A.Ds. were generally sited with a view to their operational employ-
Aent and, although they were given different titles, both command and corps
A.Ds. functioned on similar given different difference between them being
only in respect of tonnages.
