Numerous rivers and streams, rising in the mountain range, traverse the
coastal areas before reaching
the sea.
The largest of these is the Perak
River in the northern part of the west coast area.
The Island of Penang lies off the west coast of Malaya some 350 miles
as the crow flies from Singapore.
Strategy, 1937-1939
on the fundamental assumption that the British fleet would sail from home
n the lan, edent aolin in
In 1937, defence policy in regard to the Malayan peninsula was based
waters immediately upon the outbreak of war with Japan, and would arrive
at Singapore within a maximum of 70 days.
It was further assumed that
the arrival of the fleet in the Far East would automatically put an end to
any danger of the capture of Singapore.
It followed from these assumptions that the role of the garrison was
confined to holding out for 70 days, and the administrative plan thus only
had to provide against such types of operations as the Japanese might hope
to complete successfully within that period.
to the wisdom of these assumptions.
It was appreciated that events in
Europe would almost certainly prevent the fleet from reaching Singapore
within the planned 70 days, and that, in consequence, a more deliberate
form of attack by the Japanese could be undertaken, including the proba-
bility of use being made by them of the neutral territory of southern Siam
(or Thailand).
" The use of territory in Southern Siam by the Japanese is a con-
tingency which demands our careful study.
It would enable them both
within striking distance of Malaya.
Naval and air forces of sufficient
strength to frustrate such an attempt are necessary. •
1937.)
(Extract from Report from G.O.C. Malaya to War Office, November,
"It is an attack from the northward that I regard as the greatest
potential danger to the fortress.
during the period of the north-east monsoon.
Such an attack could be carried out
places impassable for infantry."
The jungle is not in most
(Extract from Appreciation by G.O.C. Malaya, May, 1938)
Nevertheless, despite repeated warnings, until the
summer of 1939
imperial defence policy continued to be based on the original assumption
might be.
that the fleet would sail from home waters whatever the situation in Europe
Only when war with Germany was imminent was it officially
recognized that this might not be possible; the " period before relief" was
then increased from 70 to 180 days and plans were prepared to augment
the defence forces proportionately.
In September, 1940, the Japanese occupied the northern portion of Indo-
China, thereby greatly increasing the threat to Singapore.
In fact, the whole
conception of the defence problem was asain changed because a Japanese
284
WO277
invading force- instead of having to be transported all the way from Japan-
could now be concentrated and prepared within close striking distance of
Malaya.
Malaya Command
As a result the strength of Malaya Command was further increased,
and on the outbreak of war with Japan on 8th December, 1941, the order
of battle of the command was as follows: —
H.Q. MALAYA COMMAND
Singanore
Fortress
(2 Inf. Bdes.
& R.A. (Coast)
& Fortress
Troops)
A.A.
Defences
Australian
Forces
12 Indep.
Sarawak
Inf. Bde.
(Command
& Brunei
Reserve)
Christmas
Islands
3 Indiar
Corps
L. of C.
Area
Penang
9 Indian
Fortress
11 Indian
Division
Division
3 Indian Corps were responsible for that part of Malaya which lay north
of Johore and Malacca, including the Island of Penang, while the Australian
forces were responsible for the defence of the state of Malacca and the
greater part of Johore. The command reserve was prepared to fight anywhere
in Malaya, although in the event of an advance into Thailand (Siam) by
3 Indian Corps.
3 Indian Corps, it would immediately be moved north and placed under
The possibility of an advance into Southern Thailand was covered by a
plan known as " Matador", which, although never put into effect owing
to the swift advance of the enemy, had considerable repercussions on adminis-
trative and maintenance arrangements before the beginning of hostilities.
"Matador"
Singora and hold a defensive position north of Haad-Yai Junction,
was to take the form of a road/rail advance to capture
and
an advance from Kroh to a line on the Kroh-Pattani road some 35-40
miles within the Thailand frontier.
mander to
Under any circumstances it would obviously be a serious step for a com-
have to make a
decision entailing the violation
"Matador" as originally conceived
bined with other limitations of a political nature, made it inevitable that
territory however dubiously that neutrality was regarded and this, com-
was impossible of execution.
Had it
been implemented it mightone had the effect of easing the air situation
by depriving the enem of forward in lue hit on the has hand it
might have led to irreparable and early disaster.
were under Headquarters,
All land forces in Malaya, Sarawak and Brunei, and the Christmas Islands
Command.
During October,
Commander-in-Chief Ear Fast had heen sunninted race ila to the Chint
commands continued to deal with the War Office on all administrative matters.
of Staff for operational control in pum Malay and Lan Kong
C.-in-C. had neither administrative responsibility nor staff. and the three
285
