possessed a small harbour, but no water supply, and the road from Sidi
Barrani to Sollum was then non-existent.
It had always been the policy
to allow the enemy to advance on our defences at Matruh before meeting
him in any force although it was intended to harass his advance to the
Nevertheless, some time before Italy came into the War, a small covering
force consisting of 7 Armoured Division, less one armoured brigade, was
placed on the frontier with instructions to attack the Italian frontier posts
as soon as possible after war broke out.
From the outset, this small force
dominated the Italians and, having secured the initiative, kept the enemy in
a continued state of anxiety by raids and minor attacks.
Although most
administrative problem was a considerable one since it was quite impossible
for the divisional R.A.S.C. (which consisted only of about 100 load-carrying
vehicles) to maintain the force unassisted.
The whole of the second line
of 4 Indian Division together with two or three locally raised and manned
general transport companies were therefore formed into an improvised third
line and operated from Matruh to just east of Sidi Barrani.
affected the availability of 4 Indian Division for operations.
hard at work modernizing
strengthening the defences which at the outbreak of war with Italy, were
being manned by 22 Infantry Brigade, with Egyptian battalions under an
Egyptian brigade headquarters in support. In July, however, 14 Infantry
Brigade took over this task, and one month later the Egyptian troops were
relieved by British battalions.
The Italian Advance
By the middle of July the enemy had moved up two divisions and the
elements of two more, to the frontier, and, in spite
small force was still dominating the situation and inflicting many casualties,
it became obvious that the Italians were at the least contemplating an
advance over the frontier.
Behind Matruh further defences were constructed,
and the process of laying in siege reserves was started.
It was envisaged that Matruh, in a state of seige, could be maintained by
sea. The harbour, however, could not be said to possess any facilities beyond
All unloading would have had to be done by lighter,
and there was one fixed crane of about three tons.
Re-supply by small
coasters was, on the other hand, perfectly feasible.
The target of reserves for
Matruh was fixed at six weeks and the garrison of about 7,000 men consisted
of five infantry battalions manning sectors, a machine gun battalion and two
field regiments; there were also elements of R.E.,
R.A.S.C., R.A.M.C.,
R.A.O.C., and military labour, and an Egyptian anti-aircraft component.
The plan envisaged that Matruh would hold out at all costs against
investment by the enemy and that his tenuous communications would be
continually attacked by our armoured forces.
On the assumption that the
water supply would be jeopardized, the major concern was the provision of
water to the garrison of Matruh during a state of siege.
of storage capacity was available including wells dating from Roman times,
98
WO217
1 0
anchored in the harbour.
but mainly the plan called for the pumping of water ashore from ships
Matruh is contained in Section 10 of this chapter.
A more detailed account of the water supply in
The British forces not beleaguered in Matruh would operate from the
Ma'aten Bagush area and be maintained from the advanced base at El Daba.
Sporadic raids, most of them astonishingly successful in the losses inflicted
on the Italians, when compared with those suffered by our forces, continued
up to the beginning of September, 1940.
invaluable for lowering Italian morale and making the
Although such successes were
minded, the strain on 7 Armoured Division was heavy. Much of their equip-
ment had been old when the War started and very little new equipment or
M.T. was coming to the Middle East at that time.
at the end of July to withdraw the armoured brigade from the frontier, and to
replace it by a composite force under command of the divisional support
This order was issued at a time when over a third of the total
number of 306 tanks on the establishment of units were under repair in
R.A.O.C. workshops.
Apart from the shortage of spares, almost non-
existent in the case of A.F.Vs., the distance from rail-head increased the
difficulties, for there were at the time neither transporters nor a reserve of
Although the Italians were not displaying much enthusiasm for the venture
of crossing the frontier, it was realized that if they were to bring forward large
forces, a limited withdrawal by our troops would become inevitable.
were therefore given for Sollum to be abandoned when enemy pressure
developed and for the road and water storage to be destroyed.
danger lay in the arrival, without the knowledge of our Intelligence, of
German armoured and motorised units.
absence of air reconnaissance and other information, for the Germans to have
passed troops undetected to Tripoli or even Benghazi. This danger, how-
ever, did not materialize for some six months.
It was obvious that if the Italians were to summon up sufficient courage
and determination to advance, they would have two alternatives.
was to carry out the main advance along the coast road, the second a wide
The enemy's major problem was
administration, and that would probably dictate both his speed and direction
although the possibility of his use of air supply might upset all previous fore-
This might well enable him to drive a small armoured and motorised
force right through to the Nile Delta.
The situation as regards reinforcements both of personnel and equipment
was still bad. None of the army formations in Egypt were complete. 4 Indian
Division was still one brigade short, and deficient of its full establishment of
The New Zealand contingent which had arrived in March and
consisted of one brigade with divisional troops had only a training scale of
equipment and in emergency it would only have been possible, by pooling such
equipment as they had to use about one third of their strength; the remainder.
equipped only with small arms, were not fit for other than an internal security
role. There was a general shortage of ammunition of all types, and the army
had no adequate protection against low-flying attack, there being only twelve
D* 2
12090
