The major installations of the new base were laid out as follows:
B.S.D.
Central R.A.S.C. Workshops
M.T. Spares Depot, R.A.S.C
Firdan
/ Tel-El-Kebir
Vehicle®
Reserve
Depot, R.A.S.C
Central R.A.O.C. Workshops
M.T. Spares Depot
General Stores
Tel-El-Kebir
Vehicle Reserve Depot
Ammunition Depot
Abu Sultan
R.E. Stores Depots
Delta Barrage, Alexandria, Fanara and
near Suez.
R.A.M.C. Stores Depots
El Mahgar (Tel-El-Kebir) and Cairo.
In 1939, recommendations had been submitted by G.H.Q. for approval
by the War Office for the construction of bulk storage for the P.O.L.
reserves which previously had been held in tins.
This consisted of three
depots disposed as follows and representing six months' reserve:
Suez-Cairo Road (Kilo 104)—8,000 tons.
The tankage at Geneifa was connected by piping to discharge facilities
on the Great Bitter Lake as was that on the Cairo-
-Suez Road with Suez.
Tankers could thus pump fuel direct into storage while these two large
tank systems were also inter-connected to allow transfer of stocks.
was in underground tanks protected by thirty inches of soil and a six-inch
concrete burster slab. Work began just before the outbreak of war and
as the tankage was completed so was the tinned reserve reduced.
be mentioned that the intention to use
"flimsy" 4-gallon containers for
distribution of petrol continued unchanged.
Various suggestions for
returnable containers had been turned down on the grounds that the 4-gallon
"flimsy" had for so long survived
transport by camel and donkey and
general rough handling in the Middle East and Asia generally that it would
undoubtedly be adequate for war—an unfortunate view which caused much
concern to "Q" staffs for the next two years.
Plans for the repair and overhaul of M.T. entailed the establishment of
centralized plants for the use of mass production methods in overhauling
At this time the R.A.O.C. and the R.A.S.C. had separate
and therefore full centralization could not
achieved, but centralized spares depots could be sited nearby.
capacity was of course also necessary for those vehicles that existed only
in limited quantities and for which, therefore, the mass production methods
of overhaul would have been impracticable.
Tel-El-Kebir became the centre
of M.T. repair activity in Egypt.
Engineer stores depots were established early near Suez and at Alexandria
and Fanara, and we were fortunately able to take over a large area occupied
by the contractors for the Delta Barrage.
The construction of the ammunition
depot at Abu Sultan in no way affected the use of the Tura caves, south-east
of Cairo, which
were being adapted for the storage of ammunition and
explosives generally (see Section 1).
Headquarters, British Troops in Egypt was responsible for the base and
all the constructional work therein entailed, which of course included exten-
sive hutted camps for the large number of personnel manning the various
168
WO217
1 P
depots.
The amount of constructional work required was enormous.
(The
total cost of the construction eventually required for the base has been
estimated at £200,000,000, and the total labour force at one time employed
on it, at a quarter of a million.) In all cases the lay-out necessitated the
construction of railway spurs and grids, roads and fencing, apart from such
normal services as the development, or initial provision, of electric power
and light by the building of generating stations.
The development of water
supplies, the construction of filtration plants and the provision of drainage,
sanitation facilities, and signal communications were also necessary in every
The first tasks to be put in hand before the actual building of the covered
storage sheds and accommodation could be started were the lay-out and
of the necessary railway spurs into the depot sites and the
provision of adequate water supplies and sanitation.
These railway spurs
and sidings were to be the means of dumping the necessary constructional
stores on the sites, but, owing to the tardiness of the Egyptian State Railways
who were responsible for the railway work, much delay occurred and thus
the value of the high priority given to this task was, to a certain extent, lost.
It was necessary to plan not only for the maintenance of nine divisions
in the Middle East, but also for the provision of the necessary accommoda-
This task was two-fold. Firstly the erection of accommodation had
to be immediately put in hand for the existing garrison and for those forma-
tions of whose early arrival G.H.Q. Middle East had received definite informa-
Such were an Indian
Division followed by 1 Cavalry Division,
6 Australian Division and the New Zealand Division.
Secondly, accom-
modation had to be planned and constructed for the formations which would
arrive later, bringing up the garrison to the scheduled total of nine divisions
with a complement of corps, army, L. of C., and G.H.Q. troops.
Although
it had been agreed that these formations would be divided between Egypt
and Palestine in the proportion of six divisions to three, the major portion
of such base units as personnel depots and hospitals was to be sited in
Egypt. As all personnel ships would arrive at Egyptian ports, the majority
of the requisite transit camps was, again, to be sited in Egypt. For the
accommodation of the full nine divisions it was decided to develop the areas
of Geneifa, Quassassin and Tahag.
At Geneifa were located the infantry
base depot, large P.W. camps, the R.A.S.C. base depot and training camp,
a 1,200 bed hospital and various stores depots, while the area of Quassassin
(which included Tahag) was planned to accommodate 100,000 troops.
The main difficulty was over the provision of materials, particularly of
timber, with the result that many substitutes had to be improvised and the
existing scale of construction drastically modified.
A long and extensive
argument developed between the War Office and G.H.Q. over the relative
costs and advantages of tents and huts; tents depreciated very rapidly as
a result of the fabric rotting in summer, but this disadvantage had little
bearing in the final decision which was eventually dictated by the shortage
of hutting materials and the need for the speedy provision of accommoda-
the ends and to needly completely hutted camps were those
for the Australians at Gaza in Palestine, the New Zealand Division at Maadi
and Helwan; certain base hospitals and depots also had a proportion of
hutting.
169
