To wind up this brief review of the administrative conditions prevailing in
Malaya on the eve of war, it is relevant to record the following comment by
the G.O.C.
"I feel bound to record
there was a lack of the team spirit
between the Service Departments on the one hand and the Civil Govern-
ment on the other in tackling problems of common interest.
The vital
importance of attaining the common object, i.e., the security of Malaya,
was at times overshadowed by local interests.
The task of balancing the
requirements of a country of vital strategic importance to the Empire
with those of a wealthy and prosperous commercial community was a
difficult one requiring great tact and patience.
Delays, as has
so often happened before in our history, resulted from discussions as to
the relative financial responsibility of the Home and Malayan Govern-
ments on matters of defence."
Other historians have been, or will be, charged with the responsibility of
determining to what extent the co-operation, or lack of co-operation, existing
in Malaya between the civilian and military authorities had an effect on subse-
quent events.
The authors confine themselves to the observation that rela-
tions between the civil power and the military authorities,
unless they are
cordial and free from suspicion, cannot fail to have far-reaching effects upon
the administration of a force operating in friendly territory.
The Japanese Attack
After a period of tension and uncertainty, the Japanese took the plunge
into war with several simultaneous and characteristic acts of aggression
and treachery.
Opening hostilities with the surprise and unprovoked attack on the United
States fleet at Pearl Harbour on 7th December, 1941, the Japanese invaded
Malaya on 8th December.
On that day, about ten ships disembarked troops
at Kota Bharu; later on, large forces were landed at Singora and Patani in
Southern Thailand.
(See Map 25.)
Singapore was made with little or no practical results.
At the same time an air attack on
The landing at Kota
Bharu quickly succeeded, albeit at considerable cost, in capturing the import-
ant airfield there on Ith December, after which the invading forces turned
south.
Meanwhile they had made their main advance from Singora following the
railway which ran across the peninsula and down the west coast.
days the general situation changed greatly to our disadvantage.
our troops, although battling heroically, were out-numbered.
The enemy soon
established complete air superiority over North Malaya, and with the grievous
loss, by sinking, of the battleship
"Prince of Wales"
and the battle cruiser
" Repulse", assumed undisputed control of the sea communications east of
In accordance with pre-war plans, the denial to the enemy of the oilfields
and installations in Sarawak and Borneo
was completed, as
far as was
About the middle of December.
instructions were received from London to the effect that, as our troops
possible, as soon as hostilities broke out.
290
WO2TY
withdrew, an unrestricted " scorched earth" policy was to be applied through-
out Malaya.
This immediately gave rise to comparisons with the policy
which the Russians were then pursuing, although, in fact, our problem differed
General Percival has pointed out that whereas the Russian armies were
withdrawing through a country inhabited by their own people, our forces
were withdrawing through a country inhabited by Asiatic peoples whom we
-both by honour and by treaty—to protect. If we deprived these
people of the necessities of life they could claim that we were not treating
them in accordance with our promises, and would become fertile ground for
the seeds of the enemy's propaganda. (From the military point of view, of
course, the destruction of roads and railway bridges was obviously essential
to delay the enemy, and had, in fact, been carried out since the beginning of
Other aspects of the problem which had to be considered were
the practicability of applying a " scorched earth" policy, and the moral effect
it would have, if applied, on both soldiers and civilians.
From the practical aspect, widespread destruction is not an operation
which can be carried out effectively at the last minute.
To be effective it
must be both prepared and put into execution in advance of a final with-
drawal, and in fact it was found impossible for the military authorities to
carry out, or supervise, the destruction in so large an area, and the best that
could be done was to appoint officers to tour the country to see that adequate
arrangements had been made.
executive work had to be left to the
owners on receipt of properly authorized orders.
The moral effect on both
soldiers and civilians would be, it was anticipated-for obvious reasons—
extremely adverse, and, with these considerations in mind, the final decision
was that, although the " scorched earth" policy was to be enforced, it would
not apply to foodstuffs already issued to the civilian population or to water
supplies or power plants.
During the months of December and January withdrawals continued
throughout the country.
The landing at Singora resulted in a steady advance
through Kedah to Alor Star, where the airfield had been evacuated within
two days of the opening of hostilities, and the seizure of the base of Penang
on 19th December, although not before a a the seizund de the base of penan
carried out on the island.
From Penang, the invaders proceeded south to
Ipoh, the centre of the tin industry, where, as part of a pincer movement with
the forces that had landed at Patani and advanced through Grik, they
captured the town on 27th December.
Kuala Lumpur fell on 11th January:
Gemas a few days later.
On 16th January, enemy columns entered the state
of Johore.
To the south-west of Gemas, Japanese forces, despite opposition
by Indian and Australian units, crossed the Muar River, south of which
landings were made (19th January) at Batu Pahat.
columns converged on Kluans, Which was Batted on 23rd January.
From Gemas also
Additional landings were made on the east coast, notably at Kuantan
on 31st December, and Endau on 26th January, after the Australian forces
had evacuated Mersing, day on 26th January, after the Aank caused by
the enemy occupation of Kluang.
291
1 2
12090
