the point of view of distance there was little in this switch, and much of
the force's resources of transport had to remain allotted to 12 (A) Division.
Although the number of transport companies available to the force had
the proportion of vehicles off the road owing to wear and
tear had risen sharply.
It was seldom that a company of 75 lorries could
find 50 in running order, so heavy had the strain been on transport in the
and so acute the shortage of spares, combined with lack of work-
As a rule the number of lorries working the road link was
kept as near as possible to 800; on a six day turn-round, with one day
off for maintenance,
about 200 tons a day were lifted to Diredawa, and
The need too for an allocation of transport to bridge
the rail gap at Awash must not be forgotten.
The second stage in the L. of C. (the stretch of railway between Diredawa
and the Awash) was complicated by the efforts of the Italians to deny the
Before blowing the high level bridge over the gorge through
which the Awash River runs—a feat accomplished most sucessfully-they
had removed to Addis Ababa as many of the locomotives and as much of
the rolling stock as possible.
Such locomotives as they had left behind
(about six) were immobilized.
By dint of much hard work, one locomotive
had been put in working order, and on 7th April the first train had run from
Awash, hauling 100 tons.
Later, the other locomotives
were repaired in the railway workshops, after repairs had been carried out
to the machinery there which had also been much damaged. It was pos-
sible to obtain spare parts from those of the locomotives removed to Addis
Not only were spares brought down, but, to supplement rolling
stock reserves, 16 short trucks were even man-handled across the Awash road
The final stage, the stretch of railway between the Awash and Addis
Ababa, never gave any appreciable trouble-locomotives and rolling stock
Meanwhile work on a low level diversion to replace the demolished high
level railway bridge over the Awash
River was going ahead, but it was
a long job for there was no standardized bridging equipment in the theatre.
At the same time the permanent way was in need of attention right down
to the frontier of French Somaliland and sundry demolitions required to
South African transportation units using uniformed Italian
who were a constant source of trouble owing to their
concern for the safety of their families, were responsible for the operation
Until the Awash bridge was finally completed during July, maintenance
along the L. of C. was necessarily on a hand-to-mouth basis and the fortuitous
capture of a dump of nearly a million gallons of Italian petrol in Addis
Ababa meant the difference between success and failure.
It was used as
sparingly as possible to make good the shortfall in what could be brought
up from
Berbera, but by the time the bridge was open, the dump was
down to 10,000 gallons.
Once the bridge was completed, and trains could
go straight through from Diredawa to Addis Ababa, a petrol crisis became
a thing of the past.
Four staging camps had had to be erected along the L. of C., where the
large number of prisoners could remain it suficient transportation was not
150
WORT
immediately available at each stage. The Italians were evacuated to Kenya
by sea from Berbera, and much assistance was received from Aden where
a P.W. camp for 2,000 was formed.
The number of African prisoners was
enormous and, as we could not feed them or guard them, we took away
their rifles and told them to go home.
Development of the ports and L. of C. continued all the time.
last week of April, a South African harbour construction company was
transferred from Mogadishu to Berbera and its arrival released more local
labour to join those already at work on the roads which had never been
designed for such heavy traffic as they now had to support.
ditions also received a severe setback at the end of April when one day
saw as much rainfall as normally sufficed for five years and not unnaturally
every road was completely washed out.
None the less, the end of May
saw reserves at last being gradually built up, although by this date the
average daily petrol consumption had risen to 45,000 gallons.
The switch of the maintenance of 12 (A) Division from Mogadishu to
Nanyuki has already been mentioned, and in this case too the rains were
The road along which the lorry convoys ran passed
through Marsabit, Mega and Neghelli—a total of some 600 miles-and
small reserves of basic commodities were held at points along the route.
For some time this L. of C. worked satisfactorily, but with the rains came
wash-outs on the road and at one point—a river crossing-bridges and
The daily run of the lorry convoys became shorter
and shorter, and eventually the leading brigade ran out of petrol.
line transport, moving forward to refill it, also ran out of petrol and was
forced to use what it was carrying.
The same thing happened to the third
line transport, the shortage flashed back down the L. of C. and suddenly
all movement stopped, there being not a can of petrol anywhere forward
Fortunately the division was not actively engaged
and rations sufficed, though in some cases troops were put on half rations
In general, however, apart from local resources, reserves
of supplies were usually considerable, being so easily carried, and the division
managed to tide over until petrol began to come forward again.
matter of weeks before the
" pipe-line" was properly filled up again, and
it probably came as a surprise to many that so much petrol was locked
It was fortunate too that 12 (A) Division was in a well-
watered country and was not dependent on petrol for bringing water supplies.
MOPPING-UP OPERATIONS
Operations subsequent to the capture of the
capital were somewhat
affected by the necessity of releasing as many units and, in particular, trans-
port, as possible for service in Egypt-and this to some extent depended
on the speed with which the Ethiopian administration could be re-established.
After the fall of Addis Ababa, and of Asmara and Massawa to the forces
from the Sudan, the enemy had retreated to the centres or redoubts
Dessie, Amba Alagi and Gondar and, in the Galla Sidamo area (with which
this section is more particularly concerned) to the Uaddara-Alghe-
-Soddu
area, the Gimma area and the Lechemti area.
One of the first tasks was to open up the road north from Addis Ababa
to Asmara, to facilitate the passage of
troops from East Africa Force to
151
