United Kingdom, the Dominions, India, etc., and this resulted in an auto-
matic reduction in the holdings of reserves, which were not being increased
proportionately.
The situation was further aggravated by the fact that many
formations and units arrived ill-equipped and inroads had to be made on
reserve stocks in desperate attempts to make up their deficiencies.
Somewhat naturally, previous
to Italy's declaration of war, complete
priority as far as stores and equipment were concerned, was given to troops
for, France, and no improvement in the
position could be hoped for until the priority demands of the B.E.F. had
The best that could be aimed
at was the building up of
reserves in the theatre to three months for the increased garrison as, and
when, priority demands for stores and equipment had been met and shipping
for surpluses was available.
Thus it was inevitable that should Italy join
forces with Germany before the Middle East reserve had been properly
established, our position would be most insecure.
In default of material from
Kingdom, recourse had to be made to local production and
resources and to stocks in India but, as yet, availability from such sources
was slender because production was not geared to the extent later achieved.
while Italy remained neutral, the short sea route via the
Mediterranean still remained the life-line with the United Kingdom, and,
so long as stocks from the mounting production at home were adequate and
shipping could be allotted, the build-up of the reserve, once the principle had
been decided, could be achieved fairly rapidly.
The fact that command headquarters possessed no administrative staff
(save the one D.A.Q.M.G. already referred to-whose duties seemed to be
concerned mainly with the local administration of H.Q.) ruled out any possi-
bility of properly earmarking a proportion of the reserves held in the various
theatres of the Command and considering them as theatre reserves.
was little or no administrative co-ordination in the theatre and the various
commands were functioning independently of one another.
Obviously any scale of reserves laid down for Middle East had to be
adequate to cover the period of time which would elapse between the closing
of the Mediterranean, the re-routing of shipping round the Cape and the
arrangement of the necessary escort, air and anti-aircraft protection for ships
passing through the Red Sea. In the light of this the Chiefs of Staffs Com-
mittee had, before the outbreak of war, recommended the total of three
months reserve as a minimum.
In September, 1939 Middle East Command
was in favour of raising the target figure to five months, but in November
modified it to four months for stores from the United Kingdom and three
months for stores of Indian or Australian origin.
This decision was largely
due to assurances by the Royal Navy that they were expecting to receive oil in
the first month after the closure of the Mediterranean, and from the R.A.F.,
who, while not wishing to reduce their own reserves. stated that the Italian
Air Force in Abyssinia was not yet trained in shipping strikes and that the
R.A.F. intended to carry out strong attacks on airfields in Italian East Africa.
The War Office was reluctant, nevertheless, at this stage to agree to less than
Finality was, however, achieved by General Wavell's agreement to accept
five months oficially whilst working, in practice, to four months for United
Kingdom supplies and three months for those from India and Australia. The
WO217
1
rate of build-up of reserves was very slow and was unlikely to show an im-
mediate increase, so it was futile to prolong an argument over an academic
target figure. (It is of interest, in this context, to note that later, at the height
of the Libyan campaign, the passage round the Cape entailed a 331 per cent.
increase in general shipping and a 50 per cent. increase in tanker tonnage.)
Attention was also given to the possibility of developing the rail-road-river
route Mombasa-Khartoum-Cairo.
The fact that this was considered unsatis-
factory merely confirmed the realistic view taken by H.Q., and stressed the
importance of keeping open the route via the Red Sea.
Early Base Arrangements
The Middle East was fortunate in possessing fairly good ports, the most
important of which were Alexandria, Port Said, Suez, Haifa and Port Sudan.
Although in general the pre-war capacity of these ports was sufficient
in the early stages of the war when the rate of effort was relatively small,
much work was later found necessary to pass through the increased tonnages.
Local labour, often a bottleneck was, rather surprisingly, available in plenty-
but air-raids were later to place the supply in jeopardy. On the other hand,
although port facilities were adequate the other essentials of base lay-out were
far from satisfactory.
The stocking of a greater scale of reserves for a vastly greater force in-
volved the provision of large quantities of covered storage, the construction
of spurs and sidings for rail-served depots and miles of roadway.
these demands there were virtually no G.H.Q. troops. Port and dock operating
companies, railway operating companies, railway constructional engineers and
the many other specialists were yet to arrive and even the shortage of ordinary
field companies was acute.
Outline of Maintenance Position at Outbreak of War
Reserve holdings in Egypt were held in two main bases, i.e. Abbassia
(Cairo) and Alexandria, with an advanced base at El Daba, the latter being
suitably situated for the majority of the operational troops who were located
There were, of course, other depots located in the Sudan
and many more in Palestine, but these do not come within the scope of this
section. The units available to operate the installations which comprised these
three bases were very few, while personnel to construct new depots or even
to expand existing ones were equally unobtainable.
On the whole, the situation as regards R.A.S.C. services was satisfactory
except for this general shortage of personnel and for the very low peace
establishments which had to be supplemented by introducing civilians so as
to release the few available soldiers for duty in the Desert.
On the entry of Italy into the War a field service ration scale, which had
previously been prepared, was introduced without difficulty, and although
supply imports became subject to considerable delay there was no immediate
cause for anxiety.
The War Office was requested to ensure that reinforce-
ments were despatched with their appropriate reserves. All local markets were
exploited, and only unobtainable items were required to be imported.
Petrol reserves which in September, 1939 totalled one million gallons had
been increased to nearly three million gallons in June, 1940, most of which
