requirement grew steadily and when the original target date of October,
944, had been reached a new basis of planning had been set to June, 1945,
27 divisions.
118 R.A.F. squadrons.
67 U.S.A.A.F. squadrons plus 600 transport aircraft.
91 U.S.A.A.F. squadrons based on China.
30 Fleet Air Arm squadrons and certain naval forces.
In general terms it was decided that G.H.Q. India would be responsible
for:
Provision of material and personnel on agreed scales.
Control and development of rail, road, river and oil pipe-lines of
communication up to agreed terminals.
The development of ports other than those handed over to S.E.A.C.
Despatches of forces to overseas theatres and their maintenance.
Reception and disposal of all personnel and materials evacuated to
India.
Works Services and the hiring or requisitioning of land or buildings
within the India Command.
Division of responsibilities were likewise fixed between India and S.E.A.C.,
in respect of more detailed matters dealt with by staff branches and services,
although some time elapsed before II Army Group (who had executive
control of army administration in S.E.A.C.) were ready to function in all
respects.
The increased administrative burden obviously necessitated major changes
in the structure of G.H.Q. India, the most important from the administrative
point of view
being the
appointment of Lieutenant-General Lindsell as
Principal Administrative Officer with a special staff for better administrative
co-ordination between G.H.Q. (I) and S.E.A.C.
The implications involved in establishing the new base can now be sum-
marized as follows.
P.A.O. and his staff.
Each problem was a separate major problem to the
Development of port capacity to receive and handle the necessary
tonnage of stores and personnel.
Development of the inland transportation system by rail, road and
I.W.T. to carry vastly increased loads.
Telecommunications development on an appropriate scale.
Provision of living accommodation in a land where little existed
for European and American forces.
Provision of the hospital accommodation required.
Provision of the facilities for training.
Provision of storage accommodation of immense dimensions in a land
where little existed initially and that largely in the wrong place.
WO 217
1
Provision of supply depots, canteens and canteen stores and amenities
under the same conditions.
Provision of cold storage, oil storage, pipe-lines and container plants
for Allied forces and aircraft and for supply to China.
Construction of airfields for our own and American use.
Construction of floating docks and naval repair facilities, sometimes on
a grand scale.
Provision of all the essential services such as water, power, light,
drainage and laundry facilities.
At the same time it was always necessary to give sufficient regard to
civilian needs to prevent famines in either food or material, to ensure essential
labour facilities, and to maintain the health of the population.
Finally, it
must be stressed that the work listed above was needed for neither North-
West Frontier defence nor for Indian internal security. Not a single extra
crane at an Indian port, not single additional siding on an Indian railway
would have been necessary had it not been for the requirements of S.E.A.C.,
and of the U.S. forces in China.
To avoid overloading this chapter with exceptions and explanations, only
general statements, to which there are, of course, many exceptions in detail,
have been made when illustrating the magnitude of the task.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE PORTS
The entry of Japan into the war, as has been seen, called for a complete
administrative lay-out.
Bombay and Cochin, the chief base maintenance ports had to be replaced
by those on the east, Calcutta, Madras and Vizagapatam.
of these three ports, new bases had to be developed.
Madras were formed the great administrative depots of Panagarh and Avadi
and, near Bangalore, the hospital town of Jellahali, and, behind Vizagapatam,
the transit area of Waltair. Fed by these three ports, a great organization
of workshops, stores, depots, vehicle assembly installations, oil depots, air-
fields, personnel camps, tin and oil drum factories and filling plants, and
naval and air force establishments as well as army establishments, was set out
These eastern ports were a difficult problem.
Calcutta was always con-
gested and limited by difficult navigational conditions and could he very
easily blocked by accident or by enemy design.
Vizagapatam was a small
port at the best, designed primarily for the export of manganese and ground-
nuts, and was only capable of verv limited expansion.
from heavy weather.
up to a point but was incapable of expansion and was not entirely safe
Bombav, the best port of the lot was of course on the wrong side
Nevertheless, the military re-construction carried out after the areat fire and
explosions of April, 1944, resulted in it becoming a much better port than
before, and, in fact, the force (" Zipper") destined for the
conquest of Malaya was embarked mainly through Bombay.
Karachi was in any
communications wandered around North-West India for hundreds of miles
case badly served for our purposes since its rail
