he Sittang river disaster really settled the fate of Rangoon, the enemy
preferred to await reinforcements before pushing on, although fairly heavy
fighting continued around Waw, where considerable infiltration was reported.
Apart from the danger to Rangoon, there was a need for a careful watch to
be kept on
Tharrawaddy (on the
road to Prome) which held a very
important dump of supplies and petrol.
The policy of H.M. Government on the evacuation of Rangoon was
quite clear.
If it proved to be impossible to hold the city it was essential
that the demolition of the oil refineries, oil storage, and other important
installations should be as complete as possible.
It was also laid down that
it was not desirable that the Army should become bottled up in Rangoon,
which was in itself indefensible,
but that it should, if necessary, withdraw
and carry on the war in upper Burma.
This
would protect the important airfields up country,
ensure our
continued contact with the Chinese and cover the projected road into India.
A hold on the oilfields in Yenangyaung could also be retained, thus affording
time to complete the necessary arrangements for their denial to the enemy
should still further withdrawal be forced on us.
In this connection, it
had been found possible at a very early stage to move certain plant from
the Rangoon refineries to the oilfields themselves,
and develop a very
considerable output of P.O.L. there-
-amounting to about 1,500,000 gallons
a month-an example of foresight on the part of the military administration
and the oil company.
The arrangements for evacuating Rangoon fell into three stages :-
(i) The warning stage; during which all non-essential personnel would
be encouraged to depart, leaving only those required to run essential
services.
This was started during the fighting on the Sittang river
although nothing was done at the time to reduce the prospect of
holding the city.
(ii) The second stage; in which the final preparations for demolitions
would be completed, and all civilians not required in connection with
this work would be evacuated.
(iii) Finally, the demolition stage,
on completion of which all the
personnel concerned and the military for guarding them were to
depart in transport for which special arrangements were made by
the "Q" staff.
A considerable number of people, especially women and children, left
Rangoon by sea during the early stages of the campaign.
could have been evacuated in this manner but for the astonishing refusal of
the sea transport authorities to carry Indian refugees in empty transports.
Many Indians escaped by walking across the hills from Prome to Taungup
whence they had to take their chance of being cleared to India by sea in
Lack of food, water and medical at toion on this route
caused much suffering and many deaths, including a large number from
cholera, which had also broken out in the area south of Prome, and the
threat of serious epidemic was always present.
However, in view of subse-
quent events in Rangoon, perhaps it was fortunate that evacuation on a large
scale did take place.
322
WORT
The route of evacuation for the majority of the population and civil
administration was inevitably the main Mandalay road and railway. The
proximity of the enemy to this line after the Sittang battles and the small
forces available to cover it rendered it very important that the first stage
should not be left too late.
The unreliability of the railway systems and
personnel was another factor and it was only by the narrowest margin that the
last trains actually succeeded in getting away.
The preparation of the evacuation measures naturally took considerable
time and imposed a severe burden on an already overworked administrative
staff. In the event the interval between the first two stages was considerably
longer than anticipated, owing, partly to the pause in the enemy's advance
described above, and partly to the unfulfilled hope that, even at that late
stage, reinforcements might arrive in sufficient numbers to turn the tide in
During this interval a number of personnel evacuated during
the warning stage were brought back to keep essential services in action until
the last moment.
Large quantities of supplies and stores were also disem-
barked and moved up country to Prome and Mandalay.
with a considerable quantity of supplies back-loaded from the Rangoon depots,
laid the foundation of the chain of dumps which the retreating troops found
of such value during the subsequent withdrawal.
On 22nd February, H.Q. South-West Pacific Command had been notified
by the War Cabinet that in view of a proposed large increase in the Army in
Burma Lieutenant-General Sir Harold Alexander would be appointed as
and on 5th March,
By that date, the weakened 17 Indian Division was holding the area Pegu-
Hlegu, and 1 Burma Division, which had handed over the defence of the
Southern Shan States to the Chinese Sixth Army, was moving south from
Mawchi in the north to Pyu and Nyaungleben in the south.
a gap of 40 miles between Nyaungleben and Pegu which the new C.-in-C.
Before anything could be done, however, the enemy com-
pleted his encircling movement around Pegu and on 6th March cut the
Rangoon-Pegu road.
Counter-attacks to open the road failed, and in view
of other signs that the Japanese had now resumed their offensive, it was
decided that the retention of Rangoon would be quite impossible.
The order to put the denial scheme into operation was given at midnight
power station, the telegraph and wireless installations and the rail and road
bridges were also destroyed.
had not been evacuated and hid vehicles the fires tolazing through the city
Any vehicles, military stores and supplies which
were destroved by the security police and the fire brigade
Owing to the defection of the staft, the doors of the prison and the lunatic
asylum were opened and crin the sat, thaden mingled with the population
and assisted in looting and generally increasina the abounding chaos.
places owing either to the activition of the lostare or to the measures taken
12090
M 2
