often spread over more than one home command (see also Section 3).
Field force formations units and drafts preparing for duty overseas were
mobilized and embarked under
War Office arrangements by the home
command in which they were located.
For administrative purposes the
commands were divided into areas.
The area commanders before the outbreak of war were normally the senior
formation commanders located in the areas.
Upon the outbreak of war,
however, most of the formation commanders were relieved of their static
responsibilities and commanders of areas
were appointed as such.
further decentralization,
areas were again sub-divided into either sub-areas
or districts, such sub-divisions being made solely for local administrative
purposes such as supply and transport, works, medical and barrack services,
etc.
Early Invasion Preparations
During the early stages of the war little alteration was made to the
pre-war lay-out except for a certain amount of re-grouping within com-
mands and the formation of a small number of new areas, notably in the
Scottish Command.
Until May, 1940, the primary administrative responsi-
bilities of the command and area headquarters were confined to routine
maintenance and the mobilization,
units.
Great
With the B.E.F. firmly established in static warfare, air attack on
Britain
practically non-existent,
place in Poland and Finland, such preparations as were made for home
fined to planning departments of the War Office and the commands.
Little
The German attack on Scandinavia, however, and the ineffective Allied
counter-action caused planning to be intensified.
attacks on the Low Countries and the lightning occupation of the
One month afterwards, the
lands by means of the skilful use of airborne troops in conjunction with
ground forces, transformed the invasion of Great Britain from an interest-
ing possibility to a grim and actual threat.
Even before the evacuation
of the main body of the B.E.F. from France was complete, the country was
being placed in a state of preparedness against invasion.
From the outbreak of war the small headquarters of the Home Forces
was responsible for coordinating the planning of military operations in the
Until May, 1940, it was thought that
in this respect was from the danger of a large scale air assault directed
against London or other vital centres of communication,
the sole threat
with a secondary
possibility of sea-borne raids of a more or less nuisance value taking place
against the more vulnerable parts of the coast.
The brunt of the counter-
measures to be taken against such raids was obviously the responsibility of
the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force, but under a plan known as
"Julius Caesar" the assistance of the local military authorities could be
The airborne landings in the Low Countries followed
by the threat to the Channel Ports led to the immediate implementation of
WOrT
measures based on the "Julius Caesar" scheme. All military forces located
in the United Kingdom were placed on the alert and certain tactical moves
were made with the
untrained forces that were available.
consisted of perhaps about ten divisions of which only a few were adequately
The Higher Command
Upon the likelihood of active fighting taking place in England, the status
of H.Q. Home Forces would change overnight from that of a small training
and planning staff to a fully operational General Headquarters. If invasion
should take place or appear imminent, command of military forces in the
United Kingdom would be exercised by the C.-in-C., Home Forces, through
G.H.Q., Home Forces.
become headquarters of armies.
The home commands would at the same time
As might be expected in the circumstances, it was not easy to achieve
complete unanimity between the three Services and the other interested
ministries as to the exercise of command at the highest level. It was obviously
impossible to draw an analogy
with an overseas theatre and state that
should invasion take place, the United Kingdom would become a theatre of
operations and that therefore overall command should be vested in C.-in-C.,
(It must be remembered that the very close inter-Service
system of control which was so successful in later stages of the war had not
even reached the earliest stage of development.) An attempt was made to
solve the problem during the latter part of May by the creation of the Home
Defence Executive (H.D.E.) which
consisted of the Chief of Naval Staff,
the Chief of Air Staff, the V.C.I.G.S., the C.-in-C., Home Forces, and a
senior civil servant to act as liaison between the H.D.E. and the various
The H.D.E. was intended to carry out the dual role of advising
C.-in-C., Home Forces, and of acting in an executive capacity in the issue
of orders so that the C.-in-C's. policy could be implemented as far as it
concerned the different departments.
However, the H.D.E. in its original form lasted for little longer than a
week.
Both the Admiralty and the Air Ministry were resolutely opposed to
overall control by G.H.Q., and under the existing circumstances there was
perhaps no little justification for their arguments.
Had the enemy attacked,
the first stages of the defence would undoubtedly have fallen not upon the
Army but upon the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force.
The Army was
ill-equipped and ill-organized.
G.H.Q. itself was a hastily improvised
organization situated in
London whence it is doubtful whether effective
command could have been exercised in the field.
insoluble problems were sufficient to kill the H.D.E. at its inception, although
for some years, with less senior representation, it performed valuable assistance
to G.H.Q in a planning and liaison capacity particularly in regard to liaison
At no time did the H.D.E. actually assume executive
authority, and the conduct of home defence was in consequence carried on
Services under the co-ordination of the
War Cabinet (see
The development of the defence of the United Kingdom against invasion
during the years 1940-1942 may loosely be divided into three stages.
the improvisations made in consequence of the defeat in Flanders; secondly
112090
