The feeding problem was particularly complicated since, in addition to
ensuring that all craft leaving
England to collect personnel were supplied
with food and water, there was also the exceptionally large task of providing
refreshments at the ports and en route for the returning troops.
It was decided, to avoid congestion,
that neither sorting of personnel
nor provision of cooked meals would be possible at the ports.
Brief halts
were therefore arranged on all the rail routes to be traversed.
At each halt
a hot drink and a sandwich was issued and also cigarettes and matches.
This refreshment was supplemented by hard-boiled eggs, fruit, etc., as con-
ditions improved.
Altogether, 14 of these halting points (or haltes-repas)
vere opened.
Personnel for staffing the feeding points were found from
ering staffs and students at various cookery
schools, and very valuable
tance was also afforded by members of the Women's Voluntary Services,
he philanthropic bodies (Salvation Army,
Y.M.C.A., etc.). N.A.A.F.I.
plied 120,000 bags of fruit and chocolate, and several commercial firms
voluntarily provided further help, e.g., by the provision and issue of malted
milk at several places.
Generally speaking the B.E.F. may be said to have arrived home in rags
and bereft of all their equipment.
(One officer in fact arrived at the recep-
tion area clad only in a pair of socks and a bath towel.) An interesting
point for reflection does, however, arise regarding personal equipment.
It
was never envisaged, nor was it considered practicable, that any equipment
other than that carried by hand could be saved.
The abandonment of
personal equipment was,
however, carried out on a scale which many
observers considered unnecessary, especially in the case of rifles.
This was
the more emphasized by the fact that certain units
whose officers had
managed to keep them, in the main, together, returned each man complete
with a rifle.
In cases where, for various reasons, the officers had become
separated from their units it was an exception to see even one man carrying
a rifle.
Those who can recall the deficiencies of rifles in the British Army
during the remainder of 1940 will appreciate the importance of this point
from the provisioning angle, quite apart from the disciplinary issues involved.
The R.A.O.C. established salvaging parties at several places such as
Margate, Ramsgate and Dover, in the hope of retrieving any
equipment,
especially of a technical nature, that might have been brought back,
but
all that was collected was a few rifles and some blankets.
The re-equipping of units and formations was left until after the sorting
out process; the more immediate task of the R.A.O.C. was the provision of
large quantities of cooking equipment and accommodation stores, and the
re-clothing of the men to the home scale.
Re-equipment when it did start
was carried out as quickly and efficiently as stocks permitted.
Complete
equipments were assembled at Didcot and other War Office depots, and
despatched in bulk to divisional ordnance dumps or to command depots.
In this way five divisions were re-equipped during the month of June and
the remainder during July.
There were, however, many serious deficiencies
particularly in warlike stores, of which issues, if made at all, were usually
of a token nature.
The unexpected arrival of large parties of French troops caused con-
siderable difficulty. By the end of May it was evident that the total that
could be expected would be in the region of between 50,000 and 100,000
1
against the 5,000 which had been originally forecast. The number who
fought their way to the French coast far exceeded expectations, and the
scarcity of shipping made it essential that they should be brought to England
instead
of moving direct to French ports south of the Somme.
It was
decided to invite the Mayors of Southampton, Bournemouth, Weymouth and
Plymouth to house the French troops, and arrangements were made to dump
rations (including red wine) in these towns for use by people accommodating
them.
The mayors readily agreed and enlisted the help of the residents
to such good effect that accommodation was found for over 60,000 troops.
Arrangements had afterwards to be made to ship the soldiers back to
France, south of the Somme, at the rate of 15,000 a day which just, and
only just, coped with the situation.
The evacuation from Dunkirk and the neighbouring beaches began on
about 19th May and finished on 4th June.
During that period a recorded
total of 224,318 British and 112,107 Allied troops were evacuated.
A senior
French officer who was himself evacuated through the " Dynamo" organiza-
tion summed up the military arrangements as follows :—
"The achievement of this masterpiece of improvised organization
is a success that all services concerned can look upon with pride."
