formed and placed under the former Director of Movements who was given
the status of Deputy Quarter-Master-General (Movements).
Q.M.G.
D.Q.M.G.(M)
This organization was maintained for the remainder of the war, and can
be justified merely by a record of its most notable achievements, which might
include such diverse activities as the control of pre-planning stowage by the
War Office, the ever increasing movement of personnel and freight by air,
the arrival and eventual return of the United
States forces and, later, the
return to the United Kingdom of troops for demobilization.
The Transportation
Directorate had likewise undergone a progressive
expansion of responsibilities and personnel. The branch of Q.M.G. 13, consist-
ing at the outbreak of hostilities of less than 20 officers, grew in four years to
be one of the largest War Office directorates, with a strength of 160 officers.
The Directorate was responsible for transportation services all over the world,
and in particular for such special major projects as the construction of two
the maintenance of the
Russia " life-line, the erection of the "Mulberry B" artificial harbour in
Normandy, and, as the culminating project, the rehabilitation of the devastated
railway systems of Europe.
In a theatre of war (Movements) are the staff branch charged with
the necessary co-ordination of the transportation service on behalf of the
principal administrative officer.
In fact, at some major headquarters during
the war, the two functions were combined, with no noticeable ill-effect, under
a Deputy Quarter-Master-General (Movements and Transportation).
War Office,
this close affinity
between Movements and Trans-
portation was less necessary because the Transportation directorate, except in
certain depots and military ports, was not an operating service in the United
The Director of Transportation is solely responsible for the efficient tech-
nical working and the financial aspects of his service, and as the Head of a
Service must have direct access to the Q.M.G.
staff officer should be, however, responsible for co-ordination of transportation
in connection with the requirements of operational movements.
ments directorate of the Q.M.G's. staff planned, allotted priorities to,
controlled military traffic, both before and during its progress.
operate the agency, whether military
This function remained with the transportation service or the appro-
priate transport undertaking.
The staff plans and directs the movement, the service provides and operates
Stores and Equipment
The War Office, when war broke out, was left only with those responsi-
bilities appertaining to army equipment which concerned obtaining financial
authority for the purchase of armaments, the storage of such armaments, and
12
WO277
1 p
their allotment and issue to units. The Ministry of Supply had assumed the
responsibilities for research,
design, production, purchase and inspection.
The Q.M.G. was charged with the task of conveying detailed Army require-
ments to the Ministry of Supply and of maintaining necessary liaison.
General Staff, under the A.C.I.G.S., advised on policy, scales, and priorities,
and covered trials of equipment and development. It was obviously necessary
to provide a link between the various interested parties, and in October, 1939,
the Director-General of Army Requirements (D.G.A.R.) was appointed to
co-ordinate under the Q.M.G. all military requirements for equipment, stores
and material obtained from the Minister of Supply, and to act as an inter-
mediary between the General Staff, the Q.M.G. and the Ministry.
The Ordnance Service remained directly under the Q.M.G. and was split
into three : the
Director of Ordnance Services, the Director of Ordnance
Services (Weapons), and the Director of Ordnance Services (Engineering), all
under the Controller of Ordnance Services, whose duties tended to become
of an advisory rather than of an executive nature.
Four General Staff Directors were also directly interested in the equipping
of the Army, viz., the Director of Staff Duties, the Director of Staff Duties
(Weapons), the Director of Anti-Aircraft and Coast Defence and the Director
of Armoured Fighting Vehicles.
Hence, by 1940, as a result of the formation of the Ministry of Supply,
two members of the Army Council (C.I.G.S. and Q.M.G.) and no fewer than
seven directorates (D.S.D., D.S.D. (W), D.A.A. and C.D., D.A.F.V., D.G.A.R.,
D.O.S. and D.O.S. (W)), were concerned in the provision functions of the
former M.G.O. (see Section 1).
Secretary of State
Q.M.G.
C.I.G.S.
V.C.T.G.S.
D.S.D.
General Staff
moliev and
co-ordination.
D.A.A. and C.D.
Equipment of
all A.A. and
C.D. units.
D.G.A.R.
Co-ordination of all
War Office require-
ments for Equipment,
Stores and Material
obtained from
Ministry of Supply.
D.A.F.V.
D.S.D. (W)
General Staff policy
affecting ammunition
and
equipment
1O1
field army
artillery
(except A.A.),
R.E..
infantry and
horsed cavalry.
Equipment
D.Q.M.G. (B)
C.O.S.
all units
issued with
A.F.V.s
D.O.S.
Distribution,
issue, receipt
and storage of
Votes 7 and 8
Ordnance stores.
D.O.S. (W)
Distribution,
issue, receipt
and storage of
Vote 9 Ordnance
inchnding
ammunition.
An organization such as this, created at a time of stress and brought into
effect at great speed, could not reasonably be expected to survive for any
length of time without progressive alteration but, although many changes
