The shortage of M.T. has been referred to elsewhere and, not being
peculiar to the Burma theatre, need not be elaborated upon.
The raising of
local Army Service Corps units was a continual source of anxiety ; vehicles
were provided under War Office arrangements, while drivers had to be found
locally. This is a striking example of the difficulties which were experienced
as the result of administrative control not being vested earlier in G.H.Q.
India, who were, by virtue of experience, certainly more alive to the problems
and would have been in a better position than London to assist in recruiting
and organizational problems.
The M.T. companies were initially formed into independent sections and
subsequently reformed as G.P. (general purposes) transport companies. Before
operations began the question of converting the second line units into infantry
brigade transport companies was under consideration, and failure to put this
theory into practice impeded operations to a considerable extent.
All M.T.
should have been concentrated into brigade units, which would then have
been tactically and administratively self-sufficient and capable of moving with
their parent units to other parts of the battlefield.
The lack of this organiza-
tion resulted in units being completely dependent upon their L. of C., tied to
certain roads and incapable of operating away from them.
The fighting units themselves were in most cases organized on a mixed
scale of M.T.
and pack, a practice which, however satisfactory on paper,
proved unsound because it rendered officers quite incapable of visualizing
operations at any distance from a road.
In countries like Burma, without
many roads suitable for M.T., it is doubtful whether commanding officers can
have complete freedom of action unless battalions are organized completely
on a pack basis.
taking civilian vehicles with their drivers off the " Burma Road". A nucleus
organization to control and maintain them was provided by putting certain
British civilian personnel, previously working with contractors, into uniform.
The difficulties inherent in such an organization were accentuated by the
Chinese who commandeered vehicles and drivers at the point of the bayonet
and by the natural timidity of the drivers once the Chinese began to fall
back.
With regard to animal transport companies, an experiment was made with
Chinese muleteers, but it proved a complete failure and the units had to
re-form with personnel obtained locally in Burma. The difficulty in raising
mule companies lay in the shortage of mules, especially the larger type of
Here again it seems that a closer relationship between
India would have been advantageous.
Animals to replace
casualties were despatched from the remount depots (the principle one being
at Pyabwe, south of Thazi) to rail and road-heads.
were located at Maymyo and Rangoon.
Veterinary hospitals
The medical situation was not reassuring.
The field units were fairly well
up to establishment but many of the rear units existed in nucleus only.
general hospital existed at Taunggyi, and casualty clearing stations were
situated forward on the L. of C. between there and Kengtung.
Other areas
Rangoon.
were served by hospitals in Maymyo, Mandalay,
Meiktila,
Toungoo and
316
WO277
1
There was a severe shortage of medical staff and although medical con-
scription had been accepted it was not enforced and many potential medical
officers were thus lost.
All existing medical services were badly handicapped
by the cheeseparing policy adopted when they were raised, but it is only fair
to point out that the lack of officers, N.C.Os., equipment and vehicles was
a factor of equal, if not greater, importance. Whatever the cause, Burmarmy
units were raised on a scale totally inadequate for the work.
medical units were not mobile and as " pool" transport is never availble
in practice wen most needed, valuable equipment was often lost.
Three ambulance trains were improvised and, although not perfect, they
proved of great value
throughout the operations.
General Hutton has
remarked that without the aid of the trains medical evacuation could not have
been carried out. Many of the casualties were moved to Mandalay by river
steamer.
The lack of a proper medical service was particularly noticeable in the
Chinese forces, which arrived with no medical stores or units.
Efforts were
made eventually to provide some assistance by Burmarmy, but nevertheless
the medical organization was quite inadequate to deal with the large number
of Chinese wounded.
At the suggestion of the G.O.C., much valuable assist-
ance in the area where Chinese troops later operated was given by an
American medical mission partly staffed by Karen nurses, under the remark-
able Doctor Seagrave whose exploits are themselves worthy of a separate
volume.
It may be noted that the Chinese usually gave no attention whatever
to the seriously injured, confining such effort as they made to those who would
soon be fit again to rejoin the ranks.
At a later stage they took to filling up
trains with wounded and dumping them in the British area of operations,
leaving to us the alternatives of either letting them die or taking them in to
the already overcrowded British hospitals.
The Royal Engineers suffered from shortage of both staff and materials.
At the outbreak of war, the only R.E. organization in Burma consisted of
what was little more than a D.C.R.E., and a few garrison engineers.
There
was no R.E. representation on the staff of army H.Q., although this deficiency
was remedied, in part, after the outbreak of war.
The base engineer field park at Rangoon was only partially stocked
although, in comparison with the advanced field parks and dumps formed
in the Southern Shan States and southern Burma, it was well filed.
The Burma public works department was responsible for the maintenance
and improvement of roads.
They had also the necessary organization for
assisting the Royal Engineers in the large programme which would have been
required to construct the projected base depots in the Rangoon area had not
the course of events precluded its completion.
The P.W.D. had done very
good work in constructing airfielts cod landing strips before the outbreak of
resisted by the Burma Government.
A proposal to take over and miling strip .W.D. was sucestully
No canteen organization existed before the war, although there was an
obligation on the part of NA. A F.I. to arrange facilities if required.
of contractors.
British units stationed in Rurma at the authreal of war made use as in India
The IndiBu ma at the outbrea hey doo had contractors, had
317
