this respect.
As will be seen from the next chapter, the War Office was
forced to relieve G.H.Q.
Home Forces of certain administrative duties
peculiar to the United Kingdom and not applicable to Egypt.
Even so,
the C.-in-C. Home Forces would have assumed full command in the event
of invasion.)
The revised instructions were: —
1. You will relieve General Wavell of those administrative responsi-
bilities which at home are undertaken on behalf of the Commander-
in-Chief, Home Forces, by the War Office.
2. You will arrange with General Wavell and report to the War Office
the adjustments of staff which may be found necessary to carry this
3. You will give first priority to the task of bringing to the highest pitch
of efficiency the organization for repairing and maintaining the ser-
viceability of mechanized vehicles of all kinds,
and secondly to
of manpower in the rearward services and the
formation of the highest number of tactical fighting units.
4. ... you will co-ordinate, and, as far as possible, pool the resources
of the repair and maintenance organizations of the Army and R.A.F.
5. While operational control over the whole theatre of war will remain
with General Wavell, on all the above matters you are authorized
to communicate direct with the War Office.
The C.-in-C. Middle East had been informed by the C.I.G.S. of the
change of General Haining's mandate and the Prime Minister himself sent
Wavell in which he outlined General Haining's
new task and stressed the value of the increased American aid.
left the United Kingdom on 5th June and arrived in Cairo on 9th June.
With General Haining's staff there were two civilians, Mr. Harriman (the
personal envoy in London of President Roosevelt) who had accompanied
the Mission in order to ensure the fullest and most expeditious use of the
American goods which were now arriving in Middle East in
quantities, and an official who was to be in charge of the development of
port and transportation facilities, and the reception, maintenance and repair
of armoured vehicles and mechanized transport.
Attached to the mission
were military and civilian experts on docks, railways, shipping, workshops,
Early Difficulties
Once installed, not without some slight difficulties, for their office staff
was coming by sea, the mission rapidly got down to work, and began to
deal with the War Office questionnaire and to meet commanders and staff
(The name 333 Military
Mission was soon dropped in favour of
" General Haining's branch", which was, in turn, discarded for
Haining's department".)
Work was started at once on an examination of
the position of R.A.O.C., and R.A.S.C. repair organizations with the view
and an investigation was made
of the system of
reception of cased vehicles from the U.S.A. and the methods employed for
Although the various experts lost no time in investigating and making
valuable suggestions for the improvement of those aspects of Middle East
184
WO27
1 P
administration in which they were directly concerned, it rapidly became
clear that General Haining's position was far from satisfactory.
The Prime
Minister's instructions were not so easily to be carried out, and there were
high level repercussions in the Middle East to their implementation on
the
lines originally
proposed.
of the mission in the Middle East, it had become apparent to
Indeed, within a fortnight of the arrival
General
Haining that the root of the administrative problem there was not within
the Army or peculiar to it, but lay in the relationship between the Royal
Navy, the Army, the
Royal Air Force and representative Government
Departments, both with each other and with the Egyptian Government.
The
solution of the difficulties could not be confined to the Army alone, but
had to take into account certain of the administrative activities of the
Royal Navy, the Royal Air Force and the civil authorities as well.
General Haining's First Report
General Haining decided to report to this effect, and on 24th June, 1941,
the report for which the Prime Minister had asked was despatched, after
the final draft had been agreed with the C.-in-C. In view of its scope and
general interest it is reproduced almost in its entirety.
" Introduction
(i) I should say at the start that I find the attitude of the Middle East
› authorities most helpful and any enquiries I made were welcomed.
The
attitude definitely was one of co-operation.
I have also had discussions
with the Commander-in-Chief Mediterranean and the Air Officer Com-
manding-in-Chief on the subject of pooling resources.
(ii) I cannot trace any instruction regarding the development of the
administrative activities of the Army in the Middle East earlier than a direc-
tive dated 21st January,
1940, by the Q.M.G. for the establishment of a
main base in the area
Egypt and Palestine for a force of nine divisions.
The authority for the establishment of this base was not given until May,
1940.
Thus a valuable opportunity of building up reserves during a period
when the Mediterranean was open, was lost and the fact that between 12th
June,
1940, and 8th June, 1941, operations were initiated by Middle East
Headquarters in no less than eight theatres accentuated the fact that Middle
East has suffered and is suffering until at least quite recently, from a chronic
chortage of resources to meet the tasks which it has been required to carry
out.
Also the need for improvisation for waging hostilities in the various
areas has left little opportunity for forward thinking and long-term planning.
Nevertheless steps for development and exploitation of the administrative
facilities on the expanded basis of sixteen divisions in the south of Egypt
have already been initiated by G.H.Q. M.E., and information
collected
for further planning.
(iii) The
administrative problem
of the Army in the Middle East is
peculiar in that for geographical reasons and on account of communications
the base installations are concentrated centrally in low Egypt whence lines
of communication radiate to the various centres of operations as compared
more usual lay-out with base installations at the rear end of the
normal line of communication.
Distances are more formidable than is
perhaps realized.
Compared with
London to Port Said which is 3,200
12090
