The Advanced Air Striking Force
The operational units of the A.A.S.F. consisting of aircraft and small
parties for maintenance, proceeded overseas through
"quick despatch"
service under War Office arrangements.
(All details for the reception, and
maintenance overseas of material and personnel comprising this service were
made by the Air Ministry.)
The remainder of the personnel, stores, vehicles
and base
establishments for the A.A.S.F.
received
and
maintained by the Army, who were to assume responsibility
for the main-
tenance of the A.A.S.F.
from the moment the necessary base installations
for this purpose were established.
The division of responsibility for the provision of maintenance services
as between the Army and the R.A.F. was, broadly, that the Army accepted
responsibility up to and including A.A.S.F. rail-heads, while the A.A.S.F.
accepted responsibility for all services in advance of rail-heads.
for certain minor services, this division was also applicable for the R.A.F.
component of the B.E.F.
(Field Service Regulations had laid down that the
Army would supply the R.A.F. up to 40 miles from rail-head, and this
rule was generally observed except in exceptional circumstances, e.g., when
a forward move was in progress or contemplated.)
R.A.F. port detachments
were provided at both the Northern and
Southern Bases to assist in the clearance of R.A.F. vehicles and equipment,
and an administrative area was reserved for the A.A.S.F. in the general
Administrative Arrangements
A supply personnel company R.A.S.C. together with 200,000 rations was
despatched to Cherbourg in the first shipment so that detail issue depots
and rail-head supply detachments could open immediately at the ports, and
in the assembly, staging, and A.A.S.F. areas.
Until leaving staging areas
units were to draw supplies in their own transport from the appropriate
D.I.Ds., which were also to be responsible for holding small working stocks
Units not in possession of sufficient transport
for drawing rations were to be supplied under arrangements of the appro-
Meal contract forms (Army Form F706) were supplied
to detached parties, etc., but were unpopular and not successful except in
respect of properly organized officer-conducted parties.
These arrangements, however sound they might have appeared in the
planning stages, were found to be quite insufficient, and the force experienced
very serious supply difficulties from the outset.
These were due to the
cumulative effect of several factors, all of which probably sprang from a lack
of imaginative planning.
Broadly speaking,
the troops landed in advance
of their supplies and had it not been for the French
army at Brest and
Cherbourg, which placed its reserve supplies at our disposal, the force would
have gone very hungry in the first few days.
The separation during this
period of units and drivers from their vehicles added immensely to the
difficulties (one infantry brigade was, for nearly three days, maintained in
the assembly area by one motor ambulance).
One lines of communication M.T. company, R.A.S.C. and one reserve
M.T. company, R.A.S.C., were allotted to each base.
These units, totalling
28
1
approximately 340 vehicles for each base, were not scheduled to begin dis-
embarkation until 13th September and, to cover the initial period, arrange-
ments were made with the French for the hire of 50 lorries at Nantes and
at Brest.
The base installations were, for the most part, however, rail served,
and road transport in the initial stages was mainly required where the depots
were established at some distance from stations and until spurs could be
taken direct from the main line.
Priority of Royal Engineer works effort was given as follows:—
Water supply and sanitary services.
Docks.
Vehicle marshalling parks and transit camps.
Provisional allotment was made in advance for each base to receive a
limited
supply of such
engineer stores as timber, stone, cement, picks,
shovels, etc.
The maintenance project envisaged the formation, at a later stage, of a
medical base sub-area in Dieppe, but initially Cherbourg was to be used as
a hospital port, evacuation being effected from general hospitals established
at Cherbourg, La Baule, Brest and also in the assembly area.
plan for the use of Dieppe was issued at an early stage and is reproduced
The high priority given to sanitary services, mentioned above, was
significant; the hygiene authorities were concerned at a very early date with
the occupation of insanitary billets by advance parties bereft of their proper
equipment.
Hygiene sections were not employed to the best advantage and
suffered from not being carefully formed.
(Cases came to light of dis-
tinguished surgeons performing hygiene duties while hygiene specialists were
H.Q. labour groups were allotted to ports, and labour units were organized
on the basis of the anticipated requirements of each service.
of the units were to be composed mainly of cavalry reservists, on the grounds
that the training of these men was out of date.
Somewhat naturally this
proposal met with considerable resentment, and it was only with difficulty
that they could be persuaded to take up their new role.
these units, although shown on the order of battle, were not immediately
of labour became widespread.
deficiency the labour directorate was empowered to hire French labour as
available, but owing to the mobilization of the French Army and the organiza-
tion of industry on a national basis the amount obtained was not sufficient
Two battalions of the lines of communications infantry brigade were
detailed for guard duties at the ports, together with six provost sections for
general police duties.
In this connection it may be noted that pilfering was
prevalent throughout the base, a problem experienced by all British forces
throughout the world for the duration of the War.
H.Q. Lines of Communication Area arrived in the assembly area on
September and assumed command
of the various sub-areas.
The
maintenance project had given L. of C. staffs an ordered plan which relieved
