of the Chinese forces. By 27th April the Allies held a line from Kyaukpa-
daung through Meiktila, ending at Taunggyi.
Two days later the Japanese
by-passed the Chinese left flank at Taunggyi and seized Lashio rail and
With the capture of Lashio it would be only a matter of time before the
Japanese moved on to Bhamo, thus cutting off communications with Myitkyina
in the north and sealing off the
"China Road".
Furthermore, the condition
of both the Chinese armies and Burcorps precluded any possibility of our
being able to hold Mandalay and the new line for very long.
Under these
circumstances General Alexander decided that his primary task
was the
defence of India, and that this could best be achieved by getting as many as
possible of his forces back there for re-organization.
The lack of any route to India, except the partly constructed road to
Imphal via Tamu and Kalewa, virtually dictated the direction any planned
withdrawal could take.
He therefore moved his headquarters to Shwebo
and put in hand preparations for making the Ye-u-Kalema track fit for M.T.
as far as possible, and for stocking it with supplies.
India had already been requested to move certain supplies to Kalewa
in anticipation of reinforcements expected there some time previously but.
although those stocks were now available for Burmarmy, notification was
received to the effect that it was not possible for India to maintain south
of Tamu.
It was known that the condition of the road Tamu to Kalewa would
not permit of traffic once the rains began and any movement of stores
between these places would have to be via the Yu and Chindwin rivers.
The maintenance capacity of this route was in the circumstances very doubtful,
especially as it was the dry season and long stretches of the rivers were not
It was estimated that the stocking of the track from Ye-u to Kalewa
would take seven days and therefore it was essential to hold on to Mandalay
The possibilities of doing so were slight and every
effort was made to speed up the arrangements, including the withdrawal of
transport from the fighting formations.
Fortunately ample stocks were available to draw on and the problem became
one of speedily dispersing the F.S.Ds. at Ye-u and Swhebo to locations
further along the road of withdrawal.
Meanwhile the Imperial forces were retiring partly according to plan and
partly under overpowering enemy
Division crossed the
Irrawaddy at Myingyan and 17 Indian Division at Mandalay, both with
the Japanese hot on their heels, and by 30th A ril the whole force was
north of the Irrawaddy.
There is little of maintenance interest in this phase,
The withdrawal was based on a General Stain timetable ersed in advance
possible to control the stocks in
Mandalay so that they were eaten down with the minimum of wastage.
The stocks left behind in Mandalay were fortunately small what were
left were devoured in the flames which swept the abandoned city.
the British and Indians left Mandalay it was no longet a city but a heap
Just before the fall of the city, the ap ese maked it again.
shop, every house, every
nothing left to destroy.
330
1
The Road to India
The Ava Bridge at Mandalay (one of the greatest in Asia) was blown
headquarters to Ye-u and the operation developed into a race with the
on 30th April and on the next day both Burmarmy
and Burcorps
moved
enemy for the possession of Kalewa.
It had not been possible to complete stocking the Ye-u road before
leaving Mandalay despite the drastic steps taken, which had included the
withdrawal of nearly all first line transport from Burcorps and also from
7 Armoured Brigade which had now reverted to General Alexander's com-
Units were made to dump kits and all stores which did not affect
their immediate fighting value. Supplies were back-loaded to the fullest possible
extent, and although Mandalay was abandoned before the depots were fully
stocked, a real shortage of essential supplies never developed.
The force
was, however, placed on half-rations on 4th May as a measure dictated
more by caution than necessity.
The problem which now faced the force cannot be appreciated without
some knowledge of the conditions of the route between Ye-u and Kalewa,
which was in fact nothing more than a sandy track running from Ye-u via
Kaduma, Pyingyaing and
Thetkegyin to Shwegyin, eight miles south of
It had been the intention to continue the track from Thetkegyin to a
point opposite Kalewa, but owing to the difficulties of the last part of this
route which required a lot of rock blasting, this had not been possible, and
this last twelve miles, over which there was nothing more than a footpath,
later caused the abandonment of the major portion of the M.T. and all
the tanks.
The road from Ye-u to Thetkegyin passed through innumerable chaungs
or nullahs some of which were dry and sandy, some of which were wet.
Towards Thetkegyin there was a dificult hill section with many rickety
bridges constructed of brushwood or bamboo.
road was summed up by General Alexander: -
"... anyone seeing (it) for the first time would find it difficult to
imagine how a fully mechanized force could possibly move over it ...".
The casualties to M.T. were heavy and the difficulties were much accen-
tuated by the need to return empty lories trom Sawegin in order to ferry.
back more troops and wounded.
As the withdrawal progressed, the road
was organized into sections of two-way and one-way trafic and the engineer
units improved conditions seof twosay and outina the later stages, perform-
ing miracles with little or no equipment or transport.
The Japanese passed straight up the Chindwin in an effort to intercept
the crossing of the river by the retreating troops.
marched, although they did all in their in ro to bar the path to the frontier.
To the retreating troops did wall in their powe
As has been seen, the withdrawal to Kalewa was forced on the Commander
before the "Q" Staff had finished the stocking of the Ye-u road.
less, the drastic action which was taken to make transport available, coupled
with an all-out effort by the RaS an organization, enabled the distribution.
of the stocks to continue and he comnleted after the withdrawal had begun.
331
M* 2
12090
