(d) Works services required in connection with units and formations
earmarked for counter-attack on aerodromes,
as opposed to their
immediate protection, were the responsibility of the War Department.
With regard to responsibility for reception arrangements, the following
formula was agreed upon: —
(a) In the case of units to be employed on or contiguous to aerodromes or
other purely Air Ministry installations, the Air Ministry accepted
responsibility.
(b) In the case of all other units, the War Department was responsible.
(c) In cases of doubt, the application of the definition " employed on or
contiguous to aerodromes, etc." was left to the appropriate U.S.
headquarters to determine.
The Air Ministry and the War Depart-
ment would then accept responsibility in accordance with this ruling.
All American forces in the United Kingdom were under the command of
the Commanding General H.Q. European Theatre of Operations, U.S. Army
(E.T.O.U.S.A.) who exercised his command through:
The Commanding General, 8th U.S. Army Air Force (8th U.S.A.A.F.)
The Commanding General, H.Q. Services of Supply (S.O.S.).
Headquarters of Armies and Army Corps.
The Commanding General S.O.S.
was thus directly responsible to the
Commanding General, H.Q. E.T.O.U.S.A. for the command, control and
administration of all troops and installations and for all supply operations in
the base and L. of C. area.
(It should here be noted that the expression
" supply" includes the provision of all commodities and services).
Four divisions of the General Staff were represented in major U.S. head-
( A fifth dealing with civil affairs (G5) was established at a later
date.) Their functions were :-
G.1
All matters of administration concerning personnel as indivi-
duals; replacements. (Analogous to the Adjutant-General's Department.)
G.2
General Staff).
Intelligence. (Analogous to the Intelligence Branch of the
G.3 Operations and training defence of the Base and L. of C. area;
training of reinforcements and at schools in the base and L. of C. area.
(Analogous to the Operations and Training
Staff.)
Branches of the General
Operational administration. Supply, transportation and medical
General's branch.)
services were co-ordinated by G.4. (Analo transportation arter-Master-
The Area in which H.Q., Services of Supply, E.T.O.U.S.A. operated was
divided into four Base Sections, their relation to the home commands being
roughly as follows: —
Northern Ireland Base Section (Northern Ireland).
Western Base Section (Scottish and Western Commands).
Southern Base Section (Southern and South-Eastern Commands).
District).
Fastern Base Section (Northern and Fastern Commands and London
274
WORTY
1
H.Q. S.O.S. was, therefore, somewhat similar in construction to a head-
quarters L. of C. although its services exercised far greater executive functions.
and included those normally possessed by heads of services at the rear HO.
of a General Heaquarters in the field.
The following is a brief outline of the functions of the various supply
services represented at H.Q. S.O.S. :-
Transportation Service. Responsible for all movement including the
operation (but not construction) of ports and railways.
of the Transportation Service known as the Motor and Transport Ser-
vice was responsible for the provision of all vehicles except A.F.Vs.
and for petroleum products.
The Motor and Transport Service was also
responsible for the operation and maintenance of road transport.
Responsible for the provision, storage, issue,
maintenance and repair of guns, small arms, ammunition, A.F.Vs. and
certain items such as binoculars.
Responsible for the provision,
operation of signal communications and signal equipment.
signal equipment for other arms and services.
tenance and repair which could not be carried out by unit personnel.
Chemical Warfare Service.
Responsible for the provision of all
materials and equipment required for gas warfare and defence against
gas. Also responsible for smoke, other than smoke filled ammunition.
Engineer Service.
Responsible for quartering and the provision of
accommodation and its
Responsible for all con-
struction including docks and railways, but excluding signal communi-
cations also for the supply of all engineering material for engineer
use and use by other arms.
Treatment and evacuation of sick and wounded.
operation of hospitals and supply of medical equipment and stores.
Quarter-Master Service. Responsible for the supply of food, clothing,
accommodation stores, unit equipment other than that provided by the
other services shown above; also for laundry and boot repair services.
General Depot Services.
Responsible for the operation of all general
with the supplies of two or more services.
supervision of branch depots and repair shops.
Note.— The operation of "branch depots" dealing with the commodities
provided by any one service described poove, was the responsibility of the
service in question.
It was normal to group "branch depots" belonging
to several services together.
The result was a " general depot" operated
under the supervision of the General Depot Services.
The Build-up of the Force
The "Bolero" Committee having
been formed, the machinery to im-
plement its decisions set up,
command studied and notife, the rough ered, it was soon possible to issue
the rough outline of the U.S. Army chain of
a first key
"Marshall »
plan based on such assumptions as could be drawn from the
Plan, and other indications tom the Combined Chiefs of Staff
as to the rate of build-up of the contingent.
The force covered by the first
275
