Transport priorities were
generally allotted on the following simple
basis: —
Specials (i.e., small consignments of any kind of particular urgency).
Personnel-British details.
Water equipment and stores.
M.T. stores and spares.
Personnel-African details.
R.E. stores.
Ordnance stores.
N.A.A.F.I.
The priority given to ammunition, petrol and supplies was dependent on
stocks forward, and over-riding priority was naturally given to any com-
modity of which stocks were dangerously low.
Transport was never enough
to meet all demands and frequently petrol, supplies and ammunition were
competing for priority both against each other and against stores of other
services.
Quite soon, however, one item forced itself to the top of the
priority list—M.T. spares.
Once top of the list, it stayed there—it was
useless to bother about giving priorities to other items if the vehicles to
carry these items were ineffective.
The appalling road conditions made the
rate of replacement of M.T. spare parts, particularly springs, very heavy
indeed, and M.T. companies very soon fell rapidly below strength in vehicles.
(At one of the transport priority conferences it so happened that the
amount of transport for the following day was small-abut 200 tons-and
claims for it
were so evenly balanced that it was next to impossible to
adjudicate fairly.
The matter was finally settled by refusing all claimants
and fetching up 200 tons of N.A.A.F.I. stores, chiefly beer, in the lorries.
It was the most popular thing "Q" ever did, and an excellent solution of
the difficulty.)
THE ADVANCE TO KISMAYU
During the period of preparation, Italian morale, once high enough to
cause the postponement of operations,
fell rapidly.
A raid on El Wak,
some 110 miles from our forward positions at Wajir, carried out in mid-
December by 12 (A) Division, was most successful and marked the start of
the ascendency of the morale of East Africa Force over that of the Italians.
The successes in the Western Desert and the enemy withdrawal in face
of General Platt's forces in Eritrea altered the whole military aspect in Africa,
and General Cunningham decided that he could attempt the capture of
Kismayu with a smaller force than he had originally contemplated, beginning
on 11th February.
So much had confidence grown that though the original
orders only concerned the capture of Kismayu and the establishment of a
bridge-head at Jumbo, it was intended, once resistance on the Juba broke,
to press on to Mogadishu.
So the day came and the divisions moved forward self-contained with ten
days' supplies, six days of water plus such extra as units could carry in
their own containers, and some 600 miles of petrol.
It is not within the
scope of this work to enter into a detailed account of operations.
It is
sufficient to say that by 14th February, 12 (A) Division had entered Kismayu;
unfortunately
without cutting off any of the
enemy who had successfully
evacuated all the white population and effected considerable demolition.
142
WO27
With the capture of Kismayu the whole administrative position changed,
Water was no longer a matter of prime consideration: there was enough fo
every need in the Juba River and furthermore, as will be remembered. water
was being brought in by sea to Kismayu.
Secondly, the land L. of C. from
Thika forward could now be abandoned in favour of supply by sea; and
none too soon, for the tracks by which the advance to Kismayu had been
made disintegrated very rapidly under the unaccustomed volume of traffic.
Maintenance by road from Kismayu onwards depended on there being
adequate roads on which our transport could move, and, unfortunately, roads
in southern Somalia were not only very rare but, where they did exist, they
were generally only sufficient for light traffic.
were surfaced generally
Although well graded they
with a type of sandstone which presented an
apparently good surface for light vehicles, but disintegrated in a matter of
hours under any volume of traffic.
True, the more important were lightly
metalled, but there was no bottoming under the metal and though they lasted
longer than the sandstone surfaced roads, their ultimate state after collapse
was a good deal worse.
The result was that a week after the capture of
Kismayu most of the roads in the immediate vicinity of the town were deep
troughs filled with as much as three feet of loose red dust.
Cars either had
to be towed by lorries or had to attempt a detour through the bush at the
roadside-
-the latter course precarious through the possibility of encountering
one of the odd land mines laid by the Italians.
One of the first necessities,
therefore, was to put road construction and maintenance in hand on a large
scale.
Kismayu itself was a disappointment and as an advanced base it left a
great deal to be desired.
In fact the only thing that really could be said
for it was that its anchorage was sheltered by the lie of the land, and could
be used throughout the year, even during the monsoon which was shortly
to begin.
Of the two small jetties, one was useless owing to the Italians
having scuttled lighters alongside, while the other, though usable, suffered
from the defect, common to both, of being approached across a stretch of
soft sand impassable even to empty M.T.
Once across this stretch of sand
a single narrow road surfaced with coral led into the town.
The town was no more inspiring- before their departure the Tialians
had destroyed the power station and oil storage plant (the oil from which
covered the surface of the harbour) and had removed anything of any value.
There was little in the way of accommodation, though a few of the buildings
along the sente in the way ot of stone and were useful for offices and sleeping
quarters.
Immediately the news of the capture of Kismayu had been received,
orders were issued, by Force H.Q., to sail the convoy waiting in Mombasa.
When it arrived. it was
quantities of water loaded, as will be remembered, as a safeguard, for by
most exasperating to have to discharge the large
this time water was being drawn all along the Juba.
It had been decided to accept the lighters on the open beach in view of
the fact that approach to the epies was impossible, and to this end a stretch
of shore was chosen immediately in front of the town.
Here a reasonably good
road ran along the sea front, and it was possible to arrange a trafic circuit
for lorries.
In the first flush of enthusiasm the disadvantages of "drying
out" lighters on an osen beach were overlooked.
As was later only too
143
