in order to handle the grain trade of the area. Chittagong was handed over
to S.E.A.C.,
even here such development has had been considered
necessary by G.H.Q. India had been completed before the time of handing
No useful purpose is served by giving
comparative figures to show
increases in tonnage capacities of the various Indian ports after development,
as their original capacity was
invariably related to
the
type
of cargo
they had to handle.
Being designed largely to handle particular types
cargo, their capacity for such cargo often left a fair margin, but the surplus
capacity could not always be used for the handling of heavy and awkward
military lifts.
Each port had, therefore, to be considered in a different
light according to its particular environment and function, and work put in
hand as necessary.
An example of what was achieved is that, at Calcutta alone, four new
important berths, two new personnel and M.T. jetties, four new loading berths
for barges, two loading hards for L.S.Ts. and two new tanker berths were
communications and other essential services in the port area.
COMMUNICATIONS
The Indian railways were geared for slow and " safety first" methods of
operation which, however suited for the peace-time demands of the sub-
small number of locomotives and wagons in use has already been mentioned,
as has the drain on the Indian railway resources caused by the earlier export
of much needed material and technicians.
Steps taken to increase the capacity of the railways to bear the increased
loads included severe reductions in civilian trains, considerable import from
U.S.A. of locomotives and wagons, the addition of extra track and improved
signal communications, the taking over by the U.S. Army of certain portions
of the system (including the important metre-gauge line from Tinsukia to
Ledo) and the provision of U.S.A. railway operating personnel to supple-
ment existing staff on other lines.
The assistance given by the U.S. Army
to the Assam railways was a very successful example of Allied co-operation.
As a result of these and other measures, the increase in ton/miles on
the railways (excluding those on the Assam L. of C., which is dealt with
below) was of the order of 25 per cent.
During 1941 many river steamers and barges were sent from India to
Persia and Iraq,
suffered in consequence.
and for a time the capacity of the Indian
Some of these were, however, returned and, with
over the system and improved trans-shipment facilities,
tonnages greatly in excess of those handled in peacetime could be moved.
PERSONAL SERVICES
Accommodation provided by India, either in India or in S.E.A.C., was
provided for nearly 1,500,000 men in some 200 cams and for a further
500.000 men in 70 training establishments.
346
WO27?
1
provide hutting for semi-permanent installations only. Tentage, bamboo o
aim to provide full hutted accommodation for all was never fulfilled, des phe
even thatch dwellings were put into use as temporary expedients, but the
the most strenuous efforts.
This was caused by shortages of such essential
materials as cement, timber and certain other items, aggravated by the limited
capacity of the transportation system.
One hundred and thirty new hospitals were built, and India increased
in five years her manufacture of medical stores from 25 per cent. to 60 per
cent. of her own requirements.
The manufacture of medical stores in India
was not economical, however, and, with certain exceptions, requirements were,
as far as possible, obtained from outside. Evidence of the overriding demands
of S.E.A.C. is afforded by the fact that 95 per cent. of the medical stores
were directly or indirectly required for S.E.A.C. and only the remaining
5 per cent. available for troops engaged on North-West Frontier defence
or internal security.
Quite apart from normal military training, the training of the Indian
recruit to meet administrative demands alone was a major task. The Indian
services expanded from a pre-war strength of 180,000 to over 2,000,000
Most of the recruits were peasants and from them, many highly skilled
technicians had to be trained, not only to operate tanks, vehicles and the
remainder of the range of modern weapons and equipment, but also to repair
and maintain them.
MAINTENANCE SERVICES
A higher scale of reserves had to be held in India than was considered
necessary in other theatres, partly because the lines of supply to India from
the United Kingdom and U.S.A. were longer than to any
and partly because the already inadequate lines of communication within
India were liable, through floods and for other reasons, to breaches and
subsequent stoppages.
the climate made a high proportion of
strongly constructed covered accommodation essential if stores were not to
deteriorate rapidly.
The total of storage required in the central depots and reserve bases was
nearly 50,000,000 sq. ft.
hard standings, while R.A.F. and U.S.
covered, and 120,000,000 sq. ft. open, including
requirements accounted for nearly
100,000,000 sq. ft. of both covered and open accommodation.
also responsible for providing base workshops to carry out fourth line repair
and 2,000,000 sq. ft. of open accommodation.
for S.E.A.C.. and this commitment demanded over 3.000.000 sa. ft of covered.
A vast programme of airfield
construction was also
put in hand and carried out successfully; this alone
960 miles of " all-weather
accounted for 72,000,000 sq. ft. of land standings etc., 310 miles of runway,
sq. ft. of hangars.
2,200 miles of roadway and 3,000,000
As most Indians are farmers fond micht he expected to be plentiful bus
347
