The close of 1943 saw the Quebec Conference and a general hardening
of the projected invasion plans.
"Round-up" had given way to " Over-
the operation had begun
December, 1943, the number of U.S. troops in the
United Kingdom had
Priority was now being given to S.O.S. troops to
make a balanced force, and a number of engineer regiments were also being
included, hence a considerable portion of the construction programme could
now be carried out by American troop labour.
Quebec proved no exception to the practice that an
increase in the
Bolero" commitment followed every conference of the heads of the Allies.
The commitment increased from 1,340,000 to 1,446,000 by 30th April, the
Army being responsible for the accommodation of 1,060,000.
The new
total was provided for as follows: —
Permanent structures
Billets
Tentage
774,000
94,000
190,000
Generally speaking, plans made were being satisfactorily implemented in
spite of the many difficulties—not the least
being the arrival in 1944 in
Southern and South-eastern England of the British invasion forces and it
can be said that the influx of U.S. troops proceeded according to plan and
was successfully accommodated in accordance with the " Bolero" programme.
By 30th April, 1944 some 1,036,000 troops had landed in the United
Kingdom as against the planned total of 1,060,000. During May, further troops
continued to arrive up to and in excess of the target figure but, in view
of the season, accommodation for these late arrivals could be provided in
summer tented camps in Southern and Western Commands.
the strength of the U.S. forces in this country was 1,526,965 including 426,819
Army Air Force personnel.
Accommodation in the American areas was
occupied to saturation point and all summer tented camp sites had been taken
D-Day was not known by the " Bolero" planners (although for planning
purposes it was assumed to be 1st June, 1944) and it was therefore necessary
to make provision for June arrivals.
A joint plan was published to provide
bivouac accommodation for some 140,000 troops who were scheduled to
arrivals did not have to be implemented.
these accommodation plans for these late
When D-Day finally materialized on 6th June, 1944, the relief of the
"Bolero" planners can be imagined.
The enormous rate of build-up of
the U.S. forces in France heralded the release of the tightly packed areas in
Southern England and the vacation of other badly needed accommodation
in all parts of the country.
During the next few months the situation could be profitably reviewed
accommodation requirements in the United Kingdom
There was, however, one legacy for the "Bolero" planners-
the phasing of the exodus of the Americans to the Continent and their
eventual return to the U.S.A._ in fact, "Bolero" in reverse of " Orelob" as
the project was aptly named.
WO2TY
10
It had previously been foreseen that the departure of troops for the Con-
linent would necessitate a large-scale review of the position in the United
Kingdom, and it had been possible in March, 1944, to obtain an estimate
of the outflow, which would of course be compensated to a degree by arrivas
in the United Kingdom
U.S.A. to Europe could be
Owing to the limitations of port facilities on the Continent, the
intention of the Americans to sail escorted personnel shipping direct from
U.S.A. to the Continent as from Ist October, 1944, could not be implemented.
carried formations and a large number of non-
divisional troops, had thus to be diverted to the United Kingdom, where the
troops had to be accommodated, equipped and moved to the Continent. This
was an unexpected development and plans for handling the increased com-
mitment had to be hastily prepared.
Twelve formations and some 145,000 replacements and non-divisional
troops were dealt with during the period 1st October, 1944 to 14th January,
1945, when direct convoys began disembarking troops on the Continent.
With the diversion of shipping from U.S. direct to the Continent, only the
larger liners disembarked troops in this country, and wherever possible these
troops were entrained without delay to the marshalling areas at Southampton
for subsequent embarkation to the Continent.
Holding camps were estab-
lished in the vicinity of Southampton, but the accommodation available in
the marshalling areas proved to be adequate and these holding camps were
As a result of direct shipping from U.S. to the Continent, the strength of
U.S. forces in this country was progressively reduced from 672,064 including
280,222 Army Air Force on Ist January, 1945, to 360,061 including 218,101
Army Air Force on 31st May, 1945.
From then onwards the
Orelob" commitments wasted progressively with the rate of repatriation of
u.S. troops, although during the lattessivery of th the rate of repatriation os
of 1946, U.S. troops continued to be deployed in England for embarkation
on the "Queen Elizabeth", • Queen Mary, at.
To achieve the impossible was often the keynote of projects concerned
with the Second World War.
embodied in the " Bolero " proje was wever, un!
It is, however, unlikely that the achievement
To superimpose an army
of nearly 1,500,000 with all its accompanying ancillaries and impedimenta
upon a population of 48,00000 accompanying ancilaries ad when accom-
modation was already stretched to the limit, when almost every commodity
required for their maintenance was in short supply, was only made possible
by determined planning. by courage to make decisions and carry them through
to their conclusion, and by curse cooperation between the joint services.
To these must be added the never failing cheerfulness of the American
.. I have never yet met an American soldier who, after spend-
ing a week-end with a British family, did not feel that America had a
inspired by a determination to show real hospitality, was likely to
We found, however, that a British family,
utilize an entire week's rations to entertain an American over Sundav.
At once we encouraged visiting soldiers to carry rations with them on
281
