The Sixth Army consisted of 93, 49 and 55 Chinese Divisions of which
55 Division was very scattered and would take some time to collect. General
Wavell, however, accepted at once 93 and 49 Divisions for the defence of the
northern frontier, centred on Kengtung.
Deployed thus, it would be possible
to maintain them either from Pueru (China) or from Lashio without major
complications.
We were responsible for supplying these troops with rice
both after and before their arrival in Burma.
The Chinese had no administra-
tive services of their own and practically all formations were without either
vehicles or administrative services.
These factors complicated the already
difficult maintenance arrangements of the Army in Burma.
Rail-head was
at Shwanyaung,
12 miles west of Taunggyi, and supplies had to be carried
from there by a 400-mile road route to the frontier.
This road, though inade-
quate, was capable of taking 3-ton vehicles up to the Salween river, but onlv
30-cwt. lorries further east.
The " flying ferry" across the Salween was the
worst bottle-neck, its capacity being only 12 tons hourly.
Under these
conditions. and taking into consideration the very real shortage of vehicles,
it is doubtful whether a larger force could have been maintained satisfactorily
in the Pueru-Kengtung area.
The Fifth Army was collecting in the Kunming (China) area and General
Wavell requested that, except for some small parties, it be held in reserve
there where it would be well placed either to move into Burma, if required,
or for other threatened operations in Yunnan or French Indo-China.
The qualified acceptance of the Generalissimo's offer gave rise to criticism
at home and especially in the United States, where it was alleged that the
Allied C.-in-C's. refusal of the offer of the full use of both armies was a main
contributing factor to the subsequent loss of Burma.
It would not be proper
in this history to enter into operational controversy, but it is an inescapable
fact that the maintenance of even that small part of the Fifth Army which was
particularly in vehicles.
separate L. of C. could have been fulfilled without a major administrative
re-arrangement, which was certainly undesirable at that stage of preparations
As things turned out the
Fifth Army did move
down into the Northern Shan States where they were maintained, albeit not
without difficulty; but this was done under different circumstances, and when
expected reinforcements-which General Wavell took into account at the
time of the offer-had failed to materialize.
moves,
In any event, from subsequent experience of the slowness of Chinese troop
General Wavell has recorded that,
even if he had accepted the
Generalissimo's offer at once, it is doubtful whether they would have reached
Burma more than a very little, if any, sooner than they eventually did.
The Base and Lines of Communication
Active operations began in Burma towards the end of January,
1941.
During the two months
preceding
the attack considerable alterations in
organization had been effected, although the administrative plans were not in
themselves affected to any considerable extent.
312
WO277
7₴
1
The base area was theoretically in the Rangoon-Mingladon area extend-
services were, however, held in peace-time station depots throughout Burma
ing northwards in the vicinity of the main line to Mandalay.
Stores of all
improvised stor su in and around Rangoon and elsewhere.
For example, an
improvised base supply depot was operating in requisitioned buildings in
Rangoon.
An orthodox base area had, however,
been planned and con-
struction of base depots was due to be started at the time of the beginning
of operations.
(In the event, the lack of centralization was
not without
compensations because if the depots had been completed and the outlying
and improvised dumps, etc., closed down it is probable that the subsequent
withdrawal from Rangoon might not have been facilitated by the existence
of the convenient supply dumps that the retreating army put to such good
use.)
There was no H.Q., Lines of Communication, although again a L. of C.
organization was emerging from the planning stages, and all depots, etc.,
were directly under the control of H.Q. Army in Burma (usually given the
abbreviated title of Burmarmy).
During December the War Office laid down
that administrative preparations were to be made in Burma on the basis of a
force of four divisions.
were made, therefore, for L. of C.
administrative and ancillary units, including a corps headquarters, on this
basis, but owing to the passage of events none of them materialized before the
loss of Rangoon.
Large amounts of equipment and personnal which had been urgently
demanded by Burma were also sent out by the War Office, but practically all
failed to arrive in time.
Administrative difficulties were greatly accentuated
in the allotment of shipping, and also by the fact that certain ships had to be
turned back owing to inability to handle them in Rangoon-largely because
most of the dock labour disappeared after the bombing of Rangoon.
From the base at Rangoon there were three separate lines of communica-
tion, serving troops in southern Burma (south of the Sittang and Salween
rivers), the Southern Shan States (the area aroung Taunggyi) and the Northern
Shan States (Mandalay and Lashio to the Chinese border).
The land routes available for the maintenance of the troops deployed on
the narrow coastal strip which she maintenance of the roos Moyee in
down to the Kra Isthmus were complicated and cumbersome.
Mar only to Ye and even then a ferry crossing of the Salween between
and Moulmein was necessary.
Mergui, this road crossed over about 20 ferries and was not a practicable
The alternative route
was by sea from Rangoon to Tavoy
or Mergui and was the olive notice was by set from piction, although,
very exposed to interruption owing to Japanese command of
All communication with Tavoy and Mergui had, however, of
necessity, to go by this route.
Although maintenance along this L. of C. was principally by either rail
and /or by sea. M.T was meaniead for maintenance inland eastward to the
frontier for forces based on Moulmein, Tavoy and Mergui.
Mule transport
employed.
was also used and in certain areas nege the frontier elephante were also
An advanced base with depots for the major services was being
313
