The Master-General of the Ordnance became the Fourth Military Member
of the Army Council and dealt with warlike stores and equipment, patterns
and inventions, and certain matters relating to the Engineers.
The evolution
and expansion of the departments of the Quarter-Master-General and the
Master-General of the Ordnance gave rise in later years to an unsatisfactory
division of responsibilities between the two departments, which had not been
entirely eradicated by 1939, and made necessary several major changes in
the higher organization of the War Office during the years 1941-1943.
During the next ten years (1904-1914), although the inevitable various
internal changes were continually being made,
organization of the
Q.M.G's. department underwent little alteration in regard to responsibilities,
and on the outbreak of war in 1914 the greater part of the present day "Q"
duties was shared by the Q.M.G. and the M.G.O.
(Certain functions of the
latter were absorbed in the Ministry of Munitions in 1916 and, in 1917, the
M.G.O. became a member of the Munitions Council.)
In September, 1914, the directorate of Supplies and Quartering was divided
into two directorates, viz. : that of Supplies and that of Quartering, and the
Director of Quartering later combined his duties with those of Deputy
Ouarter-Master-General-a new appointment in the War Office hierarchy.
Questions connected with railways and transport belonged in 1914 to the
Q.M.G., but the growth of the work led eventually to the creation in 1915
of the directorate of Movements which underwent further expansion, and in
1916 another deputy to the Q.M.G. was appointed with the title of Director-
General of Military Railways.
In 1917 he became the Director-General of
Movements and Railways and was made a civilian member of the Army
Council in his own right.
The Army Salvage Branch was formed in 1918 and was placed under a
Controller of Salvage who worked partly for the Surveyor-General of Supply
and partly for the Q.M.G. By 1918 the Navy and Army Canteen Board was
functioning and a civilian official was given the status of D.Q.M.G. and
appointed to act as the channel of communication between the War Office,
the Board,
and the expeditionary force canteens.
anteen Board was in later years incorporated into the inter-Service organiza
on of the Navy, Army and Air Force Institutes (N.A.A.F.I.)
At the conclusion of the First World War, we thus find the Q.M.G. charged
with the following duties: —
" Administration of transport, remount, veterinary, ordnance, supply
and barrack services (other than works).
Selection of officers for, and
organization, administration and training of, personnel employed on
these services
Custody and issue of all military stores, settling reserves
of food, clothing, equipment, general stores and materials to be held in
depots, garrisons, and mobilization stores; and the scale of such articles
to be in possession of the troops.
postal services in war."
Arrangements for the execution of
Control was exercised as illustrated in the following diagrammatic lay-
out which shows how the department was divided into about a dozen
branches: —
1 ф
Q.M.G.
Chief Inspector of
Q.M.G's.
Services
D.Q.M.G. (Canteens)
Q.M.G. (11)
#====
Between the Wars
arrange ded rai had ten intritied in Nor Me 18, camed mins
the war years to be suspended or modified to conform to peace-time require-
Thus in May, 1919, the appointment of the Director-General of Move-
ments and Railways ceased to exist and his responsibilities were transferred
His duties were absorbed by the Director of Movements,
whose appointment was subsequently merged into that of Director of Move-
Also in 1919 the Controller of Salvage was re-
designated the Controller of Surplus Stores and Salvage, and worked under
the O.M.G. until 1922, when the post was abolished (it was revived as
the directorate of Salvage some 20 years later to perform many valuable
services during the Second World War).
During 1927 the distribution of duties between the Q.M.G. and the M.G.O.
became responsible for all duties relating to
military stores (other than building,
veterinary stores) including the provision and maintenance of motor vehicles
(except those held on the establishment of the R.A.S.C.).
remained with the Q.M.G.,
time took over from the M.G.O. responsibility for all duties concerned with
engineers services and building
This re-organization meant that complete
responsibility for the R.A.O.C.
now passed to the M.G.O.
period of divided control.
By 1930 responsibility for the administration of the personnel employed
on the services controlled by the Q.M.G. had passed to the Adjutant-General.
The progressive mechanization of the Army and, in later years,
re-armament of the forces were reflected in the gradual increase of size
of all directorates controlled by
except in the directorate of
Remounts, the head of which was down-graded first to assistant director
and subsequently to deputy assistant director.
Indeed, the ominous warlike
