by this time the improvised organization had at least established some sort
Instead of labour and personnel adequate to operate the base
arriving, there landed staff and service officers of both the H.Q. of the force
and the base sub-area.
The tactical circumstances were such that the base
staff was superfluous and the shipping space it occupied
have been used to infinitely greater advantage
by docks labour
Finally, to quote again from General Paget:
In the case of the Andalsnes expedition it appears to have
been assumed that the port of Andalsnes and the line of communication
running forward therefrom was capable of maintaining the force which
it was considered operationally desirable to disembark there.
ascertained no attempt to verify this assumption was
although opportunity to do so existed
the possibility of main-
taining any force through the single port of Andalsnes depended primarily
upon whether or not local air superiority could be established and main-
necessary degree of air superiority
expected to exist throughout the whole length of the line of
communication, and since that line was particularly vulnerable to both
air action and to seasonable changes, the Andalsnes project was not
administratively practicable. Operationally, therefore, it was doomed
In fairness, however, to the Chiefs of Staff it must be stated that they
themselves were aware of the danger of launching " Rupert"
" Sickle"
and " Maurice" and laid down several conditions which were not fulfilled
owing to political and economic considerations.
THE SCANDINAVIAN OPERATIONS
SECTION 4-ICELAND
The worsening military situation resulting from the German victories on
the Continent and in Scandinavia made it imperative for action to be taken
to secure the safety of the main shipping routes in the North Atlantic and
other northern waters, and to ensure that no chance could be offered to
the enemy to instal himself in any position that might expose those com-
munications to further danger. One such vital link in the defence of the
and North Atlantic communications was Iceland, and in
the spring of 1940 it was decided that a British force would occupy the
island thus denying it to the Germans who, it was believed, were contem-
plating a similar operation.
Iceland (see Map 10) is a volcanic island of some 40,000 square miles
lying off the south-east coast of Greenland just south of the Arctic Circle,
and is fertile only in the coastal regions.
The coast line consists mainly
of fjords except in the south-east where the Glacier Vatnajokull stretches
straight down to the sea.
The fjords, being in many instances exposed
to the weather, do not always provide good anchorages. In summer the
hours of daylight are long and the weather conditions are generally good
although always liable to sudden change. In winter the weather is extremely
changeable with occasional gales of exceptional violence, and the hours of
darkness are long.
WO 277
1 0
Iceland had a population of over 130,000 inhabitants. It was formerly
part of the Kingdom of Denmark, but by an Act passed in 1918 became
a free and independent state under the sovereignty of the King of Denmark.
This independence granted to the country was, however, little more than a
formality for, since 1904, it had been free of Copenhagen on internal ques-
Upon the German invasion of Denmark in April, 1940, the Govern-
ment was temporarily invested with the Royal power by a resolution of
the Icelandic Parliament (or Althing) and four years later the country
achieved complete independence of Denmark by declaring itself a republic.
The island depends almost entirely on road and sea communications,
although limited use had been made of air and sea plane services before
There were no railways, a deficiency of which the War
Office was apparently not aware (see below). A road existed three-quarters
of the way round the island from the capital Reykjavik, in the south-west,
to Seydisfjordur in the east.
In many places this road was no more
than a track and open only for the months of June to August, especially
in the section from Akureyri, in the north, to Seydisfjordur. The section
from Reykjavik to Akureyri was somewhat better, although civil communi-
cation between those places was normally from Reykjavik to Borganes by
sea and thence to Akureyri by road.
147 Infantry Brigade, which was originally intended to accompany
" Maurice" to Namsos, was selected as the first body of the occupying force
which was known as " Alabaster".
The brigade was augmented by some
divisional troops of 49 Division and a number of ancillary units :—
One artizan works company, R.E.
One field hygiene section, R.A.M.C.
One field ambulance, R.A.M.C.
One section of a supply personnel company, R.A.S.C.
One sub-section of a field bakery, R.A.S.C.
One section of a reserve M.T. company, R.A.S.C.
A detachment of a base ordnance depot (including ammunition
A certain amount of dock personnel, and pioneer labour of the A.M.P.C.
was also included in the force which consisted of some 3,500 troops under
sailed from Scotland
the command of Brigadier G. Lammie.
on 14th May, 1940, and three days later disembarked at Reykjavik where
a force of Royal Marines had landed some days previously to pave the way
for the military occupation.
H.M. Government sent a note to the Icelandic Government at the same
time declaring that Great Britain promised to recognize the absolute in-
dependence and sovereignty of Iceland, and to provide that it would not
be encroached upon by the terms of the peace treaty, nor in any other way,
at the conclusion of the War.
Nevertheless, the attitude of the Icelanders,
while not hostile, was not encouragins in the initial stages, and much tact
had to be used for ss not encour break down the attitude of reserve they
Thirty days bulk supplies, plus three days " compo" rations for wee as
landing rations were suppies, pi the force in the personnel ships,
was not taken with the fret convoy, reliance being correctly placed on the
87
