the same mileage of rail track, about one-third the number of locomotives,
and about one-sixth the number of wagons. Roads were scarce, undeveloped,
often fit only for one-way traffic, and few were all-weather.
There was too— in a country intersected by many rivers a serious lack
of bridges.
Many of these rivers, when filled by the annual Himalayan
snowmelt and the summer monsoon rains, are of great width.
Their courses
change, and in winter they sometimes run in smaller channels although between
banks far apart.
None of them are navigable for any distance to ocean-
going ships,
and in a continent as big as Europe there were only seven
ports worthy of the name.
The 400,000,000 inhabitants of the continent were spread over a land
mass of 1,581,410 square miles, an area four times that of France and Spain
combined or two-fifths of the size of the U.S.A.
India was an agricultural country yet, as will be seen, she fed her own
millions only with
difficulty.
war broke out her plains and cities
were steadily developing in peace-time production,
but for the upheaval
of modern war she was relatively unprepared.
This, in its ultimate effect
on army administration, meant that where an airfield, a depot, a large
camp, etc., had to be built, the problem was not merely one of adaption of
existing conditions.
It meant starting from nothing.
Water supplies, roads,
railways, buildings,
lighting, power, drainage and every
other requirement
had to be installed where previously there had been village, paddyfield, or
perhaps only desert.
It has also to be borne in mind that India at the outbreak of war was
an impoverished country.
The great majority of the population were working
on the land on very small earnings, from which they managed to eke out
an existence at bare subsistence level.
In the past hundred years the popula-
tion had almost doubled itself, so it is apparent that any increase in the
standard of living was continually being cancelled out.
A large part of the population lived on rice, the remainder mainly on
other food grains and very little else. India-and this was a very important
factor in planning the development of the ports was not self-supporting
The rice came largely from Burma,
and when this source of
supply ceased, an immense problem in feeding the 400,000,000 population
The import of food grains into the western
ports rose to 100,000 tons a month and was a big additional load on the
strained transportation facilities of the country.
There were, however, industries of great importance, not only to the
internal security of India but to the strategic requirements of the Allies.
jute, the textile, the mica and the steel industries are cases in point.
had a virtual monopoly of jute; half a million people were engaged in her
textile industry; she was practically the sole
world producer of mica, a
product required in great quantities for our electrical equipment; and the
famous Tata Steel Works were the largest in the British Empire.
manufactured for the defence forces vast quantities of clothing, cotton-jule
canvas and, on an average, three million pairs of boots a year.
The remaining industries, too numerous to be mentioned individually.
were in every case considerably expander as to beement war production.
Government factories, reinforced by civilian firms,
turned out guns, small
342
WO2T7
arms, optical instruments, and all types of ammunition. The Indian railwa
workshops- in addition to the manufacture of railway equipment-produced
armoured cars and other mechanical equipment.
G.H.Q., India, had thus to be concerned, not only with the military
development of the country, but with the civilian and industrial development
as well. The Commander-in-Chief became a co-ordinating and directing force
for everything, whether it was food supplies for the civilian population, rolling
stock for the railways, coal for the factories or any other essential service.
There were, of course, complications imposed by the political situation.
The failure of the Cripps Mission to bring the Congress Party wholeheartedly
into the struggle on the Allied side meant that the troops at the Commander-
in-Chief's disposal had to be distributed, not only in defence of the vulnerable
frontiers, but also at
strategic centres to maintain the security of the
industries and communications which were of such vital importance not only
to the Allies, but to India herself.
SOUTH-EAST ASIA COMMAND
Such was the general picture during the second half of 1943 when it was
decided to set up a Supreme Allied Command in South-East Asia to further
operations against Japan.
With Admiral Mountbatten's appointment, C.-in-C.
India ceased to be operationally responsible for the new command, but
retained responsibility for the defence of India itself, and also for the pro-
vision and maintenance of men and material for the forces placed under
It was, and still is, considered by some that India, being his main base,
should have been under the command of the newly-appointed Supreme Com-
Disregarding the very important constitutional implications, the
authors can find little support for this theory on the grounds of custom or
Neither for the North African nor the Normandy landings were
the main bases (United Kingdom and U.S.A.) commanded by General
Furthermore, it would appear to be undesirable for such a vast
area as India to have been under the commander of an operational theatre
of war since it could not fail to increase his responsibilities, thus distracting
his attention from the conduct of operations.
At the end of September, 1943, the Chiefs of Staff directed that India
should be prepared hu Osther 1044 ne a basa doe tha following for.
20 Commonwealth divisions.
5 divisions to by-pass India, for which India was to be responsible for
154 R.A.F. squadrons.
30 Fleet Air Arm shore-based squadrons and certain other naval forces.
India was also to
set up a base for the American and Chinese troops
employed under Stilwell in the India-Burma theatre, a transit base for the
flown over the "Hump".
U.S. Forces in China, and a base for sunnies for China including the supplies
The targets set up by the Chiefs of Staff varied from time to time as
strategic conditions changed and the cause of the Allies prospered; the
