and were novices to battle.
Admittedly, 6 Australian Division were much
fresher, but even they had had two " set-piece" battles—
-Tobruk and Bardia
—followed by the chase to Ghemines.
General Wavell's decision to " call it a day" was, however, based on
two other major considerations.
The first was our obligation to Greece.
As the measure of her success against the Italians increased so, too, did
of German intervention in the support of the weaker partner
and the time was already overdue to send troops to her aid.
This, of course, involved drawing on our army in the desert.
consideration was the necessity to comply with one of the basic factors of
war administration. Brilliant though it had been to the present stage, there
After Benghazi there is no port worthy of
the name until Tripoli is reached.
Such places as Ras El Ali (nothing but
a beach suitable for unloading landing-craft), Buerat (with its tiny jetty suffi-
cient only for fishing and small coastal craft), and Misurata, could not in
themselves offer enough assistance even for the tiny Army of the Nile, and
were not to play their part until nearly two years later, when the re-incarnated
and much more lusty version of the Army of the Nile-the Eighth Army-
was to sweep the Axis out of Libya.
Further operations therefore hinged on transport-road transport-and
this did not exist in sufficient quantity to permit the operation.
With the prospect of a further advance in abeyance, our gains were
H.Q., Cyrenaica Command had been created, and at midnight
15th/16th February, took over area administration from H.Q., 13 Corps.
In point of fact, Rear H.Q., 13 Corps had been absorbed by H.Q., Cyrenaica
Command and had been performing a dual administrative role since 1st
1 Australian Corps (under H.Q., Cyrenaica Command) took over
operational responsibility from 13 Corps and G.H.Q. concentrated on the
return of 7 Armoured Division and, later, 6 Australian Division to the Delta,
and their relief by 2 Armoured Division and 9 Australian Division respec-
The only Italians remaining in Cyrenaica were those in the garrisons of
Giarabub and Jalo, two oases in the desert hinterland.
Those at Jalo were
suffered to remain, but those at Giarabub, who had disregarded leaflets
dropped from the air and other inducements, were reduced by an attack
on 21st March,
carried out by a small mixed force maintained by Matruh
Sub-Area H.Q., over a desert track via Siwa.
General Wavell's decision to refrain from further exploitation was now
confirmed by the Chiefs of Staff, who laid down that, as the result of requests
for assistance from Greece, operations were to cease at the Cyrenaican frontier
which was to be held with the minimum force necessary to secure the flank
of our Egyptian base, and at the same time, the maximum number of troops
were to be freed to go to the aid of the Greek forces.
It is therefore necessary to follow the ill-fated Greek Expeditionary Force
in its journey to the Aliakhmon Line and back before returning to the next
stage of the gigantic battles that were to be fought over the Western Desert.
But we must first turn to the eastern seaboard of the African continent
where, after one minor reverse, our forces were scoring notable victories
against heavy odds.
1 0
THE MIDDLE EAST, 1939-1942
SECTION 3-BRITISH SOMALILAND
The story of operations in East Africa properly begins with an unpalatable
event—no rare occurrence at the outset of any major war in which Britain
has been involved-the evacuation of British troops from the Somaliland
Protectorate.
The incident has little of "Q" interest but is recorded in fair
detail as it affords an illuminating example of procrastination and delay such
as was continually being experienced by British troops during the first year
Mention has already been made in the preceding sections of the magnitude
of General Wavell's commitments in the Middle East, the small force he
had at his disposal, and the policy of avoidance of any action which might
give Italy cause for entry into the war—a policy which, in retrospect, shows
many disadvantages.
These were the major factors contributing to the loss
of British Somaliland.
British and French Somaliland were, before the war, considered as a
single entity for defence purposes.
The countries can best be described as
unproductive wilderness surrounded, after the Italian occupation of
Abyssinia, by Italian territory (see Map 13).
In so far as British Somaliland was concerned, the military garrison,
after the economic crisis of 1931, had been progressively reduced until it
numbered only 14 British officers, 400 African askaris and 150 African
These constituted the only military force for the external and
internal defence of a country larger than England and Wales together.
During the years 1936 to 1938, following on the Italian occupation of
Abyssinia, various defence proposals were considered, but it was eventually
decided that, in the event of war with Italy, the role of the minute garrison
would only be to impose such delay as was possible on the enemy's probable
The northern coastal strip at the east of which lies Berbera and at the
west Jibuti, is closed in by a crescent of rugged hills through which only
six motor roads lead from the plateau of the interior.
lead towards Jibuti and Zeilah, and two towards Berbera.
however, pass through some form of defile, and it was agreed in May, 1939,
at an Anglo-French conference, that any joint plan should include the
As a result of this decision the sum of £900
was allotted in July, 1939, for the defences of Sheikh Pass and Tug Argan
Gap, these being the two points at which the roads Burao-Berbera and
Hargeisa-Berbera pass through the belt of hills. The first is easily defended,
being steep and narrow, but the other is a gap of some four miles, a very
different proposition as it was patently the route the Italians would select.
Work began at once on the construction of concrete machine-gun posts
and on providing these posts with water tanks at Sheikh Pass.
demolitions were also prepared, but once either of these two key positions
had been forced it was uncomfortably obvious that there was no position
from which a small force could long delay an advance to Berbera over the
12090.
