CHAPTER IV
THE MIDDLE EAST 1939-1942
SECTION 1-FORMATION OF MIDDLE EAST COMMAND
The Middle East Command was formed as a planning staff at the be-
ginning of August, 1939.
Its original charter laid down the command in
peace as comprising Egypt, the Sudan, Cyprus, Palestine and Transjordan.
The Middle East Intelligence Centre was created at the same time, as also was
a Joint Planning Staff.
The actual staff of H.Q., Middle East Command,
which was located in Cairo, consisted of only five officers including a
deputy assistant quarter-master-general.
Beyond the normal responsibilities of control of all land forces, prepara-
tion of war plans and constant liaison with, and assistance to, the Egyptian
Government in the development and modernization of the Egyptian Army,
the G.O.C.-in-C., Middle East Command was also charged with co-ordinating
war plans with those of our allies in the Near and Middle East
This was envisaged as involving co-ordination with
the French in North Africa, Syria, and French Somaliland, with the Turks
possibly with the Greek and Rumanian General Staffs.
In the event of war breaking out, the original charter provided for the
the new command to be extended to include all military forces
in British
Somaliland, Aden, Iraq and on the shores of the Persian Gulf.
The Outbreak of War
On the outbreak of war with Germany, the Middle East Command assumed
operational control over the troops in Egypt, Palestine, Sudan and Cyprus.
It was also responsible for military plans in British Somaliland but did
not assume full operational control of this theatre until 13th January, 1940
At this time there was not one complete British formation in the Middle
Indeed the Egyptian Army was for the most part better equipped
than the British, but as the Egyptian Government did not declare war on
Germany, the amount of support to be gained therefrom was problematical.
Fortunately the number of troops in the Middle East was larger than normal
owing to the unrest in Palestine which had resulted in reinforcements being
despatched from the United Kingdom and India.
The total, however, only
battalions of infantry while artillery was woefully short,
consisting of 64 field guns, 48 anti-tank and 8 A.A. guns.
Owing to the fact that Italy did not immediately enter the war, a very
necessary respite was granted to the Middle East.
This time was spent
in establishing relations with the various French commanders, and in dis-
cussing with the Turks the assistance to be given by the Allies if Thrace
or the Caucasus were attacked.
A considerable handicap in
preparations against the eventuality of
entering the war was imposed by instructions from H.M. Government
that nothing should be done which might in any way impair relations with
that country ; apart from limiting defensive measures in the Western Desert
precluded such vital intelligence activity as making contacts in
Italian East Africa and Abyssinia.
92
WO217
1 Ф
Throughout the first nine months of the war the responsibilities of
Middle East Command grew rapidly and it very soon became obvious that
operational control could not be exercised without at least some control
over administration.
The command therefore gradually assumed a con-
measure of administrative responsibility,
assumption of complete responsibility on 5th June, 1940.
A new directive to C.-in-C., Middle East Command had been issued
earlier, in February, 1940, in which the C.-in-C.'s powers were defined as
commanding all British land forces in the following areas (see Map 11): -
Palestine and Transjordan
Cyprus
Sudan
Turkey
The Balkans (Yugoslavia, Rumania, Bulgaria, Greece)
East Africa
British Somaliland.
These terms of reference included responsibility for administration, except
for the forces in East Africa which remained directly under the War Office
and the forces in British Somaliland which remained under the Colonial
Office unless, or until, war with Italy was declared, when responsibility for
administration would pass automatically to Middle East Command. It will
seen from the next section that this latter decision had very serious
Between September, 1939 and March, 1940 a number of reinforcements
arrived in the Middle East to supplement the exiguous resources of man-
power. These included the first contingent of Australians and New Zealanders,
each of which arrived in brigade strength with certain divisional troops,
5 Indian Infantry Brigade and 1 Cavalry Division (Horsed). The Common-
wealth contingent was magnificent material but was only partially trained
and equipped, and the same might be said of 1 Cavalry Division (the
arrival of which in Palestine recalled memories of Allenby's campaign in the
1914-1918 War). At the same time as these reinforcements arrived valuable
contributions in manpower were being made by the Colonies.
Cyprus, Malta, Southern Rhodesia and Palestine all gave assistance by the
personnel and technicians for absorption into other units, or
of anti-aircraft batteries, or transport and labour companies.
At the time of the declaration of war by Italy on 10th June, 1940, there
were estimated to be over 215,000 Italian troops in Libya and over 200,000
in Italian East Africa against which British Commonwealth forces located
in the countries with frontiers adjoining Italian territory amounted only to
about 55,000 men, with a further 31,000 in Palestine, Aden and Cyprus.
Middle East Reserves
At the outbreak of war approximately three months' reserves of all
items had been held in the Middle East for the normal garrison and for
one brigade group which was earmarked as a first reserve and which was
to come (as it did) from India. As has been stated the numerical strength
of the Command grew steadily with the arrival of contingents from the
