In the sphere of labour, there is no doubt that the long-range
wer of the air-arm, attacking back areas equally with those in the front
e, created a difficult problem.
This difficulty was especially in evidence in
lalaya where many people were not natives of the country, and where, in
consequence, defence of their homes was not a matter of first importance.
During the pre-war period the problem of harnessing the civilian popula-
tion to essential defence requirements was not tackled with sufficient vigour,
and, when the danger of the situation became apparent and efforts were
made to improve it, there was insufficient time to solve the intricate problems
which arose.
Experience showed, as it did throughout the war, that by far the best
results were obtained
from properly organized labour companies under
military control.
men were then subject to military discipline,
properly housed, fed and organized.
Steps taken later in the war concerning
the civilian labour branches of the Royal Pioneer Corps prove the validity
of this statement.
Passing reference has already been made to the effects of the numerous
changes which took place in the higher command.
In fact, during the short
campaign, there were, in all, five commanders-in-chief.
Comment on this
fact is superfluous.
Throughout the campaign, H.Q., Malaya Command, had the additional
function of a headquarters in the field; it controlled forces operating over
an area nearly as large as that of England and Wales, and dealt with the
home authorities and the civil government in respect of many matters which
are essentially the responsibility of an overseas command. Its strength, as has
been stated, when war broke out was not much larger than a corps head-
quarters, and its establishment was not suited to its dual role in war.
Further Allied Reverses
Three weeks later came further disaster. On 8th March the Dutch com-
mander in the Netherlands East Indies
surrendered unconditionally with
93,000 Dutch and 5,000 British, American and Australian troops.
On the
same day the fall of Rangoon was announced and yet another withdrawal
by tired British and Commonwealth troops over miles of difficult country
under the worst possible conditions was beginning (see next section).
By their conquests in Malaya and in the Netherlands East Indies, the
Japanese invaders had obtained control of a region producing nearly 90 per
cent. of the world's rubber, nearly 40 per cent. of the tin and sufficient oil
for all their needs.
disaster in. the history of the British Empire.
In itself, the loss of Singapore was the greatest military
It seemed, indeed, that it
was not possible to halt the Japanese and that only Burma remained to be
conquered before the glittering prize of India would lay open to the invader.
304
WO27
1
THE DEFENSIVE IN ASIA, 1941-1942
SECTION 3-THE FIRST BURMA CAMPAIGN
nonde ever old
"If they had brought me one piece of good news I should have burst out crying - but
(Lieutenant-General W. J. Slim, Commander 1 Burma Corps.
March, 1942.)
Burma is shaped like a hand with a long forefinger pointing south. Most
of the hand is an extension of the mountain ranges of Central Asia.
the hand divides into fingers so does Burma split up into ranges stretching
southwards.
Between them are the valleys with their three chief rivers, the
Chindwin, the Irrawaddy and the Salween, and another of great importance
in this campaign, the
Sittang.
The forefinger
is the
coastal strip
Tenasserim which reaches down the western shore of the Malay Peninsula
towards Singapore.
(See Map 27.)
Burma interposes itself between India and Malaya, and Siam (Thailand)
and southern China.
It is not a corridor between any of these lands, but
a barrier.
The importance of Burma, in a war against Japan, to the Allied
cause in general, and to the defence of India in particular, is now obvious,
but at the time it was overshadowed by Singapore.
no major attack on India could have been launched through Burma.
From Rangoon and thence through Burma and over the "Burma Road"
lay the only route by which the Chinese armies could be kept supplied, and
bases stocked for Allied air attacks on Japan itself. From the point of view
of India, as long as Burma was held by us, Calcutta and the great industrial
centres of north-east India were practically immune from air attack, and her
eastern land frontiers secure from the threat of invasion.
Burma had been included for operational purposes in the Far East
Command when this was established in Singapore during November, 1940,
but administration remained the responsibility of the War Office.
In many
respects it was, however, subject to the decisions and sanctions of the Burma
Government
and in
point of fact,
Burma Army was no more under the
War Office for administration than was the Indian Army in India.
So much, however, was the security of Burma of concern to those charged
with the defence of India that attempts were made by three successive
commanders-in-chief in India to have this arrangement altered, and complete
responsibility transferred to India.
These oft-repeated representations were
unsuccessful, but immediately on the
entry of Japan into the war both
operational and administrative control of the troops in Burma were transferred
to G.H.Q., India.
During the next month, however, the South-West Pacific Command was
formed under General Wa, however, the South-Was Papie Strong protests
by both the C.-in-C., India, and the newly appointed Supreme Commander.
The responsibility for administ the newly appoinemained with India and,
as General Wavell pointed nist, at on necess one to separate operational
and administrative responsibility.
Japanese aggression.
305
