trangement, designed to free 13 Corps from the task of running their sea-
ad in order that they could concentrate on the battles ahead, did not have
The reason consisted simply in the fact that the force was
Until reserves in the forward area were
obviate switches in priority unloading and were adequate to meet
sudden emergencies, 13 Corps could not forgo their interest in Sollum port.
It is true in any circumstances that the H.Q. controlling the battle must at the
same time control resources-if those resources are exiguous.
the commander of the force cannot exercise freedom of manœuvre for the
reason that administration is always a limiting factor, and in this case one
largely out of his control.
Had the capacity of Sollum been greater, and had the establishment of at
least seven days' reserves of all natures been possible of achievement in but
a few days, the removal of anxiety and worry over the running of the L. of C.,
and sea-head, would have been gratefully received. As it was H.Q., 13 Corps
found itself in a position where G.H.Q., Middle East were responsible for
despatching stores for its use to a port controlled by H.Q., B.T.E. under whose
command 13 Corps were.
Furthermore, shipping advices seldom tallied with
actual receipts, and alterations in unloading priorities were the order of the
day, with consequent loss of efficiency in the port.
Though the day-to-day
requirements of the force were surprisingly small by later standards, the
of Sollum of 400/500 tons a day only slightly exceeded these re-
quirements, and the build-up of reserves of ammunition necessary for reducing
such places as Bardia and Tobruk thus became a lengthy business.
evacuation of P.W. by sea, so necessary as the most practical way of reducing
administrative commitments in the forward area, slowed up port working to
the extent of a 30 per cent. loss of efficiency.
Though we had been singularly
fortunate in that no supply ships had, as yet, been lost by enemy action, the
effect of bombing on labour working in the port, coupled with the effect of
frequent sand-storms, were further factors affecting the ability of the force
to place itself on a sound administrative footing.
The upshot of this situation was a letter written by the corps commander
to H.Q., B.T.E., which, with G.H.Q., being relatively far from the battle and
relying on the misleading shipping advices, had been lulled into a sense of
He requested most strongly that 13 Corps should be allowed to
control its own advanced base. Further, as the interposition of B.T.E. between
the consumer and G.H.Q. (who were, as already stated, responsible for stock-
ing the advanced depots) seemed to be unnecessary and the cause of con-
fusion and delays, it was requested that 13 Corps should come directly under
Pending a decision on this point, however, H.Q., B.T.E., remained in
control of Bardia, Fort Capuzzo and Sollum through the medium of an L. of C.
sub-area which was also given the responsibility of clearing the battlefield.
H.Q., B.T.E. decided to eat down the supplies in 8 F.S.D., and to establish
advanced depots on top of the escarpment to which supplies from shipping
would be taken direct.
The Capture of Tobruk
It will be remembered that the campaign had started with Western Desert
Force (as it then was) moving out for a five-day operation.
As a result only
114
WO 277
1 0
a nucleus of administrative staff had moved with the advanced W.D.F. head-
to bring forward this administrative tail.
quarters, the remainder staying behind in Ma'aten Bagush. It was now decided
H.Q., 13 Corps now set about stocking up 10 and 11 F.S.Ds.- the latter
serving 6 Australian Division which was located just north of Gambut. A
number of water-cisterns existed in the Gambut area, and an R.A.S.C. com-
pany was put on to the task of ferrying water from Bardia to fill them in
order that 6 Australian Division could draw water from Gambut.
The date for the attack on Tobruk had been provisionally fixed for 20th
January. Mention has been made of the difficulties under which the port of
Sollum suffered, and of the frequent blinding sand-storms, of which the worst
lasted continuously from 17th to 20 th January. As an instance of the severity
carrying five days'
storms, and their effect on administration, one R.A.S.C. convoy
supplies for 7 Armoured Division was lost for four days.
Such misfortunes always entailed rapid changes in arrangements, extra use of
transport, and usually upset all build-up calculations. Another effect of the
sand-storms was the choking of pumps with sand, causing a reduction in the
daily water ration from the one gallon a man which it had become, to a half-
Further operations westwards of Tobruk (after capture) depended on
having as large reserves as possible in the forward area to meet the needs
of the force during the seven days estimated to be necessary before the port
could be put into operation. This target figure included some 1,000 tons of
ammunition with which to refill formations after the extensive artillery pro-
gramme for the attack had been carried out.
rationing of day-to-day gun ammunition expenditure was initiated.
It was not anticipated that Tobruk would be a more difficult proposition
than Bardia, and even while the stocking of F.S.Ds. to supply formations
committed to the reduction of Tobruk was taking place, plans were in hand
for maintenance of a force operating still further west, while the port of
Tobruk was being developed.
This entailed the establishment of No. 12
area Bir El Aleima to supply one armoured brigade group
operating as far forward as Mechili, and was to be stocked with seven
days' supplies and petrol.
Convoys actually started the stocking of this
depot on 19th January, two days before the attack on Tobruk began, and
while a severe sandstorm was still raging.
On 20th January, it was decided that 12 F.S.D. must be built up to supply
the whole of 7 Armoured Division, and that a new F.S.D. (No. 13) should
be established at mimi, initially for one brigade group of 6 Australian
Division and later, on the closing down of 11 F.S.D. (probably when the port
of Tobruk was working), for the whole of 6 Australian Division.
The attack on Tobruk began on 21st January, having been postponed one
day owing to the sand-storms already mentioned.
7 Armoured Division was
to make demonstrations against the defences from the north-west, and prevent
either reinforcement or escape.
6 Australian Division supported by tanks
and artillery was to undertake the actual attack.
The enemy opposition was
not great except at one point, and by nightfall about a third of Tobruk was in
our hands. Early on the next day the town was entered without resistance
but explosions had been heard during the night, and it was found that
