high level, and when the country was living under the imminent threat of
invasion, and under actual and heavy aerial bombardment.
The authors have
therefore been content to confine the section to a factual statement of the
arrangements that were made, and have not attempted to draw lessons.
One serious drawback, however, did exist when war broke out and became
more and more important until at the time of the invasion crisis it threatened
to sabotage the entire military machine.
This was the complete lack of
decentralization of financial and other powers by higher formations and was
made manifest by the universal reluctance on the part of any headquarters
to credit its subordinate formations with the ability to think for themselves.
This state of affairs could be traced back to the " between-the-wars"
when the depleted Army had perforce to watch every penny granted to it
by the Treasury and could not therefore afford to authorize the expenditure
of any but the smallest amounts without War Office scrutiny.
A study of
the 1940 edition of King's Regulations illustrates the length to which the
policy of centralization was carried.
A further important deficiency in administration of the Army at home
The return of the
headquarters, with its subordinate corps and divisions superimposed over
the existing organization, and the resulting compromises from the overlapping
of field force and static formations,
proved that the
existing chain
of
command was
quite inadequate to deal with either
the operational or
administrative requirements of the Home Forces.
The Standing Committee on Army Administration
The problem of decentralization (or the lack of it), although under discus-
sion at most levels for some time previously, was first seriously investigated
during July, 1940, when a standing committee was appointed with the follow-
ing terms of reference: —
"To consider the present administrative organization of the War Office
and of the military commands with a view to introducing such changes
of organization and simplification of procedure as are necessary to give
the elasticity which war-time conditions demand
The Standing Committee on Army Administration (S.C.A.A.) immediately
launched a number of investigations into particular branches and details of
War Office organization; these were for the most part undertaken by a mix-
ture of outside business experts and persons familiar with War Office pro-
cedure.
Some of these inquiries related to the mere mechanics of administra-
tion, some of them related to the work of a self-contained section of a
particular department and some of them covered the
department as a whole.
organization of a
covered the organization of the Q.M.G.'s Department.)
(For instance, the S.C.A.A. $ se organization of t
It also appointed a sub-committee to visit commands to see, as the report
put it, " where the shoe pinched" and in particular to try to reduce the volume
of correspondence between units and commands and commands and the War
Office.
The Committee finds its place in this history by virtue of the conditions
surrounding its appointment rather than by its work which was more a
258
WO277
steady, continuous process of overhaul rather than a number of dramatic or
drastic recommendations.
Furthermore, the wide terms of reference related
to the efficiency of the Army as a whole and were, of course, by no means
confined to "Q" matters.
no innovations.
That is not to say that the committee introduced
It certainly did, and two of them, in particular, in course
of time greatly assisted the "O" staffs in all commands, particularly at the
higher levels.
The first was the suggestion that an Executive Committee of the Army
Council be formed to relieve the latter by being able to deal with questions
which although important did not really require reference to the full' council,
and by making,
Council in other cases.
as far as possible, agreed recommendations to the Army
The E.C.A.C., as it was officially known, was thus
able to dispose of many questions which previously were unjustifiably elevated
to the Army Council.
It had many advantages, the majority of which find
no place here, but one blessing which emerged from its inception was that
it was able to shorten the career of much of the correspondence which, during
the
passage from branch to branch, attracted lengthy
decisions.
minutes but few
The second was a valiant and partly successful endeavour to achieve a
considerable measure of decentralization of War Office financial powers by
the appointment of representatives of the Permanent Under-Secretary of State
as " command secretaries" at each command headquarters.
This scheme was
inaugurated by the appointment to Headquarters Northern Command of
a command secretary and a small staff assisted by a representative of the
Director of Contracts to deal amongst other matters, with stationery and
civilian clerical staff.
The appointment of the command secretary with con-
siderable financial powers of approval in regard to contracts, purchases, etc.,
was of great assistance to the command in general and to the major-general
in charge of administration in particular, since the advice and major general
which could now be given on the spot by the command secretary enabled
many matters to be settled at command headquarters where hitherto they
had had to be referred to the War Office.
After the first experimental period it was claimed that the innovation was
a success and its extension to other commands followed in due course, until
the practice was universal over the home commands and later spread to some
overseas theatres.
SO
Attacks upon the large volume and clogging effects of "paper" were
prominent a feature of most criticisms of army administration that the
S.C.A.A.
appointed a special sub-committee to enquire into the working
of the office side of command, sub-cond other formation headquarters.
problem unfortunately proved largely intractable, and, despite many recom-
mendations and innovations,
"paper" successfully warded oft all its critics
and enemies, and at the conclusion of the war had won perhaps as complete
a victory as any that the Allies had gained over the Axis.
The committee
correctly appreciated its own failure to decrease the amount of paper in use
and in so doing recorded what is perhaps the most intelligent comment that
had been made on the subject.
•.. the Army cannot hope to eliminate all paper.
Commercial
concerns make quite extensive use of paper.
Where the Army lags
12090
