CHAPTER IIl
THE SCANDINAVIAN OPERATIONS
SECTION 1-NORWAY-BACKGROUND AND LESSONS
"It has become the habit of the British Army in recent years to assume that what
he General Staff considers to be politically or operationall
desirable is administra-
tively possible.
No greater or more dangerous fallacy could exist"
(Major-General B. C. T. Paget)
(May, 1940)
Aid to Finland
At the beginning of 1940, military operations in Scandinavia were con-
fined to the Russo-Finnish war, in which Finland was heroically resisting
the Russian onslaught.
It was evident that although the Allies were not
at war with Russia,
it was important for both military and political reasons
that military
aid should be given to Finland. This, however, could only
be achieved by the passage of Allied troops through Norway and Sweden,
and neither of these countries were showing any sign of enthusiasm at the
prospect.
On the other hand, if Sweden could be persuaded to allow British
or French forces to pass through her territory to the aid of the Finns.
Allied control of the important Gallivare iron ore mines in Sweden would
thus be automatically ensured-this being considered one of the major
economic blows that could be directed against Germany.
The proposal to send troops to Scandinavia ostensibly to the aid of
Finland was therefore attractive on three scores, firstly the international
altruistic assistance to a small
the Nazi-Soviet non-aggression pact; secondly, the
of denying the Gallivare iron ore to the enemy; and lastly the military value
of having Allied troops stationed in Norway
and Sweden in the event of
invasion by Germany of either or both of those countries.
Plans and preparations were accordingly
made for the collection and
despatch of expeditions to Narvik in
northern Norway (Force
" Avon-
mouth") and to Trondheim, Bergen and Stavanger in central and southern
Norway (Force "Stratford "), while Force "Plymouth" was to operate in
southern and central Sweden.
Besides these military preparations, diplomatic
approaches were also made to the Scandinavian Governments.
Finland was
asked to appeal for aid, and Norway and Sweden to consent to the passage
of Allied troops.
The Russo-Finnish Armistice
However, on 13th March while these diplomatic machinations were in
progress, the Finns concluded an armistice with Russia and our strongest
moral argument for intervening in Scandinavia was no longer valid.
our plans had to be shelved and the forces which had been collected were,
to some extent, dispersed.
Two divisions (42 and 44) which had been held
back in England were now allowed to proceed to France and our striking
power available for Norway was reduced to eleven battalions.
WO2T7
The denial to the enemy of the iron ore from Gallivare was, however,
by now uppermost in the minds of the Chiefs of Staff and the Ministry of
Economic Warfare.
It was claimed that there was an exact relation between
the supplies of Swedish ore to Germany and the output of the German iron
and steel industry.
Various alternatives for interrupting the sea traffic of
the ore as it sailed from Narvik to Germany were examined and it was
eventually decided to lay minefields in Norwegian territorial waters, forcing
German shipping laden with the ore out on to the open sea where it could
German reactions to the mine-laying were expected to take the course of
seizing air and naval bases in Southern Norway in order to dispute control
of the mine-fields.
To counter these reactions an Allied plan known as
Plan R4 was drawn up, under which, as soon as the Germans set foot in
Norway, or gave clear evidence of their intention to do so, we were to
Avonmouth " to Narvik and " Stratford" to Stavanger, Bergen and
Trondheim in accordance with the original plan. (Force "Plymouth"
disbanded, its employment being no longer practicable.)
" Avonmouth" consisted of 24 Guards Brigade, a French contingent and
some of the divisional troops of 49 Division, while " Stratford" was composed
of five battalions of 49 Division.
The remainder of 49 Division and two
divisions to be drawn from the B.E.F. in France were to be used for
reinforcements as necessary.
No air forces were to accompany the army in
the first instance, but an air contingent of one army co-operation flight and
one fighter squadron were earmarked for use should the occasion arise.
It does not seem that any effort was made to ensure that either force was
supported by a balanced administrative element.
During the first week of April "Avonmouth" and " Stratford" were
assembled in Scotland and on 5th April they embarked, the latter in warships,
to be ready to sail should they be required.
The German Invasion of Norway
On 8th April the mine-field was duly laid in Norwegian waters, but the
next day the Germans achieved virtually complete surprise by their combined
sea, air and land attack on Norway, military action being largely assisted by
the activities of the fifth column headed by the now notorious Major Quisling.
At the first blow the enemy forces seized a number of key points such as Oslo,
Stavanger, Trondheim and Narvik.
They
were successful in securing these
places, after which their principal aim was to consolidate their hold on them
by stabilizing their communications.
The decision to send Allied forces, mainly British, to the support of the
Norwegians was taken immediately but delay
was experienced in the initial
On 7th April the warships in which " Stratford" had embarked had
been ordered to engage the German Fleet, units of which had been reported
in the North Sea, so the troops had to be disembarked and put into camps.
There was no time for their equipment to be taken off the cruisers, and the
battalions affected had to be immediately re-quipped.
Under the fluid and uncertain conditions which prevailed the formulation
of plans was extremely difficult, and many alterations took place after all
