capacity of the wharves was 60,000 tons a month, but as much as 127,000 tons
was cleared in one month.
At the outbreak of hostilities with Japan an
additional six wharves were under construction and it was intended to double
the normal capacity of the port.
Material to be forwarded up country by
river could, in the event of operations, be off-loaded over ships' sides into
river craft for despatch direct by canal and river.
The limiting factors were the storage space in the port and its vicinity,
and the clearance of stores by rail. At the end of 1941 considerable numbers
of aircraft and vehicles for China were arriving, but they had to be assembled
in the vicinity of Rangoon before despatch to China.
Thus both the transit
sheds and the whole of the port area were very congested and enormous
quantities of material were lying in the port area awaiting despatch.
There
was a proposal under consideration by the port authorities for the construction
of new storage accommodation and general improvement of road and rail
clearance facilities, but, as with so many other projects, the question of cost
prevented the scheme from being implemented in time.
The Supply Base (Burma) was a small British organization set up by the
War Office, under the G.O.C. Burma, for the maintenance of guerilla com-
panies and R.A.F. squadrons which would be located in China in the event
of operations.
It was originally known as China Base (" Chibase "), then
"Tulip", and finally Supply Base (Burma).
In the event of operations it
was to come under the control of the Military Mission (204) to Chungking.
The number of guerilla companies was not large, but five R.A.F. bomber
squadrons were planned (they never materialized).
To simplify maintenance the companies were to live on the country to a
great extent and be provided with equipment similar to that of the Chinese.
Rations for a certain number of weekly meals were to be forwarded by Supply
Base (Burma) who were also to be fully responsible for maintenance of the
R.A.F. squadrons.
To avoid duplication they were to utilize the army base
depots and services, and place demands on D.S.T., Army in Burma for the
forward provision of supplies.
It was estimated that for the maintenance of this force along an L. of C.
stretching 700 miles to their locations in China, a minimum of six M.T.
companies would be necessary. It appears that the War Office had agreed
to provide the vehicles for these companies and drivers were to be raised
in Burma, but shortly after the first penetration of the Japanese into Burma,
Supply Base (Burma), which had never functioned effectively, was closed
down and the personnel absorbed into the administrative services.
Aid to China
War material in very large quantity was being sent into China through
Burma- the bulk under " lend-lease" arrangements by the U.S.A., although
small quantities were despatched by His Majesty's Government.
The stores
were sent either to Lashio (by road or rail) or to Bhamo (by I.W.T.) from
which two points they were forwarded to Kunming (in China) via the " Burma
Road".
At the outset of "Aid to China" the various Chinese government depari-
ments each had organizations in Rangoon to take over the stores and arrange
despatch to China.
Burma made transportation facilities available for the
310
18
movement of the material arranged by the various Chinese agencies, which
each had their own road transport fleet for the conveyance of materials from
road-rail-head at Lashio into China. These all competed with each other
and did not pool their resources.
The organization of the Burma-China Road (in China), the control of
the transport convoys, and the movement and transport facilities generally
were incredibly inefficient under this system.
Transport fleets of one Chinese
government department frequently lay idle while stores for another depart-
ment accumulated for lack of vehicles.
Appalling congestion resulted owing
to lack of traffic control, breakdowns, lack of maintenance and delays of hours
and even days at the various Chinese tax and other governmental offices on
There were thousands of abandoned vehicles which had broken
down through lack of proper maintenance, huge dumps of materials, and
empty and full petrol drums which lay discarded and which the Burma
authorities were unable to induce the Chinese either to collect or to return.
In 1941 the United States Government, who were supplying the majority
of the materials, investigated the reasons why a very large proportion was
not reaching its destination and being put to effective use.
report confirmed that everything possible was being done by the military
and civil authorities in Burma, but that inefficiencies on the Chinese portion
of the "Burma Road" were the real cause of the trouble. A start was made
to reorganize the system under American control, and certain steps taken met
with considerable success which no doubt would have increased had not the
fall of Rangoon cut the supplies off at the source.
It is perhaps of interest to record the general view that, although the
application of U.S. business methods to the problem would undoubtedly have
eradicated most of the organizational defects in the " Aid to China" life-line,
the psychological factors were left out of account.
The temperament of the
Chinese, the necessity for " face-saving"
be permitted to make a profit out of the work, were factors likely to render
any drastic but efficient system of reorganization ineffective.
It cannot too strongly be stressed that these conditions were confined to
the portion of the "Burma Road" which passed through China.
was effective on the Burma side as a result of good organization at Mandalay
and Lashio which prevented overloading of vehicles, and attempted to effect
some sort of co-ordination between the various interested agencies.
average monthly tonnage moved out of Burma was as much as 15.000 to
20,000 tons, but the magnitude of the problem faced by the administrators
of the system is shown by the fact that very little more than 7,000 tons
reached China monthly.
Co-operation with the Chinese
Towards the end of December, General Wavell flew to Chungking to
mect the Chinese Generalissimo and discussed ways and means of prosecuting
the war in the East.
The Generalissimo in the course of the discussion offered
to send to Burma the Fifth and Sixth Chinese Armies.
He made it perfectly
clear that it was a condition of Sie acceptance of his offer that separate lines
of communication should on of tie ac for his troops and that they should not
in any way be mixed up with British troops.
311
