"China Aid" traffic
Irrawaddy Flotilla Company, and consisted of bulk and cased petrol for the
with the addition of lifts unacceptable by the
The China traffic (mostly
goods from U.S.A.) was
interfered with as little as possible by the military authorities and continued
to receive a high priority up to the fall of Rangoon.
Early in the war there had been a strong demand for a transfer of Burma
river craft to Iraq, as was done in the Great War of 1914-18, but this was,
refused in London on account of the prejudice
it would have caused to the China traffic and the possible subsequent political
All-weather roads gave fair access to the more important centres, but
the greatest deficiency was
the lack of a road from India.
of a road between
been under discussion
for some years, but no action had been taken until, as a military necessity,
it began to materialize in
India was to widen
the road already existing from
Dimapur to Imphal (135
make a road from Imphal to Tamu on the frontier (65 miles) where only
a bridle track existed.
The Burma Government was to make an all-weather
M.T. road from Kalewa to Tamu
which only a fair
weather cart track existed.
Burma Army made every effort, at the
beginning of the war with Japan,
work going at the Burma end
which started at Ye-u.
No military units or personnel were available for
the work and only a few British officials
of the public works department
could be made available.
No labour was available locally and what was
collected tended to disappear in the stream of refugees.
The movement of
refugees, in fact, much interfered with
the work, and first priority had
to be given to the establishment of stocks of rice both for the refugees
and for the labour.
Reliable supervisory
personnel were almost entirely
lacking and it is not surprising that in view of the distances involved,
progress was not more rapid.
India completed the motor-road to Tamu just in time for the withdrawal
of the Burma Army.
It was, however, unmetalled and maintenance during
the wet season, should it have been necessary, would not have been possible.
Some work was done by the Burma Government on the Kalewa-Tamu
and eventually India undertook to complete it.
actually took place before work on an all-weather road by India could be
but some good work was done in a very short time to facilitate
the withdrawal by improving the existing cart-track.
Japanese made no attempt to follow up the withdrawal west of the Chindwin
may well have been due to the fact that the monsoon rendered the track
Had an all-weather road existed they might have arrived on
the frontier of India much sooner than they did.
The main road from Rangoon to Mandalay and then to Lashio ran
through Pegu very close to the Sittang river, a factor which had a con-
siderable influence on operations.
The other route northwards, via Prome,
was interrupted by a number of chaungs or nullahs and was only a fair-
weather route.
This was also to have a serious effect on the campaign.
There was a good, though very hilly and narrow, road through Taunggy,
to Kentung in the Shan States and thence to the frontier of Siam (Thailand)
308
WO2TY
18
and beyond to Chiengrai.
It was, however, interrupted by a vehicle ferry
across the swift flowing Salween river which was a serious impediment to
traffic.
The road north of Mandalay ended at Shwebo and there was no road
communication, except via Lashio and Bahmo, with Myitkyina in the extreme
north, nor with Kalewa on the Chindwin river.
Similarly, there was no through road to Tenasserim
beyond Pegu ended at Waw.
since the road
twelve miles beyond
There was a stretch of road from Kyaikto,
the Sittang river, to Martaban,
and
Moulmein.
a ferry to
From Moulmein the road led up to Kawkareik and the Siamese
frontier, being interrupted en route by several ferries.
serious effect on operations.
These again had a
Finally, the road from Moulmein to Tavoy and Mergui crossed something
like 20 ferries and, though passable in time by individual vehicles, was not a
practicable means of military maintenance.
and parallel to, the frontier with Siam.
It was also dangerously near,
Both Tavoy and Mergui were in
fact supplied by sea.
The Army in Burma
Most of the fundamental difficulties of the Malaya Command, described
in Section 1 of this chapter, were experienced in Burma.
was at the same time a War Office, a general headquarters, a corps head-
and a headquarters lines of communication.
responsibilities which covered much the same field as G.H.Q., India.
headquarters itself was little larger than that of a division.
As a result, on the outbreak of war, the staff was totally inadequate and a
few overworked staff officers were struggling to compete with problems quite
beyond their powers.
case with the administrative
In Burma itself there were two British infantry battalions, two Indian
infantry brigades and eight battalions of the Burma Rifles (four of which
had been raised since the beginning of the war). There was also the equivalent
of about six battalions of the Burma Frontier Force, the operational control
of which was taken over by the Army from the civil administration on the
outbreak of war. During December part of 17 Indian Division arrived from
India and the forces available were deployed against a possible attack, the
general effect being that 1 Burma Division held the frontier between Siam and
the Shan States, and 17 Indian Division with a force of about two brigades,
the southern frontier south of the Salween river, with a few odd units forming
the defences of Rangoon.
Such base, L. of C., and G.H.Q., units as existed consisted of units raised
in Burma, partially trained, weak in officers and N.C.Os, and with few
General Wavell has spoken of the administrative services
as being so inadequate that they might have been termed non-existent.
The main and only large port in the country was Rangoon, on the river
In addition to considerable wharfage accommodation in
the port there was ample stion in the river for a large number of ships af
buoys, which could be unloaded over the side into lighters.
