Mention has not previously been made of the capacity of Berbera as a
port-obviously a vital factor in the plan for evacuation.
It had been the
subject of a very full report in 1936, when its almost complete lack of
facilities had been exposed. All embarkation and disembarkation had to be
done by lighter or even by ships' boats.
As only very few lighters were
available the latter had more often to be used than not.
it took ten days even under normal conditions to unload a 3,000 ton ship.
"normal conditions" were frequently upset by a very strong
wind which, particularly in the month of August, blew for a number of
hours during every 24 hours at irregular periods, making loading or unloading
by lighter impossible. However, in the years 1936 to 1940 nothing was done
to improve the facilities of the port by construction of breakwaters, deep-
water quays, or provision of better lighterage facilities, so that a spell of good
weather became of the utmost importance for a successful evacuation.
Evacuation of the first portion of the garrison began on the night of
16th-17th August.
The Italians had been carrying out air raids by night
on Berbera, but owing to the loss of two of their planes on 15th August, their
air force seemed, fortunately for the evacuation, reluctant to reappear over this
On 17th August an enemy column appeared along the coast directed
on Berbera from the west but it was spotted and engaged by naval watchers
and its advance was stopped.
Protected by a series of very gallant rear-
guard actions. the evacuation continued without mishap and by the morning
of 18th August nearly the whole force had been embarked.
Fortunately the
weather was kind and, in the absence of the wind, embarkation proceeded
Priority was obviously given to the embarkation of personnel
(except for locally enlisted Somalis of the Camel Corps) so nearly all the
transport of the force and the stores at the port had to be abandoned.
although not before the transport had been satisfactorily immobilized.
During 18th August the remaining personnel, including various scattered
parties which continued to come in, were safely embarked, and in the evening
the destruction of petrol, vehicles and buildings was continued by demolition
Thus in about a fortnight had occurred the first loss of British territory
Its loss is an excellent instance of the unwisdom of separating
operational and administrative responsibility.
Had administrative control
passed from the Colonial Office to G.H.Q. Middle East at the same time as
operational control passed from the War Office, and had the latter not been
accompanied by short-sighted provisos regarding reinforcements, it is argu-
able that the Italian incursion might well have been resisted, British Somali-
land held, and our subsequent invasion of Abyssinia greatly simplified. With
this in view, no doubt much of the necessary work on Berbera, to better it
as a port, would have been started and, though time was still short, rein-
forcement of British Somaliland would have been made an easier task.
if evacuation had then been necessary it is perhaps fair to assume that some
of the garrison transport would have been saved-and transport being then
worth its weight in gold in the Middle East-this would have justified the
Possibly because Italy, to those in the Middle East, was the obvious
opponent with so much of her colonial possessions adjoining British territory.
WO217
1 8
it was considered by some inevitable that she would enter the war against
us when a favourable opportunity presented itself. In the face of this con-
viction, therefore, the attitude of London seemed necessarily wary.
however, the prerogative
of post-war authors to be wise after the event
and no doubt, ill-prepared as we were to deal even with Germany, it would
have been foolhardy in the extreme to have incited Italy as well against us.
Wherever the truth may lie, of the four major reasons given by General
Wavell as directly leading to the temporary loss of British Somaliland, two
are purely administrative an insistence in running our colonies " on the
cheap", and the almost complete lack of facilities in Berbera as a port.
Had administrative command
disastrous loss of prestige-for we lost little else- might have been avoided.
THE MIDDLE EAST 1939-1942
SECTION 4 ITALIAN EAST AFRICA
Italian East Africa consisted of Italy's colonies of Eritrea and Somalia
(Italian Somaliland) and of her latest conquest, Abyssinia. The campaign to
drive the Italians out of East Africa consisted of two separate advances.
General Platt's troops from the Sudan struck eastwards capturing Eritrea and
the northern provinces of Abyssinia (Map 14) while General Cunningham's
Force drove northwards from Kenya into Italian Somaliland
and Abyssinia (Map 15).
Eritrea is, racially and geographically at any rate, part and parcel of
Abyssinia and may conveniently be included with it in a geographical descrip-
tion of the scene of the operations covered by this chapter.
Abyssinia consists of a great irregular plateau deeply gashed by rivers which
have driven mighty gorges through it, for the most part on their way to the
The plateau, which is between 6,000 and 8,000 feet high, is dominated
by ranges rising to as much as 14,000 feet.
numerous rifts caused by the rivers make most formidable natural obstacles
As examples, the gorge or canyon of the Blue
Nile is, in places, as much as 6,000 feet deep, while that of the Takazze
river, which at times carries as much water as the Thames at Greenwich,
is as much as 2,000 feet deep. The contour of the plateau is also of military
importance. Its eastern edge, which drops precipitously to the plain, runs
from the northern tip of Abyssinia and, passing 30 miles west of Massawa,
strikes due south for some 400 miles to a point somewhat east of the capital,
Between the plateau and the Red Sea lying to the north-east of it is a great
plain containing the Danakil country, French Somaliland and the north-west
This region is one of the hottest and most arid
in the world. After passing Addis Ababa the eastern edge of the plateau
loses its identity as such, and mingles with a range which trends south-west
to a point not far north of Lake Rudolf.
Parallel to its new direction and on
the far side of the Great Rift, are other ranges which cut the north-eastern
plain from a larger plain in the south. The latter lies south and east of a line
