Egypt via Massawa or Port Sudan.
considered imperative by
G.H.Q., and the task was entrusted to a brigade from 11 (A) Division
which began an advance on Dessie on 13th April and, after slow progress
in difficult and mountainous country where much had to be man-handled,
joined up with
General Platt's forces from the Sudan in the investment of
Amba Alagi on 8th May.
Apart from this, General Cunningham was anxious to open a L. of C.
between Addis Ababa and Neghelli, so that there would be direct road
communications with Kenya, and this meant operations in the Galla Sidamo
area.
this time-mid-April—the rains were at their height and their
effect on roads made necessary frequent changes of plan.
tions in Southern Abyssinia had been hitherto considered impossible after
March.
To some extent caterpillar tractors captured from the Italians and
normally carried portee in lorries helped over the worst patches, but unfortu-
nately there were only a few of these.
In fact, in early May, G.H.Q.
suggested that it was useless to continue the campaign against the remaining
Italians in view of the rains and the necessity of taking troops for service
in the Western Desert but, after discussion, it was agreed that East Africa
Force could continue operations until the end of May.
was in many places quite determined.
The enemy were
still using a few A.F.Vs., and the capture of Soddu by 11 (A) Division on
22nd May found 12 (A) Division nearly bogged down and unable to do
little more than occupy the Soddu area and protect 11 (A) Division's rear.
It was essential that Gimma should be in our hands before the rains
began and yet it was administratively impossible to
maintain more than
two brigades on the Addis Ababa-
-Berbera L. of C.
The attack on Gimma
by two
brigades on two different axes meant two crossings of the River
Omo-a considerable obstacle some 450 feet wide-
-and administrative plans
had only allowed for the transport of special bridging materials on the scale
required for one bridge.
Some 70 bridges of various sizes had already been
erected, and captured and locally-made material was beginning to run short.
There was, however, a foot-bridge in the south near the point at which
the other crossing was to be made and, though the River Omo came down in
flood at about this time, a crossing was effected in assault boats,
being taken over on pontoon ferries.
The building of the main bridge at
Abalti was fraucht with every dificulty and eventually took 18 days to
during part of which time the assaulting troops had to remain
self-contained on the far bank until a ferry could be operated.
bridge had been built it was possible to switch the tenuous road administra-
tive link with Addis Ababa through Soddu,
to the road Addis Ababa-
Meanwhile, although Gimma could be taken at any time,
mander, East Africa Force decided that his purpose had been served by the
defeat of the enemy troops concerned, and that the embarrassment likely to
be caused by the large number of civilians in the town was such as to make its
by-passing preferable.
Eventually, however, the lawless elements which had
swollen the forces of Abyssinian patriots got out of the control of
the British mission with the patriots and it bees go necessary, for the pro-
tection of the civilian population,
for the town to be occupied.
There now remained little opposition,
WO2T7
18
Cunningham recommended to the Emperor that the small numbers remaining
could best be dealt with by patriot forces and, after some patriot success,
the remaining Italians began negotiating for surrender on 3rd July.
THE END OF THE CAMPAIGN
This virtually ended operations in Abyssinia. On 15th September East
Africa Force as part of Middle East Forces was abolished and replaced by
East Africa Command directly under the War Office.
centre of Italian resistance was at Gondar which after a short, but difficult
campaign, was captured in November.
The campaign had been fought by East Africa Force with three divisions,
but force H.Q., based in the main on the establishment of a corps head-
quarters, had to combine the dual rôle both of a corps H.Q. and of a minor
For the latter rôle, as may be imagined, there had to be many
additions to the establishment.
Naturally, therefore, force H.Q. necessarily
split into two parts advanced H.Q. and rear H.Q. The former in effect
took the rôle of corps H.Q. and the latter-which remained throughout
Somewhat naturally, the more senior officers
tended to join the G.O.C. at advanced H.Q. with the result that rear H.Q.
showed a tendency to suffer from lack of decision and direction, if not
sometimes actually getting out of touch with the situation.
The solution adopted, however, by the "Q" staff is well worth mentioning.
The two A.Q.M.Gs. alternated between main and rear H.O.
spend some two months at advanced H.Q. before changing over with his
In this way, each had first-hand knowledge of
developments in the area of operations
With most indifferent communications over the distance between
advanced H.Q. and rear H.Q., which varied from 500 to 1,500 miles, the
complete understanding achieved between the two officers was largely respon-
sible for the success of the campaign's administration-itself the keynote
This success is all the more noteworthy having regard to
the completely experimental nature of all the administrative arrangements.
There were no precedents to go by and the available manuals etc, were of
what tonnages were
required they had to turn to the Field Service Pocket Book and, with pencil
and paper, literally add up the weights of tins of preserved meat, gallons of
petrol, boxes of ammunition and so on.
As we have seen, the transport units consisted of a single
type the reserve M.T. Company of 75 load carriers (making allowance for
the conversion of S.A. reserve M.T. companies on to this basis for ease of
reference, as mentioned earlier).
The first mild specialization began when a
certain number of these vehicles were formed into water companies. Compare
this with the later stages of the war when specialist transport units ran into
many types and when statistical and logistical sections were available with
a wealth of information about tonnages, capacities, etc.
The campaign was likewise a triumph for the Royal Engineers.
No
service pattern bridging equipment arrived from
the United Kingdom in
time to be of use in the operations-but locally designed pontoon bridging,
assault boats and small box girder bridges were made in Kenya and South
153
12090
