throughout the whole 'Spiders Web' of Movement Control
At Command H.Q.,
Q (Movements) forms with 'G' and
• Q (Ops) ;
a trinity responsible for working in the closest liaison on all Movement
questions or questions affecting movement.
The dual responsibility of A.Q.M.G. (M) is inevitable; but it should
also be invaluable as a means of co-ordinating War Office and Command
Movement policy ... (he) must interpret the central viewpoint of the
War Office at Command H.Q. in such a way as never to infringe
the authority of the Army Commander within his own Command."
As with all other branches of the Army at home, the return of the
B.E.F. and the subsequent preparations to combat invasion threw new and
heavier responsibility
As the military population
of the country grew, so did the volume of personnel and freight movement
by sea, air, rail and road increase to such an extent that it fast became
obvious that the movement control staffs at commands and outstations would
be quite inadequate to deal with it.
It was decided, therefore, to set
up movement control districts staffed by the movement control groups
returned from France.
These districts would conform in the main to the
existing area boundaries although adjusted where necessary to suit the
lay-out of the railway companies.
District Movement Control was launched during June, 1940. Its primary
objects were to permit the decentralization of the control of movement in
the event of the isolation of any particular area, to facilitate direct contact
with the many formations and hundreds of units scattered throughout the
country, and to provide a satisfactory channel of communications at all
levels between the Army and the railways.
Movement Control was concerned not only with arrangements for military
movement and for the avoidance of military interference with the technical
working of the railways, but was also the intermediary between the Army
and the Railway Executive Committee about any military activity, as well
as providing the means of mutual intelligence in regard to the military and
invasion led to a significant change
In this connection it must be realized that the threat of
in the attitude of the military to the
Under peace-time conditions the Army is largely concerned in
economy of movement but under war-time conditions military considera-
tions assume paramount importance.
Railway operation on military account
in the event of invasion would, of course, have been carried on without
Treasury restrictions and regardless of cost or the normal workings of the
In the event of operations, any form of centralized control might
have broken down, and so movement control districts were prepared to use
their authority without hesitation, the predominant factor always being to
" keep the traffic moving".
Stores movement generally speaking consisted of two distinct classes:
movement of commodities between ports and factories and the War Office
central depots, and the internal movement from War Office central depots
to command and formation depots and dumps.
The former class required
consultations between the War Office, Ministry of Supply and other depart-
It had, therefore, to be operated under central arrangements,
had communications broken down, the only decentralization envisaged was
an endeavour by local movement control staffs to keep the central programme
WO27
1 P
working until such time as the position allowed the War Office to resume
The same problem did not arise in the latter class, being mainly
a matter of local adjustment whatever the circumstances.
In this type of
traffic the major task was to ensure that alternative means of movement
were available should the scheduled service be interrupted by enemy action.
Movement of stores until they reached the command, etc., depots was nor-
mally by rail, forward movement from the depots to the consumer units
being by road in the normal manner under arrangements made by the
The control of movement of all casualty evacuation and of military
ambulance trains was vested in the Ministry of Health and was normally
to be arranged through the Railway Executive Committee.
A total of 28
ambulance trains was provided throughout the country for evacuating service
and civilian casualties.
Unless invasion occurred, priority of repair of railway damage was to
be decided entirely by
the railway companies who could call for such
assistance from the transportation service as was required. In the event of
active operations, however, Movement Control in consultation with the "G"
and "Q" staffs would be responsible for advising the railways of any priority
of repair on military grounds.
The Army had no direct responsibility for port immobilization schemes,
although
Movement Control were prepared to give such assistance as
was required.
Subject to the requirements that ships had to be ready
to leave with as little delay as possible, Admiralty instructions would be
issued for ships in port to take part in the active defence of the port.
diversion of ships at sea would have been undertaken by the naval authorities
in accordance with the strategical position.
Road movement perhaps more than rail demanded urgent attention by
movement control,
and immediately after the evacuation
from Dunkirk
many inter-Service and War Office conferences were held to consider the
subject.
The proper control of service road movement was of prime import-
ance.
Not only was it necessary to institute an adequate plan whereby
military and civilian traffic could be properly controlled during operations,
but also to deal with the more immediate task of the traffic problems
presented by the many major and minor military moves concerned with
the redeployment of the large home army.
The first step was the formation of traffic control companies in an ad
hoc manner on the lines of the similar units which had been improvised
to operate on the lines of communication in France.
When they were first
formed these were static units always operating from the same area, and
responsible only for provision of control on the main roads outside urban
It was not long, however, before traffic control personnel were often
seen standing next to
the civil police in towns, partly to assist and partly
to gain experience under the tuition of the experts.
Eventually, traffic control units were absonbed into the Corps of Military
Police and called C.M.P. CT. CN As they increased in eficiency and as the
strength of the civil police decreased they soon became a familiar sight on
the roads of Great Britain.
Their presence was essential to the new Army
organization, and when the danger of invasion receded they took their place
255
