key plan totalled 1,049,000.
The army responsibility was the
provision
of hospitals (85,000 beds), and covered storage (12,000,000 sq. ft.) required
for this number, and personnel accommodation for 869,000 which included
60,000 Air Force personnel for whom the Army was responsible.
It was estimated that thirteen divisional areas, five corps troops areas,
and accommodation for supporting and S.O.S. troops would be required, and
provision was made, as had been decided, in Southern Command to meet
the requirements of movements and to provide facilities where troops were
ne
accommodated.
A large construction programme was initiated to
build hutted camps, hospitals, workshops and depots, many of the latter
being rail served.
Reconnaissances became a daily occurrence, sites were
chosen, and the work of construction pushed ahead either under Ministry
of Works or military arrangements and, in a great many instances, by
outside contract.
By 31st July, 1942, some 82,000 troops had arrived in the United King-
dom disembarking at Glasgow and Liverpool.
(Reception arrangements
included an address of welcome given by a senior officer, and the distribu-
tion of refreshments and periodicals before the departure of the trains.)
By this time, a revised troop forecast had been furnished to the committees
and policy could be more clearly determined.
Thus, on 25th July, 1942,
the second key plan was published as a further step towards the evolution
of the final plan.
Under this second plan, the total commitment was increased to 1,147,000
of which 965,000 were a War Office responsibility, comprising 50,000 air
force, 556,000 ground forces, 259,000 S.O.S.
ments for
troops and 100,000 replace-
reinforcements).
The bulk of the
additional accommodation
required was to be provided in Northern Ireland (65,000) and
Command (40,000).
Soon after the issue of the second key plan it became evident that the
arrival of the "Bolero" force would be greatly retarded by demands made
It was made clear that large numbers of
troops who had arrived or were scheduled to arrive in the United Kingdom
and Northern Ireland would form a contingent to take part in this opera-
The extent of the diversion will be appreciated by the fact that from
a total of 240,000 who had arrived in the United Kingdom up to 31st
100,000 remained as a contribution
"Bolero" build-up. A proportionate amount of stores was likewise diverted
Although "Round-up" had by then been postponed, and a large num-
ber of the troops intended for it had been sent to North Africa, the original
"Bolero" directions had not been superseded ; in fact the postponement of
"Round-up" obviously indicated that the
materially increased,
" Bolero"
programme would be
second key plan.
was pressed forward to implement the
An incidental repercussion of the "Torch" planning was that owing t0
S.O.S. headquarters at Cheltenham.
The visit disclosed the need for fuller
276
WO277
18
liaison between the U.S. services and the various service directorates at the
War Office, and as a result, suitable British liaison officers were appointed
to perform this duty at the earliest opportunity, e.g.: —
Deputy Assistant Director of Supplies and Transport (for P.O.L.).
Assistant Director of Ordnance Services (for Vote 7 and 8 stores).
Deputy Director of Warlike Stores (for warlike stores and vehicles).
Assistant Director of Labour (for civilian labour).
On the basis of the revision of the build-up necessitated by "Torch".
plans were then formulated for a first contingent of 427,000 troops
"Round-Up" to be followed by a second contingent of 960,000 to
complete arrival by October, 1943. In November, 1942, the third key plan
to cover this total force of 1,387,000 was issued by the War Office. Based
on the increased build-up figures it stepped up the provision of covered
storage accommodation to 15,000,000 sq. ft. and the hospital accommoda-
At this point British and American planning fell out of line since the
Americans considered 427,000 the final
"Bolero" commitment, while the
War Office regarded this number as a first contingent only, to be followed
by the remainder at a later date as laid down in the third key plan.
The
position was further aggravated in that U.S. engineers employed on varied
construction, including hutted
drawn for
camps and installations,
had been with-
operation "Torch" and British labour was not available to
complete the work.
no alterations in the "Bolero"
The War Office throughout this period maintained that
project were admissible without a definite
directive from C.C.S. whose original directive of a force of about a million
men for the
European operations had up
to this time in no way been
The difficulties encountered were chiefly on the construction side
and in many instances only the close friendship and understanding of the
two
staffs, backed
"gentlemen's agreements"
made progress possible.
For over two months, however, a S bertements made progress posthe
figures.
wide divergence of opinion between the British and U.S. planning
The Construction Programme
U.S. engineer labour was to be responsible for one-fifth of the construction
programme but, as stated, the smas numbers so far employed were with-
drawn for operation
" Torch "
This difficulty, added to the fact that British
labour was not available in suficient quantity, led to the inevitable result
that the completion dates of "Bolero" projects fell behind.
The final blow
was a Cabinet decision to impose a cut of 225,000 in the labour force in order
to provide recruits for the Apose and workers for munitions.
This situation
influenced the initiation the Arm and Mirkers, in December, 1942, of a plan
to receive a force representing 65 per cent. ot the original "Bolero" commit-
This plan aimed at having accommodation and facilities available for the
force in sight (British forecast), up to October,
1943, and represented a post-
ponement and not a cancellation of previous plans.
The chief points were:—
(a) Accommodation flation of previous October, 1943, of which 515,000
were to be iocoror 600,000 by 1st Oniod Kingdom and 85,000 in
Northern Ireland.
277
