made a request through Burma for N.A.A.F.I. bulk issue depots from India.
When hostilities began the contractor system, as was inevitable, broke down
and the troops were left with no substitute and a consequential lowering of
morale.
Burmarmy had previously made every endeavour to get a sound
canteen organization established, but could get no co-operation either from
the War Office or in Burma.
As soon as the war with Japan broke out a
canteen service was started, but it was then too late.
Large quantities of
canteen stores arrived in Rangoon but could not be distributed, although units
were ordered to collect them to prevent them falling into the hands of the
enemy.
The Japanese Attack
The foregoing paragraphs have endeavoured to outline the position in
which Burma found herself in January, 1942, when Japan began hostilities.
There being no practicable routes over the mountains separating Burma
from India, the defence of Burma rested primarily on command of the sea
communications with India.
This had already been lost.
And to naval weak-
ness was added not only weakness in the air, but military weakness and
unpreparedness.
Burma was defended only by little more than the equivalent
of two divisions consisting of British, Indian and Burmese troops reinforced
by such assistance as could be provided by the Chinese.
Land operations in Burma developed with rather surprising suddenness.
From 11th January unconfirmed reports of enemy concentration on the
Southern Tenasserim frontier were continually being received despite negative
results of air reconnaissance.
At this time, 17 Indian Division was located
south of the Salween river, while 1. Burma Division was deployed in the
Southern Shan States.
46 Indian Infantry
Rangoon.
Brigade was disembarking at
The Japanese had been in possession of the airfield at Victoria Point
(the southernmost point of Burma) since 15th December, when, as a result of
events in Siam and Malaya and a Japanese incursion, it was appreciated that
it was no longer tenable and was evacuated.
From that time onwards enemy
patrols had been working up towards Mergui and when on 16th January
contact was made at Myitta, near Tavoy, with a small Japanese force which
had infiltrated across the frontier, it was obvious that the important airfield
at Tavoy was very seriously threatened.
Consequently on 18th January it
was decided to evacuate Mergui by sea while there was yet time and concen-
trate the troops available to hold the airfield at Tavoy.
Unfortunately Tavoy
fell before this move could be completed and the garrison and the civil
administration from Mergui were evacuated direct to Rangoon by sea, the
units in Tavoy completely disintegrating.
Up to this time, the question of forward maintenance scarcely arose since
both Tavoy and Mergui were isolated detachments dependent for supply on
sea communications.
re-stocked and were well forward.
Field supply depots in the area had recently been
(In the light of events they were probably
inevitable because units had to draw direct from F.S.Ds.)
too well forward, but the difficulties of transport in Tenasserim made this
The most important
administrative aspect of the operations to date was undoubtedly the loss of
the supplies, etc., in these depots.
318
1
On 20th January, Japanese
troops
Kawkareik, some 50 miles east of Moulmein.
attacked our positions around
After some heavy fighting
out troops started to withdraw westwards and unfortunately there was a
certain amount of panic.
One unit shot up the transport of another and the
ferry boat crossing the Gyaing river was sunk, rendering impracticable a
withdrawal by road, and necessitating a move across country by a track
impassable to vehicles.
Orders were therefore given to destroy the transport
and signal equipment, and other stores which could not be carried.
23rd January our troops had withdrawn to Moulmein, not, however, without
abandoning most of their animal transport, their signal equipment, many
weapons and all M.T.
On 23rd January G.O.C., 17 Indian Division, put forward the view that,
in view of the now disorganized state of his troops and the strength of the
enemy, he considered it desirable to withdraw from Moulmein to the area
Bilin-Kyaikto-Sittang river, where he could re-group and establish a secure
This suggestion was not accepted by
the G.O.C. Burmarmy, who insisted that Moulmein should be held, though
all preparations were to be made for evacuation if this should become
necessary at a later stage.
During the next few days the Japanese made contact along the Salween
river and south of Moulmein.
Enemy pressure on Moulmein thereafter
saved. An important consideration in the eventual decision to withdraw was
Salween river.
The month of January therefore ended with our troops west of the
The withdrawal from Moulmein caused the loss of all our supply dumps
and depots south of the Salween and necessitated a rearrangement of our
supply lay-out. An advanced base supply despia was e stadiang at pe gu and
fed either by rail or road from Rangoon,
while daily pack trains were
despatched to rail-head at yaom Ransoon, while daily pack trains were
between the Sittang and Salween rivers.
Daily maintenance was by now however most precarious as mail was to
say the least, uncertain, and 17 Indian Division was becoming extremely short
of formation transport.
tion were located for each brigade group and divisional troops.
Accordingly dumps of supplies, P.O.L., and ammuni-
To carry on
supply work at the dumps non-divisional supply units, comprising bakery
and butchery section, in vis suppo
This system
was obviously wasteful as it locked up a number of badly needed supply units
whose practically irreplaceable equipment was eventually lost.
probably have been far more economical to have centralized supply under
cations from Pegu to Kyaikto.
any really satisfactory method because there were no through road communi-
known as a divisional maintenance area.
divisional arrangements by the formation of what later became commonly
It was, however, difficult to arrange
319
