Italian reconnaissance plane apparently saw nothing amiss. Here was a golden
numerically superior Italian Air
Force seriously to
prejudice British hopes-an opportunity fortunately either disregarded or not
The attack on Nibeiwa camp by 4 Indian Division began at 0700 hours
on 9th December.
The rapid demoralization of the enemy, due partly to
surprise and partly to the imperviousness of the "I" tanks, resulted in the
capture of the camp by 0830 hours.
Meanwhile, 7 Armoured Division had executed its covering role and the
force from Matruh had successfully occupied the attention of the Maktila
however, entailed heavy ammunition expenditure a good
deal heavier than
anticipated-and the disadvantage of a force
second line reserve rapidly became apparent.
Although its artillery consisted
of only eight 25-pounders, and 16 very life-like dummies (mixed with the
real guns and simulating firing by flashes), it had not been possible to carry
more than normal first line ammunition holdings for the eight
Furthermore, the Matruh garrison had at the last moment been called
upon to form a dummy tank battalion and, although this consisted of only
a few men with dummy canvas tanks, it needed a number of 3-ton lorries to
carry the " props" and this had further reduced the force's M.T. resources.
It thus became necessary in the middle of the engagement for the staff
captain to round up all available first line " A " echelon transport, including
empty ammunition lorries and gun towers, and to make a rapid trip back to
No. 3 F.S.D., thus giving to first line transport the task normally assigned
to first and second line.
Such guns as had run out of H.E. shells continued
firing with Smoke and A.P. and the desired effect of containing Maktila was
Nightfall saw 4 Indian Division occupying Nibeiwa, Tummar West and
the greater part of Tummar East, with one brigade watching Sidi Barrani
Pt. 90. (a camp immediately north-east of Tummar East)
was isolated, and the Matruh force was still containing Maktila. 7 Armoured
Division, leaving the support group at Sofafi, had cut the coast road between
Buq-Buq and Sidi Barrani.
Up to this time, beyond a rather heavier ammunition expenditure than
had been estimated in so far as Matruh Force were concerned, the adminis-
trative problems were chiefly confined to the feeding and watering of the
large number of prisoners taken.
Although no supply dumps of any size
were located, a considerable quantity of foodstuffs was found in the various
camps and though much of it was looted by our own troops as providing a
welcome change of menu, sufficient was available to feed the prisoners in
transit back to base.
An altogether different problem was presented by water
because the Italians had been dependent on Tobruk and Bardia, where they
had sea-water distillation plants, and water was transported thence in road
tankers and 44-gallon drums.
Two distillation plants had been erected at
Sidi Barrani, but one had been sabotaged and the other had not been com-
pleted at the time of the operation.
The British were limited to a half-gallon
of water a day, and could spare none for their prisoners. The immediate need
was partly met by sending interpreters to the various camps and calling for
When these came forward they were told trious it and fetch their lories
WO277
1 0
from wherever they had been left (refuelling them if necessary, if they could
find fuel), and to load them with water-barrels; they were then to return to the
camp with lorries and water.
This measure had a good response and resulted
in much-needed water and a motley collection of lorries which were sub-
sequently put to good use carrying the prisoners back to Matruh. Help in
their feeding and evacuation, however, now came from an unexpected
The Egyptian Army had had for some time a mobile force situated
in the desert around Ma'aten Bagush, under command of Prince Ismail Daoud.
A cordial offer was now made by the Egyptians, and gratefully accepted by us,
to place a number of lorries at our disposal for taking supplies forward and
returning with loads of prisoners.
This offer, together with the standard
practice of ensuring that every lorry returning empty to Matruh carried
prisoners to capacity, materially eased the position, but such a bag of prisoners
was certainly not foreseen and it is hardly reasonable that it should have
The attack on Sidi Barrani on 10th December was completely successful
and resulted in its
capture with many prisoners and guns, by nightfall.
Meanwhile, Matruh Force advanced to cut off the possible retreat of the
Maktila garrison westward, ordering its dummy tank force to abandon its
" props" and assume a fighting role.
Owing to darkness, poor going and its
own relative weakness, however, it was unable to prevent the enemy's retreat.
but pursued him with all speed.
By nightfall on the 10th, therefore, only the garrison from Maktila and
that in Pt. 90 had not been accounted for.
required some show of force before surrendering early on the next day to
4 Indian Division, while the surrender of the 1 Libyan Division from Maktila
was taken at the same time by Matruh Force.
The battle of Sidi Barrani had resulted in the
destruction of five enemy divisions.
Over 38,000 prisoners, 400 guns and
over 50 tanks had been captured. All this for a cost of 133 killed, 387
It had always been the intention of the Commander-in-Chief, Middle East,
to send 4 Indian Division to reinforce the Sudan during the winter in order
to enable our forces there to take the offensive and recapture Kassala (see
He proposed to relieve it with 6 Australian Division, by now
trained and equipped after its stay in Palestine.
or not to carry out this plan could not be taken before the battle of Sidi
Barrani, owing principally to the question of availability of shipping.
was now considered unlikely that Bardia would fall and the real extent of
the subsequent advance was not fully appreciated; therefore, as administrative
resources precluded anything more than a small force for the pursuit, orders
were issued for the return of 4 Indian Division to the Delta. This, of course.
entailed fresh calls on transport to move the division, but the vehicles would
return with the troops of 6 Australian Division.
Victory in Egypt
The original plan had only allowed for what was necessary for a large-
scale raid of some five days' duration.
The successful outcome of the battle,
however, entailed the administration of a pursuit force by the establishment
of a further F.S.D. Orders were, therefore, given for 5 F.S.D, in a location
107
