Bofors guns in Egypt.
Such heavy A.A. guns as there were, were mostly
manned by Egyptians whose reliability was doubtful, but " shadow" British
crews for both guns and searchlights had been trained and were ready.
7 Armoured Division could not be considered fully efficient. It contained
less than one third of its proper establishment of 220 cruiser tanks, and even
some of these were deficient in armament, while the lack of A.F.V. spare
parts qualified their value even further.
There were only 79 anti-tank guns for the whole of the Middle East.
Of these, nine were 2-pounders with the New Zealanders and the remainder
were 25-mm. Bofors with only 200 rounds of ammunition each and no likeli-
hood of further supplies, the ammunition being of French manufacture. These
guns could not deal with the German heavy tank.
The enemy was, fortunately, deceived to some extent as to our tank
strength and, more particularly, as to the constitution of the force on the
frontier which made skilful use of dummy tanks.
On 10th September, 1940, it became
obvious that an advance was
imminent, and accordingly the first stage of the planned withdrawal of our
frontier force was put into execution.
On 13th September, the advance began.
A large force was deployed by the Italians, under heavy artillery preparation,
against the escarpment above Sollum, a position which had been held for
some time past by a platoon, but which had now been evacuated. At the same
time a second column advanced on Halfaya Pass down the escarpment towards
The advance continued in the face of the orderly and extremely
well-conducted withdrawal of the small British force until the enemy, who
showed a singular lack of aggression in his slow and unenterprising advance,
reached Sidi Barrani on 16th September.
Other than the question of prestige in that the Italian advance constituted
an invasion of Egypt, the net gain achieved by the enemy was slight.
Barrani itself was merely a collection of a few Arab houses, some barrack
buildings, and a small, indifferent landing-ground cleared from the desert.
There was no question of destruction or loss of any of our administrative
installations because none then existed forward of Matruh.
engineers, however, added to the Italian administrative difficulties by heavily
polluting all the fresh water wells with common salt.
normally brackish and of a high salinity this meant that even the few
natural sources were denied to him and entailed the carriage of all his
water supplies from Bardia or Tobruk. (It was with interest that the British
troops later heard Rome Radio broadcast to the effect that the Italians had
speedily repaired and put into commission again the tramway service in
Sidi Barrani, that all public utilities were in operation and that the University
would shortly be re-opening.)
On his arrival in Sidi Barrani the enemy showed no inclination to continue
his advance and merely organized himself in a series of camps with all-round
defended perimeters from Maktila, a point on the coast some twelve miles
east of Sidi Barrani, in a rough semi-circle round to Sofafi on the escarpment.
Except for a small force in contact, the main body of British troops had
withdrawn on Matruh and Ma'aten Bagush.
suffering very considerable administrative difficulties.
The enemy was undoubtedly
Sollum there existed only a rough and very dusty desert track.
From Sidi Barrani to
WO 217
1 0
vehicles were unsuited to desert going, being of the heavy 5-ton and 10-ton
varieties, with twin rear wheels shod with ordinary small section tyres suitable
The rest of his equipment was very varied, ranging
from modern light A.A. equipment to field pieces dating from the 1914-18
War, and gun tractors with solid tyres of mediaeval appearance, which steered
by articulation of the chassis.
It was quite obvious that the enemy had
underestimated the administrative difficulties of maintaining so large a force
and was uncertain whether to continue eastwards. His totally inaccurate
appreciation of the strength of the British opposition made him reluctant to
continue his advance with light forces, leaving behind the remainder, including
marching troops, on his lines of communication.
thus devoted considerable effort to consolidating his position
administratively, installing distillation plants for producing fresh water from
sea-water and stocking up his perimeter camps with food and ammunition,
while he established large reserves in the immediate area of Sidi Barrani.
Numerous labour battalions were hastily deployed on the rough dusty track
between Sollum and Sidi Barrani.
Vast quantities of stone were quarried
and transported to the area and much modern road-making plant employed.
In some three months the Italians had achieved a well-laid and properly
cambered road, which only needed a tar-macadam top dressing to bring
it to an equivalent class 40 capacity.
Meanwhile, the Italian dependence on roads having been duly noted, the
tar-macadam coast road, from a point some 45 miles from Matruh as far
as its outskirts, was ploughed up and mines and booby traps thickly planted.
Wide mine-fields were also sown in the desert south and west of Matruh,
and the Matruh-Sia road was also mined.
Preparation for the Counterstroke
It was naturally to be expected that the enemy would continue his
advance to Matruh, and plans, in accordance with pre-arranged policy, were
made to engage him as he reached its prepared defences. While these were
being perfected and both our defences and forces grew daily in strength,
consideration was given to early offensive action on our part, in spite of
our numerical inferiority, since the likelihood of an immediate resumption
of the Italian advance seemed remote. Accordingly the Commander, British
Troops in Egypt (B.T.E.) was given a directive to attack the enemy's
fortified camp round Sidi Barrani.
The limitation on our offensive effort
would be administrative, since operations would be conducted some 80 miles
forward of the Matruh rail-head and, as has already been stated, the
The provisional date selected was the last week of November, but Middle
East Command was living on a hand-to-mouth basis in regard to provision
of equipment, and delays in the provision of the additional transport essential
to mounting the operation, and in the re-equipment of the artillery with
postponement until the end of the first week in
December. An additional complication was the invasion of Greece by Italy,
which had caused the diversion of troops, guns and transport to occupy
Crete and assist Greece.
The loss of air support in conjunction with these
troops very nearly caused the operation to be shelved, but the intervention
of the War Minister guaranteed reinforcements of aircraft in replacement.
