damage done of any consequence was to a ship which was hit by one of the
very first bombs and set alight, her bows soon turning red hot.
there were 200 tons of explosives in the ship which, for some inexcusable
reason, had been berthed alongside the main quay although in fact it was
known that she carried explosives.
Early next morning the ship blew up
and wherever her red-hot fragments dropped fires started.
By this means
alone a large number of ships and lighters were set on fire and lost.
The port was, of course, still under Greek control and no arrangements
had been made in advance of fire-fighting parties nor was any such work
organized when the situation arose.
Mine spotting had not been organized
and the result was that the locations of the magnetic mines dropped were
not known and considerable extra difficulty in clearance was experienced
with the consequent cessation of work in the port.
The result of the raid
was therefore the loss of the one good port that we could use for mainten-
ance (and later for evacuation).
The blow was all the more bitter because
the greater part of the damage was caused by the disregard of elementary
safety precautions by those in authority.
The situation of our forces when the German attack opened on 6th
April was that 1 Armoured Brigade Group and the N.Z. Division had
arrived complete in the forward area and that 6 Australian Division was
in process of arrival. The line held ran from the Aegean Sea east of Mount
Veria and Edessa and thence northwards to the Yugo-Slav
The position was a naturally strong one provided that the Germans
did not force a way through Yugo-Slavia.
The intial German thrust, however, went straight through Yugo-Slavia
without material delay, emerged at the Florina gap and, as feared, turned
the
Aliakhmon position from
the north-west.
There was no alternative
to withdrawal.
By this time the armoured brigade group had withdrawn
to the British left after carrying out such delaying action and demolitions
as were
possible north of Mount Olympus.
The N.Z. Division
was in
position in the Mount Olympus area and 6 Australian Division had one
brigade on its left, and one in reserve, while the third was still arriving at
Larissa.
The Withdrawal
Directly it was known that a withdrawal to the Thermyopylae line was
inevitable the following major administrative tasks had to be carried out: —
Increasing the mobility of the fighting formations.
Evacuation of stocks in the advance base at Larissa.
Clearance from the forward area of certain administrative troops.
Evacuation of the Volos " sub-base".
Establishment of dumps close behind the new line.
In spite of enemy air attack on the advance base and the L. of C., and
the difficulties of communications,
all the needs of the above programme
were met.
addition to all the transport units already sent forward a
further hundred lorries were squeezed out of the base resources and reserves
at the express request of the Anzac Corps H.Q. A special M.T. column
was also sent forward for the evacuation of Volos.
As a result the whole
162
WO27
7₴
of the fighting troops were motorised in time and were able, when they
broke off the battle, to withdraw in long bounds, probably to the surprise
of the Germans.
this was indeed no mean achievement.
Considering the acute shortage of all forms of transport
was given to ammunition,
In ordering the evacuation of advance base stocks, paramount priority
supply.
especially the natures which were in shortest
The withdrawal of these stocks were severely handicapped by the
dislocation of the railways, especially at Larissa, when enemy bombing
began.
and their staffs withdrawn.
The advanced medical installations were all cleared successfully
The Volos
but not without the destruction of food and petrol stocks.
"sub-base" was also evacuated,
Even in the early stages of planning the operation, the possibility of
evacuation had been considered and it was now decided by G.H.Q. Middle
East that, as the whole force could not be motorised, a joint planning staff
should be sent to Athens if evacuation were ordered, to deal with the
situation on its merits.
Even before the German attack had been launched,
administrative reconnaissances had in fact been carried out of beaches likely
to be useful for maintenance purposes should enemy bombing put Piraeus
and Volos out of action.
A secret underlying motive was, however, their
possible use for evacuation.
For evacuation it was considered essential to have no moon, because
German aircraft did not operate on dark nights.
Other local physical
requirements were a motor
road to within a mile or so of the beach, a
beach assembly area with adequate cover for personnel and vehicles, water
supply, and above all a steeply shelving shingle beach.
ties were all available at sufficient places at the southern extremity of the
Greek mainland as well as in the Peloponnese.
Moreover there was no tide,
and ample stocks of food and petrol were available to form dumps in beach
assembly areas.
The general administrative plan, formulated long before evacuation was
ordered, was for troops to proceed in motor transport by one long bound
direct to a beach assembly area during the night of "A" Day, to lie there
concealed during
daylight on "B" Day, to destroy their vehicles, guns,
etc., at dusk on "B"
evening and to embark by means of ships' boats, and
lighters if available. on " B/C" night.
The ships would thus be well clear
of the coast in daylight.
The Greeks failed to rally on the Thermopylae position with the rem-
nants of the British force.
The latter consisted by now only of the N.Z.
Division, less one battalion lost; 6 Australian
Division, reduced to little
more than two brigade
and the armoured brigade without any
armour (the majority of the tanks had suffered mechanical failure).
The Germans pressed on and on, round the left flank as well as frontally:
their aircraft were soon operating from airfields on the Larissa Plain which
was now dried out by the sun after the winter rains.
The C. in C., after an investigation on the spot, decided on further
resistance on the Thermopylae line to cover an orderly evacuation with at
163
F* 2
12090
