their task immensely.
Indeed, as so often happens, the greatest problems
were experienced when individual commanders saw fit to alter, rather than
to adhere to, the original plan.
The General Headquarters staff which had formed at Camberley moved
in echelons to the Le Mans area, accompanied by the various heads of
The Q.M.G. of the field force, who had left by air for Paris
immediately war was declared, also joined G.H.Q. at Le Mans.
tration of G.H.Q. was completed by 21st September.
The movement of the force had begun on 2nd September, when 18 officers
and 31 other ranks had left the United Kingdom by air.
The final troops of
Phase III arrived on 27th September, by which time the total strength of the
force of four divisions was as follows :—
Army Personnel
R.A.F. Personnel ...
21,424
In addition a large tonnage of stores of all types had been shipped includ-
ing nearly 20,000 tons of ammunition,
20,000 tons of M.T. spirit and over
10.000 tons of supplies.
The figures of personnel and vehicles quoted above
interesting fact that the
"gross division" or " divisional slice"
of 40,000 men and the vehicle/ men ratio were exactly as they were to remain
throughout the whole of the War.
(A common rule-of-thumb method of
estimating the total number of men in a force was to multiply the number
of divisions in the force by 40,000; the resulting total was as a rule remarkably
The Move to the Belgian Frontier
It had originally been intended that formations, as soon as they had
completed their reorganization in
the assembly area, should move to a
concentration area in the north of France and remain there in readiness to
occupy the line not before 5th October.
move should begin earlier and that the occupation
complete by about 12th October.
Accordingly 1 Corps began a 250 mile
move from the assembly area to the sector north of Maulde
September. G.H.Q. moved to the Arras area on 2nd October, and the move
was completed when 2 Corps came into position left of 1 Corps on 12th
After a lapse of over 20 years a British Expeditionary Force was
once more holding a line in the field on the Continent of Europe.
THE B.E.F. IN FRANCE AND BELGIUM: 1939-1940
SECTION 2-DEVELOPMENT OF THE BASE:
SEPTEMBER, 1939—MAY, 1940
The first section of this chapter outlined the despatch and reception of
the first contingent of the Field Force and the arrangements made for main-
tenance until leaving the assembly area.
establishment, organization and development of the Main
This section is devoted to
Base; and the
30
7₴
1
maintenance arrangements adopted in the field until active operations began
on 10th May, 1940.
campaign.
Diagram 3 shows B.E.F. stores imports for the whole
The record is, unfortunately, incomplete but space is limited and
it is only possible to describe adequately those aspects of the campaign
which will be of greatest interest to the reader.
For this reason it has not
been possible to enlarge on the administrative arrangements for the initial
move from the assembly area to the frontier, nor on those for the plan for
the subsequent advance to the River Dyle.
This period of tactical inaction in France is of great interest to the student
of war-time administration since the method of maintenance laid down in
Field Service Regulations and observed at the time was based largely on the
static conditions prevalent during the war of 1914-1918, and the lessons
learnt from this abortive campaign were without doubt the first stage in the
subsequent evolution to the present day organization.
As no complete
record of the administration of the B.E.F. is in existence, an attempt has
been made to describe the lay-out of the base
in
somewhat
greater
geographical detail than will be found elsewhere in this narrative.
An
illustration of the lay-out is at Map 5.
Certain facts and comparative statistics have been compiled from
historical records, war diaries and other information in possession of, or
available to the War Office.
Many G.H.Q. files and records were destroyed,
mislaid or otherwise lost during the evacuation of the force, and thus certain
of the facts and figures cannot be entirely verified and should be treated with
a certain amount of reserve.
The Build-up of the Force
At the time of the occupation of the line of the Franco-Belgian frontier
by the B.E.F., the outline order of battle was as shown below: -
G.H.Q.
A.A.S.F.
G.H.Q.
Troops
Component
1 CORPS
2 CORPS
Corps
Troops
1 Div.
2 Div.
Corps
Troops
4 Div.
3 Div. CH.O. Reserve)
L. of C. Area
1 Base
Suh-A rea
2 Base
Sub-Area
L. of C.
Troons
1 L. of C.
Sub-Area
(Cherbourg)
2 L. of
sub-Area
(Assembly and
(Northern
Stageing Areas)
Base)
kase )
1 Corps had
the sector Maulde-Geuson on
frontier with 2 Division on the right and 1 Division on the left, 3 Division
of 2 Corps was on the left of 1 Division, with 4 Division in G.H.Q. reserve.
The defence of the British sector involved construction of field defences;
duplication of the forward anti-tank obstacles. and construction of concrete
" pill-boxes"; work on these was started immediately by Royal Engineers
