behind is in failing to provide itself with properly qualified personnel
and up-to-date machinery so that paper can be made a servant instead
of a tyrannical master."
Considerable economies were, however, effected in reducing the number
of returns which were called for from formations and units.
Orders were
issued in August, 1940, that no fresh returns of a routine character were to
be called for without the prior sanction of the S.C.A.A. who could then
scrutinize them with a view to preventing duplication.
At the same time a
detailed investigation of all returns in the Southern Command was carried
OuT.
These investigations revealed several duplications, and other unnecessary
and superfluous returns, and in July, 1941, it was found possible to publish
an Army Council Instruction (1110 of 1941) which had the effect of reducing
all War Office periodical returns to the minimum extent compatible with
efficiency.
The findings of the S.C.A.A. in regard to the Q.M.G's Department are
dealt with in the chapters of this work devoted to War Office directorates,
albeit indirectly, for instance : —
The confusion and lack of definition in the relationships between
Ordnance and the General Staff concerning certain classes of Army
equipment and the eventual appointment of the D.G.A.E. (Chapter D).
Simplified accounting and audit procedure at Central and Command
Ordnance Depots (this chapter-Section 1).
And improved system of ration indenting (this chapter-Section 1).
A new system of presentation of the War Equipment (A.F. G1098)
scales enabling the G1098 to serve both as scale and ledger (this chapter-
Section 1).
The appointment of a Controller-General of Economy with practically
a free hand to suggest economies wherever he could find scope for them
(Chapter I).
As mentioned previously, the work of the S.C.A.A. was not spectacular.
It did a very great deal in the sphere of day-to-day administration but its
greatest achievement was undoubtedly the strong impulse it gave to the
process of decentralization from War Office to commands and from com-
mands to lower formations during the first year of its inception.
Its success
in this respect was perhaps due to the fact that all but two of its members
were actively concerned with the daily working of the War Office and three
were
directly
recommendations.
implement
their
own
The Gale Report
On 19th Mav. 1941, the G.O.C-in-C Northern Command forwarded
proposals for the administrative re-organization of the Northern Command to
the War Office.
His recommendations concerned his ovo them and only, but
his action had the effect of setting in motion the greatest re-organization of
army command that had been known at home.
He stated that the existing
organization was quite inadequate to deal with the tasks allocated to it,
260
WO277
and that unless drastic steps were taken to improve the situation there was
a prospect of a serious breakdown in administration.
main defects in the present system were: —
He suggested that the
Shortage of staffs in area headquarters was resulting in overloading
of work with the consequent immobilization of staff officers.
Thus there
was little time for staff officers to visit units, and unit administration was
fast deteriorating.
Corps headquarters was interpolated in the chain of command and
exercised
county divisions,
operational control over areas, including static units and
but the corps possessed no additional administrative
staff to deal with static and routine administration in areas. Corps could
only deal with their own units, and therefore commands had to deal
direct with county divisions and areas.
Moreover, the claims of the
operational factor which was exercised by corps often conflicted with
those of the administrative factor exercised by command.
Ancillary to this, the command had to deal with too many subordinate
In order to remedy the situation he recommended that an increment
should be added to the corps headquarters staff to deal with static and routine
administration,
and that the status of certain areas be raised to that of
districts, and that certain additional areas should be formed. He also made
the following observations, the gist of which is still well worth while being
placed before any war establishment committee bent upon economy: -
" Economy of money costs, industrial effort, imports and manpower
are all vital needs of the present time if we are to achieve decisive
and not too tardy victory.
Yet waste of all four items is to be seen
on every side under the existing standards of army administration.
With
inadequate supervision by staffs free to tour and see for themselves,
irregularities and inefficiency which ought to be detected and checked
at the outset are allowed to grow into major scandals which only come
to light in a General Court Martial or a public outcry.
Well conceived plans and orders laid down by War Office and Com-
mand are not in fact translated into effective action at a lower level,
and we are living in a fool's paradise.
Economy is merely the reflection of efficiency and I feel strongly that
a scaling-up of administrative staffs will lead to an increase in efficiency
which will pay a handsome dividend in economy."
The Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces reported that the recommenda-
tions would undoubtedly give much greater efficiency of administration.
added that the existing manpower situation was, however, such as to render
unlikely that such an
expansion of staffs as was suggested would be
possible without very serious repercussions in other directions.
mended that the whole question of area organization and area staffs in
the United Kingdom be examined by a War Ofice committee as a matter
of urgency.
Something, obviously, had to be done, because
G.O.C.-in-C. Northern Command merely brought to a head a matter which
had been causing increasing concern to the Army Council for some time.
261
