from the Army was sought.
Such assistance always had to be immediate
complete
the
other
demands—the
alternative
generally meaning the threat of absence of air support.
Engineer demands were varied.
Lorries for road-metal and for labour
working on road repairs were essential; the need was readily appreciated
by "Q" and this requirement was met by a permanent or semi-permanent
allotment.
were two other types of demands from
the
engineers that were rather harder to bear.
The first, solely one of insurance,
was for transport for defence stores-barbed wire, pickets, etc.
To meet the
demand in full was impossible even with the entire third line resources, so
an allotment very much smaller than asked for had to be accepted.
Lastly,
there was the
demand for
transport for bridging material, with further
stipulations that the lorries detailed must be of a particular type and made
to carry the awkward loads, and that the drivers must be white men.
Troop-carrying requirements were on the basis of three and a half reserve
M.T. companies to one brigade group, i.e., about 250 lorries.
preparatory period it was necessary to allot a few reserve M.T. companies
to the two divisions to motorise a proportion of the troops on the far bank of
who were protecting the advanced base while it was being
stocked up with the assistance of every other available lorry.
As we have already noted in this chapter (c.f. Section 2), there are two
methods of maintaining an attacking force.
One, the long-term project, covers
the regular delivery of agreed tonnages to the troops, over an unspecified
period.
The transport required to keep up this maintenance is a pre-requisite
of the plan, but the essence of the plan lies in the fact that it is not designed
to cover a specific period.
It may be continued as long as necessary, pro-
viding that any lengthening of the L. of C. is compensated for by an addition
to transport resources or a reduction in the maintenance commitment. The
alternative, which may be styled the short-term plan, is dependent on there
being a fixed time limit and range of manoeuvre for the operation. These
must be laid down and adhered to by the General Staff.
In essence this
plan consists of the force setting out self-contained for the period and distance
agreed upon, with such extra transport as may be necessary.
Of course,
at the end of the period, either the force must have returned to base or it
must have reached an objective from which it can replenish its supplies.
For an operation likely only to last a short time and of a range which
can be accurately assessed, the latter plan will probably prove to be the more
economical in transport and, in fact, was the method chosen for the advance
of the two divisions from the River Tana.
Planning was based on daily tonnage requirements of 50 tons for each
infantry brigade group or divisional troops group, i.e., 200 tons to a division.
Although, as might be expected, it proved on the low side, it was used
as a reasonable basis of calculation throughout the whole of the campaign-
together with an estimate of distance varying from 80 to 110 miles to represent
the average daily lorry turn-round. It must be remembered that the figure
of 50 tons contained no element of build-up and, as the force was seldom
in action, the small amount of artillery expended very little ammunition.)
140
WO27
In order to take immediate advantage of Kismayu essential in view of
maintenance plan—a convoy of ships with "hard"
ammunition, R.E. stores and water, was specially loaded and held at Mom-
The water had been provided in case Kismayu
was captured before we were able to draw water from the River Juba, and
was deliberately loaded on top of the other cargo, as if wanted at all it
would be required very urgently.
The function of this convoy, besides the
delivery of urgently needed stores, was the rapid establishment of a new
advanced base, so as to replace the long overland route as early as possible.
In deciding how the water should be conveyed, 44-gallon drums had been
ruled out as being difficult to handle.
Something was required that needed
neither pumps nor tanks, and was thoroughly portable.
decided to treat it exactly the same as petrol, i.e., to can it in 4-gallon
" flimsies", which were packed two to a wooden case.
in the Mombasa petrol packing plant by the simple method of turning on
water instead of petrol, and the cases were suitably and distinctly marked
"Water" on top and bottom. The mistake lay in only marking the cases,
for when the tins were later removed there was no way of knowing what they
In all, the convoy consisted of three hired transports, two tugs and four
lighters, and carried, in addition to a complete anti-aircraft battery for the
port defences, some 920 tons of P.O.L., 500 tons of R.E. stores, 180 tons of
medical and ordnance stores, 120,000 cases of water, and 240,000 hard rations.
It was intended to set up a dressing station for casualty evacuation by sea as
early as possible, and a medical staff was included for this purpose.
As the time for the advance drew near and the dumps had been completed,
not only Bura and Garissa on the Tana, and at Arbo (near Wajit) for 11 and
12 (A) Divisions, but also at Marsabit and Lokitaung for 1 (S.A.) Division
and 25 (E.A.) Brigade, the usual last minute snags arose, chiefly over transport,
but the quantities dumped were fairly satisfactory.
In the case of ammuni-
tion,
divisions had formed forward ammunition dumps by dumping second
line loads well forward and replenishing from the advanced base.
The final allocation of transport, after 16 companies had been detailed for
troop carrying, left some 15 companies available for third-line work from
Thika forward. Optimistically enough, it had been originally intended to
use these companies for the task of ferrying forward stores from the advanced
base to an advanced line of smaller dumps some hundred miles nearer the
River Juba.
In the event there arose so many miscellaneous demands for
stores available only in the base depots in Kenya that the full 15 companies
were soon completely occupied in lifting these forward of rail-head.
The allocation of eight companies for water has already been mentioned,
as has the fact that the water reserve at the advanced base consisted of the
water of the River Tana.
An unusual appointment at Force H.Q. was that
of "Water Officer" and as water was to become a prime administrative
consideration in operations towards Moyale, the appointment, though perhaps
novel, was amply justified.
During the final period a forward line of dumps was established at Red
Ridge, Liboi and Dit in sites selected by divisions, although the quantities
dumped were actually quite small.
141
