If possible Narvik was to be captured before the evacuation, both to
cover our withdrawal and to ensure the destruction of the port.
The railway
and dock facilities were to be destroyed, and the enemy forces killed or
captured.
On receipt of these instructions General Auchinleck ordered a
withdrawal from Bodo (which was successfully accomplished during the last
three nights in May) and made plans for an attack on Narvik.
On the night 27th-28th May, Allied troops operating with Norwegians
carried out a brilliant operation and by the evening of 28th May the town
of Narvik was in our hands, while the Germans who had so long resisted
forces four times their strength retreated into the mountains.
to relinquish all that we had won after such painful exertions.
Demolitions
were effected in the port and on the railway leading to it which the Chief
Engineer of the force estimated would stop the export of ore in appreciable
quantity for one year.
The destruction or capture of enemy forces could not be achieved ; they
withdrew to positions about eight miles east of Narvik, where French and
Polish troops maintained contact with them until ordered back.
The news that a decision had been taken to evacuate was not imparted
to other than a few selected senior staff officers until 29th May, when the
services and other staff officers were informed. In the meantime,
although many steps had been taken for evacuation, such as the loading
of arms and stores in ships and the embarkation of certain
was maintained and fostered by indicating that these activities
were concerned with such projects as the establishment of the Tromso Base.
The entire process of the evacuation, which lasted from 3rd to 8th June,
whether from beaches
or quays, in
" puffers "
, destroyers or directly into
transports, went with the greatest smoothness, and the morale of the troops
remained high although-so well was the secret kept-their destination was
not known to them until they were actually on the high seas.
The following stores and equipment were evacuated: —
Vehicles (British)
All technical vehicles and
Skaanland area were loaded.
Twenty-eight ambulances, a large number
of lorries and motor-cycles and approximately 20 cars were also loaded,
making a total of 390 vehicles.
Approximately 400 British vehicles
consisting mainly of 15-cwt. trucks were
Of these over
60 per cent. were destroyed or rendered useless before departure.
Vehicles (French)
All A.F.Vs. available were loaded, also a large proportion of tractors
and lorries, making a total of about 400 vehicles.
Mules
340 were loaded.
Supplies
All reserve stocks were loaded with the exception of some 30,000
WO277
1 Ф
Ordnance stores
All technical
equipment and such signal equipment as was not
unavoidably committed, plus over 95 per cent. of the remainder of non-
technical stores were loaded.
Ammunition
The following stocks only were abandoned: —
25/18 pr.
3•7-in. A.A.
40 mm. A.A.
3-in. Mortar ...
2-in. Mortar ...
4,000 rounds.
10,000 rounds.
8,000 rounds.
1,600 rounds.
5,000 rounds.
Unit G.1098 Equipment
A certain proportion was loaded, mostly in unit vehicles.
Rifles and Light A.A. Equipments
All were loaded with the exception of a quantity destroyed.
The following were loaded: —
25/18 prs.
Bofors 40 mm. A.A.
Accommodation Stores
Practically none of the limited stocks were loaded.
Petrol
All stocks were either loaded or destroyed.
Explosives
All stocks were sunk at sea.
All outstanding billeting accounts were paid and an adequate amount
handed over to the appropriate authorities to meet all charges up to the
By 8th June, with the help of the Norwegian forces and assisted by
weather unsuitable for enemy aerial operations, the withdrawal of the 27,000
men of the expedition was completed with little German interference this
was by the grace of God, having regard to the fate of the aircraft carrier
" Glorious" only fifty miles distant.
convoys, however, passed
on safely to their destinations and the British campaign in Norway came
to an end, the assault on Trondheim having failed ignominiously nearly a
month earlier.
