imperative.
This section deals with the more important steps that were
taken to establish this main base in Egypt and, to a much lesser extent, in
Palestine.
progressed further
bases and
sub-bases
established elsewhere in the Middle East Command, notably in East Africa
in the Sudan, in Syria and in Persia and Iraq but, as none of these were
called upon to support active operations, they do not properly come within
the scope of this history.) The lay-out of the base in Egypt in 1942 is shown
in Map 17.
The Selection of the Main Base Area
The location of the main base in the Middle East Command had been
previously affected by three major considerations which may be summarized
as follows: —
The available ports of entry into Egypt and their relative strategic
positions on the line of
Imperial communications with the United
Kingdom, India and the Far East.
The availability of areas, in reasonable proximity to the ports of
entry, which could provide space not only for immediate requirements,
but also permit considerable future expansion,
The probable future development of the war in the Middle East
involving hostilities with Italy and the closing of the Mediterranean
with a consequent lengthening of the lines of communication to the
Middle East (see Diagram 5).
As regards the first of these factors there were only three possible base
Mediterranean which would be virtually denied to us in the event of war
with Italy, while Alexandria was not only the main naval base in the Levant
but was also very vulnerable to air attack by Italian bombers operating
from the Dodecanese and Libya.
Port Said was primarily a passenger and
coaling port, the facilities of which did not permit of much expansion and
the port as a whole was already cramped and congested. It was, again,
very vulnerable to air attack.
To increase the turn-round of shipping at
Alexandria it was visualized that it might be necessary to trans-ship at
Suez, although the port facilities were much less developed than
those at either Alexandria or Port Said, possessed great potentialities for
development and expansion.
It gave direct access to the Red Sea and
thence either to the United Kingdom via the Cape or to the Indian Ocean,
Australia, New Zealand and the Far East.
In considering the second factor, Port Said, being virtually an isthmus,
did not offer areas either suitable for the establishment of a base or capable
of expansion within reasonable distance.
To the west and south-west of
was unlimited desert land which would afford all the
space required, but this desert area was wholly on the western side of the
River Nile and a base located there would be exposed to attack by land
from the west, would have the Nile at its back and would be easily vulnerable
to attack by air from the west and from the Dodecanese.
was already a British Naval base,
and to the east were
of the Nile delta which were physically unsuitable for
establishment of a base.
1 P
Suez, however, possessed great potentialities for development.
at the north-west end of Suez Bay, it is connected by the canal with the
Great Bitter Lake upon the shores of which it was possible to construct
unloading jetties and which, in turn, leads to Lake Timsah and thence by
the sweet water canal to Tel El Kebir, Cairo and the waterways of Egypt,
(which were used from the outset for the carriage of all types of military
Furthermore, the lines of the Egyptian State Railways ran: -
To Cairo and then to Alexandria.
To Ismalia and Port Said, connecting at Kantara with the Palestine
Railways. (This line skirted the Suez Canal, Bitter Lake and Lake
To Moascar and thence via Zagazig to Alexandria.
In the area which came to be known as the Canal Zone and which may
be loosely described as bordered on the east by the Suez Canal, on the
south by the Suez-Cairo railway, on the west by the eastern edge of the
Delta cultivation, and on the north by a line running due west for some
15 miles from Kantara, there was ample space on reasonably hard desert
for the establishment of base installations, reinforcement, transit and training
camps, personnel base depots, etc.
There was almost unlimited room for
dispersion for passive air defence and the area was not particularly vulnerable
to attack either by land or air.
It was already comparatively well served
by railways which could be developed, and the topographical nature of the
ground promised to make the construction of spurs and sidings in the instal-
lation areas a by no means difficult undertaking.
Existing road communications between Suez and Cairo, Suez—Moascar—
Ismalia and Ismalia-Cairo were being improved and developed, also the
general nature of the terrain made additional road construction a simple
matter, depending chiefly on the availability of road materials, machinery and
labour.
Although the area was, except for Moascar and Ismalia, an almost arid
desert, it was bisected by a branch of the Sweet Water Canal and subterranean
water was known also to exist.
The water supply problem was therefore
capable of solution although much well machinery and filtration plant con-
The whole of the area while
being easily
accessible to a port could also provide ample and suitable space for the
siting of the installations well clear of the port area, thus ensuring potentially
adequate port clearance and avoiding the possibility of congestion in the
It was, considering the general lack of road and rail communications
in the Midas, East, one of the best provided arcas in this respect.
Operations
in the Western Desert could thus be maintained by road, rail and sea from
Construction of the Base
In March, 1940, G.H.O. Middle East submitted an estimate of £921,000
as being the cost of completing storage accommodation for the nine divisions
on which the initial planning
was based.
The Treasury,
however, seemed
hesitant to face up to the implications of total war and the War Office could
obtain authority for the immediate expenditure of only £291,000.
G.H.Q.
was instructed to go ahead only
with immediate requirements for troops
already in the Middle East or due to arrive soon.
167
