Some Activities of the I.G's. Department
It also became apparent, during the months following the official state-
ment on the functions of the Intendant-General, that the latter was, inevit-
ably, more concerned in dealing with the rearward organizations of the Army,
and with some of the more domestic problems, such as repair, maintenance
and organization of transport, than he was with the higher type of adminis-
trative problem affecting all three Services.
This was due to a variety of reasons, but mainly to the fact that G.H.Q.
was admittedly
weak in rearward organization and in ability to deal with
the ever-increasing flow of war-like material and stores from ship to shore,
and its subsequent readiness to take the field.
By the end of the first four
months of the I.G's. stay, progress was evident; following on the co-ordina-
tion of the rearward services by the I.G's. department,
these services them-
selves began to take better shape, and to realize the problems in front of
them with such good effect that by the end of September the I.G. had the
satisfaction of seeing a great advance in the speed and scope of rearward
The situation in the ports, previously far from satisfactory, was also
Projects for the development of both existing and new ports
were put in hand and details
specialists, and every effort made to look forward and to anticipate situations
as they were developing and to keep ahead with plans and appreciations
of future operations and possibilities.
On the provision side, the situation when General Haining came out was
that the Middle East Supply Centre had recently been instituted but was
handicapped by lack of staff, and its activities were confined to a number
of isolated transactions dealing with the more urgent supply matters.
the Eastern Supply Group (see Chapter VII) with which
the Middle East Supply Centre was, to some extent, linked, had also got
into its stride but the organization for local provision in the Middle East
which again, in its turn, came under the Central Provision Office in Delhi,
was confined to the production of military stores and did not include food-
stuffs of any kind.
The task of forming a solid basis on which to develop
and co-ordinate the various supply agencies in the Middle East with one
another, with the Ministry of War Transport acting as the agent of those
concerned at home, and with the Eastern Supply Group in India, was there-
upon undertaken by the supply side of the I.G's. Department.
Thus the framework of the Middle East Supply Centre, so vital to the
future development of the base, began to take
shape; military and civil
requirements were co-ordinated while liaison between the various countries
which comprised the theatres was put on a proper footing.
The Intendant-General was further responsible for the maintenance,
servicing and repair of armoured vehicles and mechanized transport working
throughout in collaboration with the Royal Air Force and Fleet Air Arm.
With the help of his experts, a thorough survey was effected of all base
and forward installations and recommendations made for the speeding up
of the period of repair, and with regard to repair organization generally.
A number of independent investigations were made into such matters
as the oil and petrol situation, equipment and manpower for workshops
190
and co-operation with civilian firms in the Middle East, all of which con-
tributed to a much needed tidying up of the maintenance services generally.
As an outcome of the recommendations of the Intendant-General's report.
and after a good deal of persistent pressure, a controller of mechanical
engineering
resources was appointed to control and co-ordinate all Army
and R.A.F. workshops with a view to pooling the workshop resources of the
R.A.S.C. and the R.Á.O.C. (at that date quite separate).
The Principal Administrative Officer
The announcement on 3rd October, 1942, of the appointment to the
Middle East of a " principal administrative staff officer" had a further effect
on the position of the Intendant-General, and the gradual disappearance
of his department may be said to date from then.
the War Office notifying the appointment contained the following paragraph
on the new position of the Intendant-General: -
"General Haining will continue in his position as Intendant-General
but will be relieved of all responsibilities in the Army sphere proper
and will be responsible solely to the Minister of State.
ordinate such inter-Service matters as the Minister of State may direct.
He will be Vice-Chairman of the Sub-Committee of the Mid-East War
Council for Supply and Transport.
He will require a small personal
The remainder of the present Intendant-General's organization
will be made available to the Principal Administrative Staff Officer
for the employment in such capacities as he may think fit, or for
disposal by the Minister of State according to their qualifications."
Clearly the Intendant-General's Department
re-organization upon the arrival of the P.A.O., since the exclusion of all
functions within the Army sphere meant a very great reduction in work
and indeed, by the end of October, there was little work for his department
What remained was more properly within the sphere of the Minister
of State's department.
Abolition of the Intendant-General's Department
During mid-November a short directive was issued to commanders-in-
chief on the functions of the I.G.
who was now reduced to representation
on a number of local councils and committees, and it was clear to General
Haining that the War Office was desirous of abolishing his appointment.
Accordingly, on 7th December, 1941, he submitted a report on his depart-
ment's redundancy drawing attention to the fact that, since his original
appointment as I.G., two new appointments had been made, that of the
Minister of State and the Principal Administrative Officer (later known
as the Lieutenant-General i/c Administration) and that the result was that
his own task had rapidly diminished.
The report closed with a recom-
mendation that his department be abolished but that:
(a) The Middle East Supply Centre should be strengthened with addi-
tional stafi, possibly drawn from the Intendant-General's supply and
transportation division, and should be responsible for the day to
day co-ordination of the various organizations dealing with supplies,
both civil and military, and with the Ministry of War Transport in
191
