remainder of the force was engaged in improving their accommodation and
endeavouring to relieve the density in which officers and men had been billeted
One of the first administrative installations to open was the force pay
office, well stocked with kroner—a great advantage since the R.A.S.C. trans-
port officers were thus able to proceed with the hiring of transport to augment
the slender military resources. Despite the most strenuous efforts, however, the
total daily hirings never greatly exceeded an average of about ten cars and
ten commercial vehicles.
In order to show our determination to help the Norwegian troops, two
companies of infantry had been landed on the mainland of Norway, north
This early contact had an excellent effect on the
co-operation obtaining with the Norwegians but gave rise to obvious ad-
ministrative difficulties because a L. of C. had immediately to be established.
The base was on an island, few ships of the force were suitable for plying in
the fjords and these were, in any case, needed back home again.
This problem of communication between the island and the mainland
would obviously grow in importance as time went on, and it was essential
that early action should be taken because, apart from the constant require-
ment of craft to ferry between ship and shore (transports had to lie in the
Tiel Sundet, 10 miles or more from the harbour to be safe from air attack),
further landings on the mainland would be made as the force grew, giving
rise to additional maintenance commitments.
Contact was therefore made with the Harbour Master (who was fortunately
very pro-British). He made available about eight personnel ships capable of
carrying from 200 to 700 men each and ten other ships that could each carry
between 100 and 500 tons of stores.
He also produced over a hundred
Norwegian fishing craft each capable of carrying anything from 20-50 per-
sonnel and 10-50 tons of stores. These small craft turned out to be the standard
method of inter-force movement and were universally known as " puffers"
(owing to a puffing noise they made).
The "puffers" were operated by Norwegian crews who were rationed
by the British.
An early snag in their use was caused by the fact that as soon
as an air raid alarm was sounded the " puffers" would disappear like magic
into the countless creeks on the coast and would not re-appear for many
hours, some not for days. This was counteracted by placing on board every
ship and craft, two or three armed soldiers to give the crew some confidence.
These crews were found from a railway construction company who would
otherwise have been virtually unemployed.
The " puffer" fleet was, of course, an unsatisfactory improvisation.
craft were mainly crewed by their owners, and the fact that they were diesel-
engined necessitated local purchase of diesel oil by R.A.S.C.
however, no alternative, and the "puffer feet became A. main agency for
forward maintenance.
Such control as it was possible to exercise over the
"puffers" was shared equally between the Royal Navy and the Army Move-
General Auchinleck (who subsequently assumed command of the force)
commented on the fact that although a study of the map would have shown
that inland water transport would necessarily have to be used to a great
WO27T
18
extent, no provision had been made to send with the force the necessary
personnel to organize and operate I.W.T. from the outset. On the other hand,
railway personnel were despatched to organize the Narvik-Lulea railway
which, at best, could only be considered a hypothetical and limited asset.
of a depth of anything up to 30 feet.
The setting up of the base was impeded throughout by heavy falls of snow
The temperature was 30° below zero.
During the last days of April a heavy thaw set in which caused even more
difficulties than the snow. Every road and track became a torrent up to 2 feet
deep in water and serious flooding was experienced in most of the depots.
Maintenance Arrangements
The R.A.O.C. personnel who, of all the "Q" services, were in greatest
demand, began their duties while the convoy was actually leaving Scotland.
It had been decided that all ranks would land equipped to the "Arctic"
clothing scale but that it would be unwise to risk issuing this clothing before
the voyage owing to the heavy weather expected and in the interests of
The clothing was issued aboard each ship, men being paraded on
deck in single file and passed through a large room containing the various
In this manner a complete battalion could be equipped to full
scale in less than three hours.
A special detachment of a base ordnance depot, consisting of two sub-
depots and an ammunition section had been organized to support the force.
This detachment B.O.D. set itself up in Harstad, and on 23rd April the stores
arrived (during a raging blizzard).
They were in no way tactically packed
and the cases could not be identified until they were unpacked. Few of the
cases and crates could be man-handled, and once having been deposited on
the quays by ships' derricks could not be further moved owing to the lack
of mobile cranes and transport on shore and the deep fall of snow.
those stores which were obvious by their shape and size-such as bales of
blankets could be issued in the first few days.
Under these difficult con-
ditions the B.O.D. proceeded as best it could with the simultaneous task of
" stocking-up" and making urgent issues.
As during the disembarkation of the B.E.F. in France the previous year,
a number of units had become separated from their A.F. G1098 equipment,
and demands were continually being made upon the B.O.D. for immediate
These demands poured in as soon as units became installed, and
the haphazard method in which the stores had been first packed, then stowed
and finally off-loaded threw a great weight on the B.O.D., scaled as it was to
hold some 30,000 different items.
The supply units with the force consisted of headquarters and seven sections
of a supply personnel company (for operating a small supply depot and sub-
sidiary detail issue depots), one section of a field bakery, one field butchery
All units embarked with 14 days supplies (3 days composite rations and
11 days bulk supplies) plus one emergency ration for each man.
was to build up to 60 days reserves in the theatre together with an adequate
working margin consisting of something between 15 and 30 days.
was experienced at an early stage in the off-loading of the landing rations
