deficiency not cast its ever-present shadow over all aspects of maintenance,
the " Q
staff could have faced the future with a degree of confidence that
could certainly not be felt by the General Staff.
After the loss of Prome the administrative situation in the various com-
modities was as follows: —
Supplies
The stocks of imported supplies, together with present and known
future purchases of indigenous supplies were sufficient to feed the army
of about 60,000 for six months, provided that: —
(a) Sources of indigenous supplies were held and were utilized to the
utmost.
In accordance with this policy hard rations were only
made available to troops engaged in operations.
All other per-
sonnel had to depend mainly on rice and locally purchased meat
and vegetables.
There was still plenty of rice and cattle in the
country but wheat and flour were already beginning to be short.
(b) No further losses of stocks occurred either by bombing or by being
over-run by the enemy.
no de tond a quaiction was senion ater the los
subsequently destroyed by bombing.
Petrol and Oil
The excellent work carried out in the oilfields as the result of the
staff and the oil concerns initiating the local production of spirit has
already been noted. Requirements were about 1,300,000 gallons monthly
and production was probably in excess of that figure.
oil situation was satisfactory-providing the oilfields could be held.
Medical
There were sufficient stocks of medical stores for army purposes for
six months; as small quantities of these items were about the only
goods that could economically be flown in from India, there was no
cause for concern about stores, but the shortage of hospital beds was
Ammunition
There was a serious shortage, but it was estimated that there would
be sufficient of the more common types to last until the rains, when
expenditure could be expected to be reduced.
Ordnance Stores
There was a shortage of clothing and equipment but there was a
reasonable stock of small arms.
The Battle for the Oilfields
With the fall of Prome, however, the supply situation, despite the for?:
going, again became exceedingly difficult. The Burcorps area of Taungdwingyi
was off the river, the only lateral rail communication (a oop trom Pyinmana
to Kyaukpadaung) was not functioning, and the corps had to be maintained
328
WORT
1
from Magwe and Yenangyuang with corresponding extra use of transport.
The continued dereliction of river crews also made it difficult to get river-crat
to proceed down-stream, and M.T. road convoys from Mandalay and Meiktila
had to be used to an increasing extent.
Before the withdrawal from Prome, it had been possible to institute a
form of daily maintenance to the forward troops. Bakeries and butchers had
been able to function more or less normally. After the loss of Prome, drawing
from dumps by
formations and units again became necessary until the
position stabilized around Taungdwingyi, when for a short period it was
possible to resume daily maintenance from the F.S.D. at Taungdwingyi, second
line transport drawing in formation bulk.
After the withdrawal from Prome and the concentration in the Allanmyo-
Taungdwingyi area, Burcorps temporarily lost contact with the enemy and
were able to prepare for the defence of the Yenangyaung oilfields.
matter of necessarv
precaution "scorched-earth"
As a
steps had already been
instituted in the fields.
Almost all the wells had been blocked and plans
had been made under army headquarters by a specially appointed and
expert officer to carry out demolition work in the oilfields and improvised
refinery, destroying all available stock in the event of necessity.
On 10th April it became apparent that enemy columns were moving north,
and within two days heavy fighting was in progress for Taungdwingyi and
Magwe.
The importance of both these centres resulted in a gap being opened
in between, as our forces were not strong enough to hold a continuous line,
and the enemy were able to push into this gap and thus directly threaten
the oilfields.
Orders for the destruction of the Yenangyaung oilfields were issued on
the night of 14th April, and the denial scheme was successfully completed
within three days.
The final stage, the demolition of the power house, took
place when the Japanese were actually in the outskirts of Yenangyaung.
fighting now became confused and although 17 Indian Division hung on to
Taungdwingyi, 1 Burma Division had been forced out of Magwe and, while
withdrawing through Yenangyaung, was cut off by a road block in the rear.
It eventually managed to fight its way out, but not without the loss of
one-fifth of the personnel, a number of guns and mortars, and nearly all the
small amount of M.T. which the division possessed.
The Decision to - Withdraw to India
In the meantime the position on the Chinese front in the Southern Shan
States had seriously deteriorated and after losses at Pinamana a disastrous
series of reverses had forced the Chinese back on a line from Pyawbe to
and were now threatening Lashio and the direct route to China.
The continued withdrawal of 1 Burma Division and the seriousness of
the situation in the Shan States now made it a matter of supreme importance
Indian Division
to hold securely the centres of communication south of Mandalay, and 17
Meiktila while 7 Armoured Prioade was temnorarily placed under command
was ordered to withdraw from Taungdwingyi to around
12090
329
