of Asmara promptly replied that they would do all they could in Asmara, but
could not answer for the authorities in Massawa.
It appears that we were
satisfied by this reply.
The population of Asmara at the time was approximately 40,000 Italians
and 40,000 natives.
The problem of administering
this large population,
mostly armed, with but a limited staff to deal with civil problems, no police,
and few troops, was no small one.
Telephone communications with Massawa
were still open on one line, and the Italian Commander was warned that
no responsibility for the feeding of the Italian population of
Abyssinia would be accepted by the British if any of the ships in the harbour
(of which there were many) were scuttled, or the harbour and its facilities
On the evening of 5th April the Admiral commanding the Italian forces
sent in a flag of truce and asked for terms.
rejected and the advance which had been halted was resumed.
now started from the north and west but the opposition soon petered out
and the commander of 5 Indian Division received the surrender of the town
It was then found that considerable destruction had been carried out.
ships were scuttled in the harbour and the port facilities and oil
installations were also badly damaged.
It was the first occasion on which
the Italians had make a really effective effort at demolition, and it was most
unfortunate that so much damage had been caused to a port, the possession
of which, intact, would have been of very considerable value to us in our
East African campaign.
THE END OF THE CAMPAIGN
With the departure, after the battle of Keren, of 4 Indian Division to the
Middle East, it became necessary to provide both for the garrisoning of the
newly conquered territory of Eritrea and also for further operations against
Amba Alagi and Gondar, which constituted the main enemy centres of
resistance in Northern Abyssinia and to which the remnants of the Italian
troops from Eritrea had retreated.
Operations against Amba Alagi were begun immediately.
minimum force was kept forward to ease the administrative load, all avail-
able transport was set to work along the 230-mile route between Asmara and
Amba Alagi on the necessary dumping programme.
In the immediate battle
area vehicles were confined to the road and everything had to be carried by
man or mule off the road. Unfortunately shortage of road transport had made
it impossible to ferry forward either of the two Cypriot mule companies which
had proved so invaluable at Kéren, and so 5 Indian Division were forced to
collect mules froin the countryside and to improvise their own organization;
this resulted in an inevitable reduction in fighting strength.
5 Indian Division began the attack on 4th May but was soon checked.
However, reinforcements in the form of a South African brigade group from
East Africa Command arrived on 8th May and the effect was to beleaguer the
Italian forces even more closely. On 16th May, after some further fighting, an
armistice was asked for and granted, and the Italian garrison, after an un-
conditional surrender, were granted the honours of war.
In so far as H.Q.
WO217
Troops Sudan, was concerned, this surrender virtually terminated major
Subsequent operations were on a small scale, widely scattered,
and carried out by small mixed forces often with patriot assistance in some
cases action was taken by patriots alone.
It is now opportune to consider the sequence of events in the south and
to review the operations of East Africa Command, of which, as has been
seen, one South African brigade had already arrived in the 5 Indian Division
The Advance from Kenya
As already stated, at the beginning of 1941, East Africa Command con-
sisted of 11 and 12 African Divisions and the newly arrived 1 South African
This force was disposed to cover 650 miles along the frontier of
Italian Somaliland and Abyssinia, with 11 (A) Division on the
right, 12 (A) Division in the centre and 1 (S.A.) Division on the left. Reserves
could only be counted upon from a formation resting or from units under
training for the whole force was necessarily committed. The policy for de-
fence was the establishment, wherever water existed on main tracks leading
out of Kenya into Italian territory, of small defended localities provided with
the strongest physical defences, but only lightly held.
The main defence depended on highly mobile reserves kept outside and
behind these localities for immediate counter-attack.
formations already mentioned there were two Somali irregular companies
under British officers, and later these were added to by companies formed
from Abyssinian refugees and from Turkana tribesmen.
On the right of the front, from the sea to just short of Marsabit, the
country consisted of waterless flat bush. The actual density of the bush varied
greatly, but there were few places where light tanks could not push through.
Movement of armoured cars was restricted in parts of the area, but large
portions were by no means impassable. Except in the rains the actual surface
of the soil permitted movement by M.T. anywhere where the bush was thin
enough to let it through. During the rains, however, the many large patches
of black cotton soil became impassable for days at a time.
Round Marsabit and west of it was quite a different picture. The Chalbi
Desert and the lava escarpment which surrounded Marsabit hills were com-
The lava belts themselves were impassable to M.T. without
preparation, but in dry weather the sandy portions of the Chalbi Desert could
be driven over anywhere. Further west, north and west of Lake Rudolf, was
stony country with some very thin bush, and hills from which observation
was possible over great distances.
Furthermore, armoured cars could drive
over it anywhere, albeit slowly.
PLANS FOR THE CAPTURE OF KISMAYU
The G.O.C., East Africa Command had been instructed at the end of
October to study the possibility of carrying out an operation for the capture
of Kismayu before the rains broke in March.
The conclusion reached was
that the minimum force required would be six brigade groups of which one
should preferably be an armoured brigade. It was, however, very reluctantly
decided that the operation would not be possible until after the rains ended
in May. The morale of the Italians was obviously good—many of them had
