Stocks were ample for requirements and the problem
position over the appalling 120 mile route described above.
get them into
This was done
in three stages.
The first step was to put in four days' modified rations at Pyingyaing,
which was just about half-way to the river.
Secondly, two days' supply were
located at points about 30 miles from Pyingyaing in
each direction and
lastly, a through carrying of two days was pushed right through to the point
on the Chindwin
where the crossing was to be made, and the complete
lay-out can thus be reproduced diagrammatically as follows: —
CHINDWIN
CROSSING
(Two days)
Dump " y"
(Two days)
- 0-
- 60 miles —
PYINGYAING
(Four days)
Dump
"X"
i we days
YE-U
(Large stocks)
In addition, skeleton supplies of tea, sugar and milk, with the equivalent
of one meal, were then placed about 15 miles in each direction from both
the dumps
"X"
and "Y"
thus forming staging posts which later
were
increased to a capacity of two days as far as possible. It will thus be seen
that ration dumps of varying sizes were established along the whole route
at approximately 15-mile intervals and this ensured that adequate supplies
would be available each day, the withdrawal taking the form of a 15-mile
march daily for eight days.
Bakeries were established at Pyingyaing and
at the Chindwin crossing point.
Dumps were manned by R.I.A.S.C. supply sections under army H.Q.
control until the arrival of fighting troops, after which they were handed
over to Burcorps and the supply personnel thus released leap-frogged across
the river to Kalewa so that they could assist in the dumps that were being
formed, with the assistance of India, on the Kalewa-Tamu road.
This stage of the withdrawal saw the only example of a water shortage.
On the road from Ye-u there was one " dry
might have caused difficulty if adequate steps had not been taken in advance,
and improvised arrangements, utilizing petrol road wagons, 40-gallon drums
and other miscellaneous containers carried on M.T. vehicles and army trek
carts, hurriedly brought into effect.
From Shewegyin, all troops, motor vehicles and guns had to be transported
to Kalewa by steamer.
There were six steamers, the capacity of each being
700 men, but they could carry only two lorries and two jeeps.
special flat had thus to be constructed for taking vehicles,
be made of this method of transport.
difficulties of embarkation from the beach at Shivesyin full use could not
As a result of the low vehicle capacity
of the ships, the transport problem on ta result of the lowe river became
sven more serious since now there was bartly sough transport to carry
such essential unit equipment and ammunition as remained. or even to
evacuate the wounded.
WORT
1
The threat of enemy air attack on river craft reduced the capacity of the
steamer service between Shwegyin and Kalewa during the hours of daylight.
The crews were nervous and guards had to be placed on all ships to prevent
them deserting their posts.
Fortunately, the steamer service was singularly
The withdrawal, however, was not completed
without a last reverse being experienced by the unfortunate force.
This happened at the Shwegyin crossing, where an enemy force sought
first to cut off the covering forces and then to destroy them.
engagement General Slim decided that further ferrying by steamer from
Shwegyin was no longer practicable. He ordered all remaining guns, tanks.
and motor vehicles to be destroyed, and the personnel to move by the track
to the ferry opposite Kalewa.
Thus the last elements of Burmarmy crossed
the Chindwin, but not without a further grievous loss of transport and
The road northwards from Kalemyo to Tamu was no more than a dirt
track through the jungle and, once the rains set in, would become impassable
even to the small amount of M.T. remaining with the force. The operations
thus became as much a race with the weather as with the Japanese and as
much a fight against nature as against the enemy, but the end of the retreat
By 9th May, staging camps on the road to Tamu had
been established at Kalewa, Imbaung,
Yezagyo, Khampat and Witok, and
the army was now steadily marching without incident from camp to camp
followed by thousands of refugees who had also crossed the Chindwin. The
principal anxiety was that the enemy moving up the Chindwin, which ran
parallel to the road from Kalewa to Tamu, might cut in and get astride the
line of withdrawal. Even a small enemy force could have imposed a serious
delay at this stage, but fortunately this threat did not develop.
"Transport was the
great problem.
4 Corps who was now in command at Assam was able to place at my
disposal a G.P.T. company which proved of inestimable value.
During the withdrawal it was necessary to take from 7 Armoured Brigade
nearly all their vehicles for use in the general pool both east and west
of the Chindwin and after their tanks and remaining vehicles had been
abandoned at Shwegyin this brisade continued to find drivers, not only
for the vehicles brought across the Chindwin but also to supplement
the drivers of G.P.T.
companies working north and south of Tamu.
Six to seven hundred men were employed in this way. No praise is
too high for the work done b this fommation.'""
The race against the weather was won.
The British columns disappeared
into the mountains of Manipur as the monsoon rains broke. As the last
echelons passed over the Tamu road, it was washed out behind them.
20th May the Anoin Rune need to exist as a comment to tro
were incorporated into 4 Corps of India,
which was based on Imphal.
unnecessary.
Comment on the campaign from the administrative viewpoint is almost
Withdrawal is not normally a serious problem of maintenance
when a force falls back al not an established L. of C. but in Burma a
new L. of C. had to be established against time and during a period of
intensive onerations. Fortunately the need for this was correctly appreciated
333
