Liaison with the Civil Power
Effective co-ordination between the military and the civilian services
could not, however, be obtained so expeditiously as that between two purely
military organizations.
This was due in part to the absence of a regional
administration of the continental type in Great Britain which became, on
the threat of invasion, a serious and admitted drawback.
It meant that
collaboration at the top between the civil service and the defence forces, in
So far as
it was dependent on a clear appreciation of conditions in the
country,
was defective.
Problems in connection with the
effective
co-
ordination between the military and the public can hardly be solved by
scrutiny of
the correspondence of the
separate departments
every
ministry with municipalities, county councils, special local committees and
so on.
this
deficiency-albeit from a different viewpoint-by dividing the country into
in order to meet any exceptional circumstances resulting from heavy bombing
attacks
e.g.,
complete
disruption
communications.
These
regions were at once adapted to meet the changed conditions, and formed
the basis of a regional administration which could exercise effective control
if required.
The regions are shown diagrammatically at Diagram 7 which also
illustrates the relationship of the commissioners to the home commands.
The
areas of commands and regions were not identical and in some cases a
G.O.C.-in-C. had to work with two or more commissioners and sometimes a
commissioner had to work with more than one G.O.C.-in-C.
responsibility
The areas of
experienced in this respect.
and little difficulty was
Under
the Minister of Home Security.
normal conditions regional commissioners answered directly to
Their functions were mainly of a co-
ordinating nature although they had a direct responsibility for the efficiency
of the civil defence arrangements in their area.
in consultative capacities representatives of government departments.
They had attached to them
representatives, however, worked direct to their own ministries.
These
In respect of police and fire services, the commissioner had
operational responsibilities for the movement of reinforcements.
certain
At his
headquarters he had regional police and fire staff officers who would operate
their respective services as required. He had no direct responsibility regard-
ing hospital arrangements, which were dealt with centrally by the Ministry
of Health through the regional hospital officers.
donation were had no dire
Authorities such as county councils, borough councils, etc., were under
the operational control of the commissioners.
Ministry of Home
Security there was a chief of staff for operations who worked direct with
regional commissioners on matters of operational planning and was directly
responsible to the Minister. In all other matters, administrative,
financial,
etc., the regional commissioners dealt departmentally with the administrative
side of the Ministry, the head of which had also the responsibility for the
co-ordination of the various
defence.
government departments concerned in civil
238
1 0
An important point to be kept in mind in connection with the regional
organization is that commissioners under normal conditions had extremely
limited financial powers and, as a result, co-ordination between the military
and the civilian administration was often subject to irritating delays which
were not always appreciated by local commanders when faced with problems
of urgent operational importance.
Against the contingency in which communications had broken down and
a state of acute emergency, ie., invasion, had arisen, the Minister of Home
Security had conferred on regional commissioners a suspended authority to
an extent which
Crown.
would normally only be exercised by a Minister of the
Such powers would have been of the widest possible character, and
would in effect have given the regional commissioner more or less complete
authority in so far as the exercise of civil government and civil defence in
his region were concerned.
Likewise, the other government departments
had conferred certain powers on their local representatives who would in
general be responsible to the regional commissioner in emergency.
There
were, of course, certain cases of central government services which it was
impossible to control effectively on a local basis, and in this instance the
commissioner could not act without reference to the appropriate central
authority.
As an example, diversion of shipping from one port to another
could not be ordered by the regional commissioner.
In brief, the main difference between a case of acute emergency and that
of normal circumstances, was that in the former the regional commissioner
assumed administrative and financial control in addition to
operational control.
In the latter he had full operational control but only
general co-ordinating functions as regards general administration.
Whether under normal or emergency conditions army commanders con-
veyed their requirements to the civil population, or to civil organizations,
through the regional commissioners.
It is important to note, however, that,
in spite of their wide powers, regional commissioners had in no circumstances
whatsoever, any authority over the armed forces.
It is a matter for conjecture whether under invasion conditions the
regional system as constituted would have been entirely successful.
As will
be seen from Diagram
had created its own
regional
organization but it cannot be said that there was adequate contact between
the regional officials in all departments and the regional commissioners.
Wherever the regional commissioners exercised co-ordination in any par-
ticular respect, officers of each department had the richt to refer any decision
back to their own ministry.
This, of course, entailed renewed consultation
at a high level amongst the different departments concerned and the con-
sequence could have been an enormous duplication of labour and loss of
time, both from the point of view of the regional commissioner and the
G.O.C.-in-C. who was naturally impatient to complete his defence arrange-
ments with the minimum of delay.
This point is particularly stressed because in nearly all defence prepara-
tions, notwithstanding the Defence Regulations, progress could not easily be
made without the co-operation of one or another ministry of local authority.
239
