It has been said that the light aid detachments (L.A.Ds.) of the R.A.O.C.,
and, later in the War, of R.E.M.E., amply justified their existence throughout
the campaigna sentiment often repeated in other theatres in later stages
of the war.
Handled properly they can be of great value to commanding
officers.
Their versatility was only equalled by their capacity for hard work,
and their only fault was that they sometimes attempted to undertake tasks
beyond their resources.
The vehicle census which was supplied to the force at the start of the
campaign was quite incomplete and therefore of little use.
vehicles with the B.E.F. were contained in four (rising later to seven) light
tank regiments (divisional reconnaissance units), one armoured car regiment,
Their maintenance and repair services fell upon
the existing corps and G.H.Q. troops organization, which was not scaled to
meet the demands of armoured units.
Planning for the expected arrival of
armoured divisions, and for the A.F.V. area to be established at Pacy, in-
cluded provision of a base ordnance depot and base ordnance workshops
in the area for A.F.V. requirements only.
Maintenance spares for A.F.Vs.,
especially reserve tracks and sprockets, were in extremely short supply, and
it is doubtful whether armoured units could have been kept in action for
any length of time had operations been protracted.
One result of the impressment scheme, i.e., the lack of spare parts, has
been previously referred to in the paragraphs describing the work of the
R.A.S.C. It may be imagined what effect this shortage had on the ordnance
After a bad start, the vehicle stocks in the theatre improved and a scheme
was prepared, but never carried out, for the inauguration of staging vehicle
parks along the L. of C. As the number of vehicles increased, so the spares
The demand for spares was enormous and was made un-
believably complicated by the fantastic variety of vehicles in use.
the first three months of 1940 a total of 3,613 different types of spare parts
were on indent; of these only 254 were supplied.
1940, No. 1 Base Ordnance Depot had over 16,000 indents for M.T. spares
unsatisfied, and further indents were arriving at the rate of 1,400 a day.
The supply of spare parts and accessories for vehicles is of paramount
importance in a mechanized army and it is a fact that this problem
shortages was continually recurring throughout the War.
Spare parts to
vehicles are much the same as reinforcements to battalions, and battalions
are not initially sent into a campaign without adequate reinforcements.
The issue of vehicles from ordnance field parks was strictly under G.H.Q.
departmental control until the possibility
of active operations necessitated
control passing to corps.
The theory was that replacement vehicles could be
issued without delay in accordance with operational requirements.
the result was that the corps "Q" staff immediately issued all vehicles in
stock to meet general transport deficiencies, and even tissued a hicles such
as workshop lorries were found to have been released for this purpose.
On the other hand there is no doubt that departmental control, with its
attendant formalities, is quite unsuitable as a method of issue of operational
vehicles in a theatre of war,
of control by the General Staff (G(SD)) in accordance
and the best solution is probably still that
priorities.
with operational
1
Ammunition
ing rates upon which stocks were based: —
The maintenance project estimated ammunition expenditure on the follow-
Type
25-pr.
Daily (except where otherwise stated)
ou-nt
6-in.
35 r.p.g. (restricted to 25 during September)
How.
30 г.р.g.
3- in. 20-cwt.
40-mm. A.A.
1.0.2
2-pr.
A.T.
40 r.p.g.
3-in. Mor
5 r.p.g.
2-in. Mor.
13 r.p. mortar
10 г.р.
S.A.A.
mortar
A.T. mines
6,000,000 per division per month
1,500 per division per month
Base ammunition depots were originally sited at Plourat in the northern
base and the Forêt de Gavre in the southern base.
Both the depots were
road-served, traffic being received by rail at nearby stations from Brest
The depot at Plourat was not considered
permanent and was subsequently transferred to a site in the Forêt de Rennes
where more cover from air observation was available.
As time went on
five further depots were installed at Tourville les Ifs (road-served) (for
chemical bombs and gas warfare stocks), Châteauneuf (rail-served), Dieppe
(road-served), Rennes (rail-served) and Blain (rail-served).
An advanced
ammunition depot was projected, but the scheme was abandoned owing to
various French objections.
A compromise was then made which involved
stocks being held on rail in carefully selected locations.
Two days' supply
were to be held within thirty-six hours of the ammunition rail-head for each
of 1 and 2 Corps, and an additional two days for 1 Corps within twelve
hours of rail-head.
These trains were designated ammunition sections (en
cas mobile) the abbreviation A.S.E. being used.
Forward dumps under G.H.Q. control were formed at rail-heads by the
ammunition rail-head detachments.
Five days' supply was held for 1 Corps
and seven days for 2 Corps, thus making nine days' supply in all for each
corps
either at rail-head or on rail.
In addition, four days estimated
expenditure was dumped in front of rail-head under corps control.
Similar
arrangements were in process of completion for 3 Corps but were interrupted
by the
course
events.
Again, therefore, the creation of large dumps in forward areas took place,
later to cause considerable difficulty during the withdrawal of the force.
It is, however, doubtful whether any other course could have been taken,
and ammunition came pouring in from England throughout the early months
with negligible compensating expenditure.
The length of the L. of C. and
the already over-stretched storeholding capacity of the base ordnance depots
forced
the staff into accepting
these dumps, a policy circumstances may
have proved faulty but for which it is difficult to suggest an alternative
having regard to the available resources.
At the end of November, shipment
of ammunition from the United Kingdom had to be stopped, since the base
depots could accept no more.
Finally, the following observation was made by a senior ordnance officer
regarding the care and custody of ammunition in the B.E.F.:-
"A noticeable consequence of the practice which existed between
the Wars, of storing gun ammunition centrally instead of in unit charge,
47
