L. of C. might be switched from Mogadishu.
The short-comings of Berbera
as a port have already been dealt with in the previous section but, poor
though it was, it could be no worse than Mogadishu or Kismayu.
During the time it had been in Italian hands its facilities had not been
improved, though flies, dirt and disease had received the fullest encouragement
from the Italian way of living.
However limited might be the resources of
Berbera,
the road to Gigiga was at least in tolerably good condition, and
the resultant shortening of the L. of C., though suffering from the inevitable
complications of a switch, proved a godsend.
Contact between East Africa
Force and the force occupying Berbera was achieved by skilful timing on
20th March when Nigerian troops occupied Tug Wajale on the borders of
THE CAPTURE OF ADDIS ABABA
With the capture of Berbera the force was now maintained from two
-Berbera and Mogadishu-from which the distances to the
leading troops were respectively 250 and 800 miles.
still necessary to keep open the port of Kismayu for the maintenance of
troops and part of 12 (A) Division; and finally, the
continued lack
of facilities for unloading vehicles at the ports forced the
continuance of the road L. of C. from Kenya, now 1,600 miles long.
12 (A) Division, after the capture of Dolo, had occupied Neghelli on
21st March but, owing to the impracticability of maintaining troops there,
had withdraw its forces back to Dolo on 26th March.
tunate because, in order to assist 11 (A) Division by delaying the with-
drawal of the enemy along the route Neghelli-Addis Ababa, 12 (A) Division
had been ordered to make a show of force in the area.
So slow, however,
were communications that this message was not received until the division,
which had never intended to stay, had withdrawn from Neghilli.
trative arrangements were therefore put in hand to maintain a small force
after the town had been re-occupied.
After disposing of two more enemy prepared positions on the road to
Harar, 11 (A) Division were confronted by an Italian civil official with the
now familiar white flag, and the town was occupied on 25th March after the
leading troops had covered over 1,000 miles in 30 days an average of
The advance was resumed on 27th March.
The enemy had effected
extensive demolitions, particularly in a mountain pass leading down to Dire-
dawa, but much hard work saw the road re-established in some 36 hours
and Diredawa entered on 29th March.
There now remained 300 miles to
Addis Ababa, with the obstacle of the Awash River to be surmounted.
road and rail ran side by side much of the way and the enemy was making
the utmost use of rail transport, a circumstance which drew upon him much
of our air effort, several hits by bombs on trains being registered.
this was to rebound to our disadvantage when the time came for the railway
to be used by us.
On 2nd April our troops were on the line of the Awash River, where
both road and rail bridges were found to be demolished.
was surmounted and Addis Ababa was officially entered on
although at Italian request some troops and armoured cars had entered the
WOLT
town the night before to stop looting.
A great deal of miscellaneous war
material was found in the capital, and a considerable amount of railway spare
parts, rolling stock and serviceable engines, which the Italians had removed
from Diredawa before blowing up the Awash railway bridge.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE L. OF C.
With the capture of Addis Ababa, a more orthodox system of adminis-
tration became possible; its development is the subject of the following
After the earlier capture of Berbera 600,000 rations had been sent over
from Aden as a start, and it was necessary for H.Q., East Africa Force to
assess the tonnage to be brought through the port.
number of first line troops could be estimated with accuracy by the General
Staff, as is always the case in similar circumstances the number of adminis-
trative troops engaged upon the development of the L. of C., the R.A.F.,
gendarmerie, police and P.W. not only vastly increased the original figure
but constituted a constantly fluctuating total, with a general tendency to
Initially, bare maintenance requirements, with no margin for the build-
ing up of any reserve, were assessed at 2,000 tons a week-in the approxi-
mate proportion of 1,000 tons P.O.L. to 500 tons of supplies and 500 tons
of miscellaneous items. Quite apart from such a tonnage having to be
handled with Berbera's meagre facilities, it had to pass through threes pare
ate stages of the L. of C. before it reached the troops in Addis Ababa.
stretch of rail between Diredawa and the demolished bridge over the Awash,
and the third the railway again between the Awash and Addis Ababa.
might almost be said that the road link bridging the Awash constituted a
fourth stage; it certainly entailed two extra handlings.
In fact, over the period 18th May- 6th July, when the whole L. of C.
was in operation, the tonnage discharged at Berbera averaged about 450
tons a day—a truly remarkable effort under the difficult circumstances.
this total, some 200 tons daily were carried forward by road to Diredawa
and 150 tons railed on from that point.
Naturally the tonnage decreased
progressively at each stage, representing, in part, the consumption of units
stationed along the L. of C., and in part, the petrol consumption.
heavy drop between the tonnage unloaded at Berbera and that sent forward
on the first stage.
Although in some respects the road stage was the
subsequent stages.
Not only were 11 (A) Division now operating well beyond Addis Ababa
and requiring to be maintained by road from rail-head at the capital, but
12 (A) Division operating in the
Galla Sidamo area had found that the
heavy rains were making the L. of C. to Mogadishu precarious, and it was
decided to switch their maintenance to rail-head at Nanyuki in Kenya.
From
