estimated that the unloading figures might rise to 250 tons a day but,
unfortunately, the persistent bad weather prevented lighters being sailed round
Tobruk, by contrast, was now capable of 1,200 tons a day, having
been equipped with new and faster tugs and a number of lighters which had
For maintenance of the troops in the forward area 13 Corps were still
relying on F.M.C. No. 54 at Msus.
This was stocked daily by a third line
despatched by H.Q.
Eight Army from Tobruk which entailed a
The daily tonnage delivered was 520 tons for 13
Corps and some 120 tons for the R.A.F.—and was made up in accordance
with 13 Corps requirements signalled 36 hours in advance.
for some time been most anxious to open an F.M.C. further forward, in
the Agedabia area, to reduce the strain on the forward troops of having to
For various reasons, amongst which were the prevalence
of mines in the most suitable areas and the inability of Eighth Army to
deliver the agreed tonnage, the project was delayed for some time after
the enemy had withdrawn from the area.
By the middle of January, however.
this F.M.C. (No. 55) was established and was stocked jointly by Eighth
Army and 13 Corps.
The turn-round from Tobruk now became nine days
and deliveries averaged 370 tons a day for 13 Corps, and 130 tons a day
At the same time 13 Corps drew 150 tons a day from Benghazi
in third line transport to make up shortfalls.
It was essential that both move-
ment and ammunition expenditure be limited to allow the build-up of the
necessary reserves, so that the enemy could be driven out of his Agheila
Artillery ammunition expenditure was therefore limited to 25
r.p.g. per day except for troops actually attacked by the enemy, though it
was not expected that reserves would be sufficient until about mid-February.
Meanwhile the Eighth Army L. of C. was the scene of considerable activity.
One of the first essentials was the extension of the Desert Railway forward
from Mischeifa, in the first place to Capuzzo and then to Tobruk.
heavy mine-fields on the frontier which had formed part of the enemy's
defences enforced
but the work on the whole proceeded
satisfactorily, some 30 miles having been completed by mid-January.
now agreed that H.Q., Eighth Army should hand over to H.Q.,
all territory up to the Egyptian frontier on 7th February.
Until a rail-head
was established at Capuzzo 86 Sub-Area at Mischeifa would be responsible
for bidding for Eighth Army's requirements on H.Q., B.T.E. and reserves
at the rail-head would remain under control of Eighth Army.
In order to provide more transport in the forward area it was decided
to close down F.M.C. No. 51 and to cancel any further convoys from rail-
Troops based on F.M.C. No. 51 were to draw instead direct from
H.Q., Eighth Army was responsible for bidding on G.H.Q., Middle East,
for requirements by rail to Mischeifa and by sea to Tobruk,
Benghazi in 10 day periods, 10 days ahead.
As an indication of how much
it was hoped to increase the capacity of Benghazi by various improvements,
including the provision of further tugs and lighters, it is interesting to note
the tonnage demands for the period from 27th January to 6th February:
220
WO277
1 0
It was not, however, expected that the amount of transport available
would allow of the running of convoys between Mischeifa and Tobruk
during this period and so the tonnages demanded at the ports was rather
improvements would materialize.
higher than those being handled at the time on the assumption that promised
The policy for the holding of reserves was decided upon on 20th January
Mischeifa R.H.—7 days for all troops in Eighth Army Area.
Tobruk—7 days for all troops in Cyrenaica Area.
Derna—7 days for all troops based on Derna and Benghazi but
excluding troops based on Msus.
Benghazi—10 days for all troops based on Benghazi and Msus.
Msus—2 days working margin for all troops based on Msus.
Needless to say the quantities laid down were never achieved-petrol
in particular at this. time being in very short supply-and on some occasions
reserves in Tobruk fell to one day's consumption.
The Axis Counter-Offensive: January-February, 1942
On the morning of 21st January, the enemy surprisingly began an advance.
Our forces were able to do little to check their progress and by 25th January
Msus was in enemy hands and Benghazi was to be evacuated; 13 Corps.
greatly in need of P.O.L., was instructed to draw some 75,000 gallons from
Benghazi and this virtually exhausted its stocks. Precautionary measures
were rapidly taken to hold the Derna-Mekili line.
counter-attack 4 Indian Division and 1 Armoured Division gradually with-
On Ist February orders were
given for Derna to be evacuated,
installations there to be demolished and for a general deliberate withdrawal
to the line of Gazala and Bir Hacheim.
By 4th February, all our forces had
withdrawn to the Gazala line, which initially was not held in great strength.
In view of heavy tank losses of 1 Armoured Division (over 100 tanks out
of a total of 150 together with some 30 field guns, 32 anti-tank guns and
guns) it was felt at first that our strength in armour was insuffi-
cient to hold the position. The enemy's supply situation, however, forced
him to pause, and replacement tanks began to come forward for us quicker
It was of great importance to preserve Tobruk as our forward
base for the ultimate renewal of the offensive and, as if to demonstrate its
value, Tobruk on 29th January achieved the record discharge figure of 2,125
tons in one day.
Eighth Army now gave orders for the re-establishment of
F.M.C. No. 51 at Sheferzen and based 13 Corps on Tobruk.
was expected to reach Capuzzo by 27th February.
Eighth Army to G.H.Q. for the period 7th February—16th
February called for daily tonnages as follows: —
Mischeifa R.H.: 1,850 tons.
Tobruk: 1,260 tons.
Figures for bulk petrol were not included as G.H.Q., advised daily by
Army H.Q., were required to keep Tobruk supplied with tankers sufficient
to meet its off-take capacity of 300 tons a day M.T. petrol and 65 tons a day
Eighth Army also drew up a road programme to allow for
transport of some 500 tons a day from Mischeifa Rail-head forward
