established at Capuzzo so that 7 Armoured Division could exploit
into Libya after
the capture of Bardia, and it had been found that the
Italians had taken a leaf out of our book by salting the wells at Capuzzo,
had been hoped to rely for 7 Anmoured Division's water
The wells too at Requett (6 F.S.D.) were almost dry.
included reconnaissance for water in the Sawani Ogerin area,
the despatch of
12,000 gallons from Matruh and final reliance on the
The arrival of these two ships was the signal for the hitherto somewhat
Aeronautica to make its appearance,
bombing caused some casualties in transport and labour personnel at Sollum.
The water was unloaded, notwithstanding, and was taken by road to storage
tanks at Fort Capuzzo.
Other stores, including ammunition, supplies and
petrol, also arrived without hindrance and it was hoped to stock up both
8 F.S.D. and 9 F.S.D. with seven days' reserves of petrol and supplies, and
The target date was 1st January, 1941-
the provisional date for the attack on Bardia.
The deficiencies of Sollum as a port, however, quickly manifested them-
There was no proper port organization, and long-range shelling of
the port from Bardia, coupled with occasional air bombing, though causing
no appreciable damage, affected the Cypriot and Palestinian labour consider-
ably, and as a first step
achieving order, the appointment of
Administrative Commandant was created and filled.
By the end of the year,
the appointment of movement and transportation representatives to the
port, together with the provision of 100 stevedores and additional labour,
had eased the situation, and despite occasional delays due to air action, and
vicious and blinding sand-storms, work proceeded fairly satisfactorily.
A new jetty was constructed by Royal Engineers in order to speed up
and apart from minor difficulties (for instance,
the mixing of
R.A.S.C., supplies and E.F.I. stores in one ship with resultant confusion
when the stores were unloaded in the dark) and inevitable pilfering, the
build-up of reserves for the attack on Bardia proceeded satisfactorily.
It was a sign of the general progress that had been made that the E.F.I.
Depot was able to open up on 6th January, albeit only with limited stocks
available against the credit which was then allowed.
In fact the only
untoward administrative incident was a sudden demand by the R.A.F. for
Army responsibility,
the R.A.F.
staff had up to then met their requirements from their own resources.
The Advance into Cyrenaica
The enemy in Bardia comprised the greater part of four divisions, together
motley collection of tanks and guns salved from the rout of the
Italian forces in Egypt.
The Australians were to undertake the assault
while 7 Armoured Division covered approaches and exits to the north and
Some twenty-six of the Mk. II infantry tanks were still runners.
This shortage of tanks meant a higher
ammunition expenditure for the
protection of the infantry, and had dictated a delay in the arrival of the
Australian division outside Bardia while the necessary build-up had been
112
WO 217
1 0
Before the attack, which started at 0530 hours on 3rd January, 1941,
H.Q. Western Desert Force became H.Q., 13 Corps.
Operations against Bardia, once they began, entailed a steady influx of P.W.
By the evening of the first day their numbers amounted to approximately
10,000. Unfortunately their capture did not coincide with the discovery of
any enemy stocks of food in the part of Bardia that was in our hands.
As British stocks of food were too slender to allow of any diversion, even
of the stand-by items such as bully beef and biscuits, H.Q., B.T.E., were
asked to arrange the despatch of shipping, loaded with P.W. rations, in which
the bag could be evacuated without straining the ration resources of the
By this time H.Q., 13 Corps had found the transport available inadequate
to do any more than fetch balancing items and urgently needed natures of
ammunition, etc., along the road L. of C. They were thus almost completely
dependent on sea supply. The maintenance by sea of a force was a novelty for
H.Q., B.T.E., and until a routine was established difficult in the quickly
changing circumstances-H.Q., 13 Corps were constantly looking over their
As an instance, the force was rationed at the start of the battle
against Bardia with five days' supplies, i.e., sufficient to last until 8th January.
No notification was received for some time of any despatch by sea which
could arrive at Sollum by 6th January—the latest day to allow for off-loading
and distribution. As it happened the supplies did not arrive until 7th January,
and the delay caused considerable difficulties.
Resistance in Bardia finally ceased on 5th January. Its subjugation had
considerable expenditure of ammunition, and steps were im-
mediately put in hand to replace it by despatching transport to Sidi Haneish
to replenish the ammunition depot at Sollum.
The final Bardia "bag" was
45,000 prisoners, 462 guns and 129 tanks of all types, and every opportunity
was taken to evacuate the P.W. by sea and land.
established at Sollum to which the prisoners were called forward from the
main cage at Capuzzo.
Mindful of the previous misappropriation of captured stores which had
been such a handicap in operations up to the frontier, H.Q., 13 Corps had
issued comprehensive instructions before the battle of Bardia and had charged
6 Australian Division with the task of reporting and safeguarding the various
categories of equipment and stores.
Unfortunately, as before, many units
thought the orders regarding captured vehicles applied to everyone but them-
selves, and again many valuable and much needed vehicles were misappro-
priated. The organized collection of a number of captured vehicles scattered
over a wide area was achieved but was prejudiced by the lack of drivers. An
Italian supply depot was, however, found and taken over by R.A.S.C. per-
sonnel to make issues to P.W.
7 Armoured Division, its task of covering Bardia ended, now moved off
to the El Adem area south of Tobruk. It continued to be based on 9 F.S.D.
(Capuzzo) until a new F.S.D. (No. 10) could be established south of the Trigh
Capuzzo. 11 F.S.D., for the maintenance of 6 Australian Division, was to be
established just north of Gambut.
On 9th January, H.Q., B.T.E. took over Sollum and Bardia as an L. of C.
The area included the Bardia defences and Fort Capuzzo.
