The existing shortages of many of the main types led to a temporary
scale being substituted for the W.E.
of ammunition held by units engaged
on home defence.
Second line was also held on this temporary scale by the
ammunition companies, while stocks to meet between three and four days
estimated expenditure were held by the command and corps A.Ds.
Commands controlled all issues from A.S.Ds. to command A.Ds. and
corps A.Ds. In the event of active operations, however, corps A.Ds. would
be replenished on demand from A.S.Ds. or command A.Ds. which would,
in turn, be replenished from War Office depots on information notified daily.
In early 1941 as a result of a lesson learnt during exercise " Victor" it was
found that should invasion occur the handover of ammunition control from
the War Office to G.H.Q. Home Forces could not be effected as expeditiously
as was desirable.
This was subsequently remedied by the War Office handing
over all ammunition in the country (less reserves) to G.H.Q. who thereafter
controlled the whole ammunition situation through the War Office.
The
actual release and initiation of movement was effected by the Directorate
of Warlike Stores acting upon the instructions of G.H.Q.
WORKSHOP
SERVICES
The R.A.O.C. repair and maintenance services for the home forces were
considerably affected by the shortage of skilled personnel and technical
equipment.
In addition, it was often claimed that the existing repair organiza-
tion was unsuitable for a modern field army from the
dual aspects of
economy and efficiency.
A proposal was in fact made in May, 1940, for a re-organization of work-
shop facilities which envisaged the placing of all the repair services of the
Royal Engineers, Royal Army Service Corps and the Royal Army Ordnance
Corps under one control. This was turned down on the grounds that they were
yet, for all intents and purposes, untested by prolonged active operations; it
would therefore be dangerous to make radical alterations until the essential
components of an undeniably better organization were available.
This con-
sideration led in turn to the theory that more scope would be found in im-
proving the existing organizations than in attempting any fundametal changes.
The R.A.O.C. workshops lay-out was therefore kept under review during the
remainder of 1940, and by May, 1941, a complete re-organization had been
undertaken.
to units for
First echelon repair was in the hands of light aid detachments, attached
administrative purposes, but under the technical control of
ordnance officers at brigade or divisional headquarters who acted as advisers
to their commanders.
The L.A.Ds. were equipped to carry out light repairs
and replacements in the field and to effect light recovery of equipment where
this was beyond the scope of the unit to which they were attached.
Second echelon repair was confined almost entirely to assembly replace-
ment, which was undertaken by divisional workshops.
These consisted of
three self-contained workshop groups designed to deal with the equipment
operated by the formation to which they were attached and each possessing
a recovery element. In addition, second echelon workshops carried out such
other repairs as they could deal with without interfering with their ability
to keep pace with their formations.
No attempt was made in second echelon
250
WO277
1 P
to repair assemblies; these were evacuated to the semi-mobile workshops
constituting the third echelon.
Third echelon semi-mobile workshops were
designed to undertake the repair of assemblies by an exchange of component
parts, but they also undertook the overflow of
heavy repairs from second
echelon, including any repairs which the more forward workshops might be
unable to cope with.
No recovery facilities existed at this stage, casualty
vehicles and equipment being lifted back to third echelon by the recovery
elements in divisional workshops.
Static base workshops, well equipped with machinery, tools and accessories,
and capable of undertaking the complete overhaul of vehicles, assemblies and
equipments, formed the fourth echelon.
Manufacture of parts was also
undertaken to a large extent in these base workshops, as was done later in
theatres overseas, notably Italy and Middle East, where replacements were
often difficult to obtain and local resources inadequate. Under fourth echelon
were also included the command, central repair and Ministry of Supply
auxiliary workshops in the United Kingdom.
This reorganization of ordnance workshops services covered the whole
of the Army at home and overseas, but the Commander-in-Chief, Home
Forces was able to recommend certain economies in the light of conditions
existing in the United Kingdom, particularly as existing and proposed static
installations in England could be utilized so as to make it unnecessary to
provide for Home Forces all the units required for an overseas expeditionary
force of comparable size.
It was decided that the requirements of the fourth echelon or base work-
shops were met by the various central and command installations already
proposed and that second or third line workshops were not
necessary in all cases.
The main modifications made by Home Forces to
the new system were :-
Field Force Divisions
(a) Light aid detachments to full scale.
(b) Second line divisional workshops were required, but storeholding
field parks were not necessary until the mobilization of divisions for
Supplies of assemblies and spare parts could, of course, be
provided from static stores.
(c) No provision of third line field units before mobilization, third line
services being met by static workshops.
County and Static Divisions
(a) Light aid detachments on the scale of one to a brigade only, and one
for each field regiment, R.A.
(b) Second line static workshops which were geographically located so
could also serve corps and
area.
troops located in the
The difficulties under which Ordnance were labouring in introducing the
new system cannot properly be anaece war unless it is realized that the
reorganization went hand in be appreciates ances for adequate spares, the
removal of impressed and requisitioned vehicles and the adoption within
formations of standard types quisiticles and new equipment.
