All dumps were manned by R.I.A.S.C. personnel and were under the
Burmarmy, who was forced to improvise in an
unprecedented manner.
The problem of maintenance forward of dumps
was never really solved. While the Chinese formations were static and close
difficulties could be overcome.
transport and sometimes supply units had to be provided if the distribution
was to be carried out at all.
This was proved at an early stage, when the
Chinese first joined in operations in the Toungoo area and both a transport
unit and a supply unit had to be found to assist in the distribution of
With the best will in the world Burmarmy could not provide transport
and supply units on the scale necessary out of their meagre resources and
the Chinese
were asked to provide 30 vehicles for each division and to
organize some sort of a supply service for detailed issues.
There is no
record of the reply to this request, but even if operations had not made further
representations unnecessary it is doubtful if the Chinese could have given
anything except token assistance.
of rations to the C.E.F. fell under two heads:
firstly a
" guaranteed" scale of rice (27 lb.), salt (* oz.) and tea ($ oz.), and secondly
"if available" scale of peas or beans, fresh meat and vegetables.
Chinese inevitably regarded
The
this latter scale as a right, and although they
were nearly always provided with it, their attitude when it was not forth-
coming
demonstrated their complete ignorance of the difficulties of
distribution.
On 24th March, all Imperial units had been withdrawn from Toungoo
en route to the Irrawaddy front, and the C.E.F.
Toungoo northwards to Pyinmana and the Southern Shan States. Unfortunately
on that date the Japanese made a surprise attack north of Toungoo and
cut off the Chinese forces in the town.
After about a week's
the besieged troops were able to fight their way out, but the fighting left
the enemy in possession of Toungoo, and some of the best rice-growing areas
in the country which, owing to the recent harvest, contained large stocks.
The Japanese now began to make heavy bombing raids on centres of
communications in central and upper Burma such as Prome,
Mandalay, Thazi and Pyinmana.
Except for damage to house property, the
material result of these raids was not very great, but the effect among the
civil population was enormous.
Results similar to those experienced earlier
in Rangoon and Singapore ensued.
After a heavy raid on a town, the life
of the community came practically to a standstill because the population
the jungle, while from the administrative aspect the effect on
the working of the public utility services was most serious.
and I.W.T. employees left their jobs, the power supply broke down,
police forces and the A.R.P. services disintegrated.
effect of bombing was accentuated by the presence of the workers' families,
many of whom had not at this time been evacuated.
of a considerable interruption to military eratic an effort was made 10
evacuate a large numhar of the families of military nersonnel hy rail i
was found that the workers did better esd othmilitary desertion decreased.
WORT
1
The morale of the railway personnel was hardly improved by the Chinese
who seized trains at the point of the revolver, forced the drivers to ignore
signals and, on occasion, to crash into other trains on the same line.
On 25th March the regrouping and re-forming of 17 Indian Division
and the move of 1 Burma Division were complete, and the newly formed
Corps H.Q. issued orders for the concentration of the corps in the area
The loss of Rangoon had necessitated a complete change in the main-
The Mandalay area became, in effect, the base area, while
an advanced base was situated in Prome, with F.S.Ds. at Toungoo (lost
almost immediately) and Meiktila.
The axis of supply was now north-south,
and presented an easier problem in some respects, although the complete
lack of lateral communications entailed difficulties.
A period of intensive
activity ensued at the river-head at Prome.
Wounded, sick, and military
stores of all descriptions were trans-shipped to river steamers and removed
Very large quantities of supplies evacuated by rail from Rangoon had
been collected at Prome, together with thousands of tons of rice.
siderable tonnages had also been ferried on to Mandalay by river steamer.
Local resources were being exploited to the full, and a military purchasing
agency, based on a commercial undertaking, was functioning.
was being carried out successfully at the oilfields conveniently situated to
the north, and in general there is every evidence that the Prome base would
have been able to maintain Burmarmy for many months-had it been held.
At this stage it was General Alexander's intention to hold out in defended
localities at Prome, from which there was to be no withdrawal. In accordance
with this policy, large quantities of supplies and stores were retained in
Prome, which might perhaps have been evacuated further north.
hard supplies, ammunition, R.E. stores, etc., were actually sent forward to
Prome to stock dumps and were in consequence lost, for on 26th March
the Japanese launched a new attack and bombed Prome so heavily that three-
quarters of the town was burnt. During the following few days fierce fighting
took place, and on 2nd April the town was evacuated and Rurcorne with
drew during the next 48 hours to a line Minhla-Taungdwingyi.
The loss of Prome was a serious blow to the administrative staff, for,
apart from the very considerable stocks lost there, it was now necessary
to re-cast the administrative system entirely.
We also lost our foothold in
the
rice-producing areas of lost entire ith co also ental repercussions
on our local purchasing.
In retrospect it may appear curious that Prome
should have been selected as an advanced base, but the fact is that it was
physically impossible to move stocks further back in the time available.
The shortage of transport dictated that advanced depots should be near the
fighting formations and the defensive plans referred to above prevented stores
being reduced while there was still time.
operations started.
as a result of the continual back-loadings which had been going on since
It is no exaggeration to state that had the transport
327
