would have entailed an additional 40 miles over which to supply
Mechanically, 2 Armoured Division, consisting only of an
armoured brigade, an armoured car regiment and part of the support group,
bad condition, with only half its tanks in running order.
fact the divisional H.Q. had only arrived in the forward areas in the latter
half of March and the whole division needed time to find its feet. 9 Austra-
lian Division had two brigades forward,
but again, for transport reasons,
found it necessary to keep the third in Tobruk.
The intention in face of any enemy attack was to give up ground in
front of Benghazi if necessary, and even
Benghazi itself, but to hold the
high ground above the port-the " Jebel" country-
-for as long as possible.
As far as possible it was hoped to conserve the armour, since no armoured
reinforcements were available.
On 31st March the enemy began his counter-offensive and forced upon
2 Armoured Division a slow withdrawal.
It was intended that the division
should take up a position from which it could flank an enemy advance by
Benghazi and yet be
able also to block any attempt
to turn our positions in Cyrenaica, by taking the desert route to Mekili.
On 2nd April in view of the enemy advance, H.Q. Benghazi Sub-Area
was ordered to put the demolition programme in the town into operation
By some inexplicable misunderstanding this order was
construed as also applying to 18 F.S.D. at Matruh where stocks were
accordingly destroyed, with resultant embarrassment to 2 Armoured Division.
therefore, to be assembled rapidly and
despatched to the division on the next afternoon and 2 Armoured Division
was instructed to retain the transport and to base itself thereafter on Benghazi,
if possible, or on 19 F.S.D. (Msus).
In Benghazi, water and electrical power plants were destroyed, together
with harbour installations and the remaining stocks of Italian stores.
non-essential troops and units also began.
Armoured Division had asked that supplies and P.O.L. should be placed
at Regina near Benghazi as it was anticipated Msus would shortly be denied
did, in fact, capture
19 F.S.D. on 3rd April and 2
Armoured Division was ordered to withdraw with all speed to Mekili via
-Barce-Marawa and then by track. Petrol and supplies
were placed at El Abiar.
Demolition at Barce followed.
had to be abandoned and although the possible privations to the civilian
population were well realized, it was necessary to blow up the
power plant, wells and the railway engines and stock.
On 4th April the inadequacy of a static command, with slender com-
munications to administer a mobile force became more than ever evident.
It was extremely difficult to co-ordinate the moves of the armoured division
with that of 9 Australian Division,
which anyway lacked the
administrative services.
The General Staff plan for the latter involved a
the Barce escarpment and demanded the carriage of the
So stripped was the division that it was unable to make
contribution to the transport required and force
essential maintenance
WO27
1 p
Eventually the 150 lorries required were found by ordering forward as many
vehicles from maintenance tasks as could be spared, by using captured
vehicles and by intercepting loaded lorries on their way forward. 9 Australian
Division were thus successfully withdrawn according to plan.
2 Armoured Division was not so fortunate.
From 4th April, owing to
difficulties over petrol supply and the constant breakdown of communica-
tions, divisional H.Q. was never properly in touch with the whole of the
force under command.
The P.O.L. convoy despatched by Force H.Q. on
4th April was set on fire by enemy action and only one lorry escaped.
The enemy air force repeatedly attacked the division, particularly its wireless,
petrol vehicles, and materially added to already considerable
handicaps. It became clear on 5th April that the enemy was gradually out-
flanking 2 Armoured Division, and 9 Australian Division was accordingly
moved straight back to the Tmimi-Gazala area, retaining the improvised
Mekili on 6th April.
Eventually H.Q., 2 Armoured Division reached
Owing to shortage of petrol, the armoured brigade
appears to have decided to go to Derna rather than follow H.Q., but although
it was cut off and captured, the majority of the armoured cars and of the
support group got away to Tobruk.
At Mekili H.Q., 2 Armoured Division and an Indian motor brigade, which
had moved forward from Tobruk to protect the place, waited in vain for
the armoured brigade and it was not until evening on 7th April that orders
were issued for a withdrawal to El Adem, south of Tobruk.
The enemy
had by now, however, arrived in strength and the attempt to break out,
made at dawn on 8th April was doomed, though some parties of troops
managed to break through the enemy, and, after a long circuitous trip,
The remainder of the force
including practically the whole of the divisional H.Q. was captured.
By 8th April, H.Q. Cyrenaica Command was established at Tobruk
and was reorganizing the maintenance system for the troops converging on
the town
Then, after handing over administrative responsibilities for all
the headquarters embarked
on 9th April for Matruh, from which a move was made to Bagush where
On 17th April, H.Q. Cyrenaica Command
H.Q. Tobruk Fortress,
which now can Hit being Dese of orce us operations, became 0e
Western Desert Force for operations, became the
The Germans
were in occupation of the whole of Cyrenaica (less Tobruk) and had forced
Tobruk with its huge reserves, port, and water
supply, was really inevitable, now that virtually all the available armoured
forces in the Desert had been lost.
A brigade of 7 Australian Division had
been sent from the Delta
by sea to reinforce the garrison, and arrived
onl
7th April.
Fortunately
a number of tanks were undergoing repair
in Tobruk and these were supplemented by others sent from Egypt, so that
the fortress was not without an armoured component.
195
H 2
12090
