Staff, then the provision of some skilled transportation personnel with a
reasonable proportion of dock labour should have been insisted on.
was provided, and congestion and confusion were the order of the day.
Loading of ships in priority of unloading was apparently not considered
until the most urgent representations had been
the force com-
manders to the War Office.
"at the top"
supplies, ammunition or guns, had therefore to come out first regardless of
what was most urgently required, with the result, for example, that an
artillery unit would be in possession of guns without ammunition, or vice
versa, for a number of days.
Stowage plans of the ships were frequently
not available and, if they were, were usually inadequate, so that it was
difficult to determine what had been loaded at all.
These few examples of the complete disregard of the basic principles of
administration which characterized the planning for the lamentable campaign
in Norway have purposely been recorded before the more detailed record
of the operations, in the hope that, with these points in mind, the reader
will be able to view the story in a proper light and perhaps will understand
a little of the frustration and disappointment which was felt by those on
whose shoulders fell the terrible responsibility of directing the operations.
Departure of the Expedition
"Avonmouth" sailed for Narvik on 12th April, and later on the same
day " Stratford sailed with the troops earmarked for the landings in central
Norway.
Their general position cannot be better stated than in the following
extract from Mr. Churchill's war memoirs (" The Gathering
Storm", p.
480):
"... they lacked aircraft, anti-aircraft guns, anti-tank guns, tanks,
transport and training.
The whole of northern Norway was covered
with snow to depths of which none of the soldiers had seen or imagined.
There were neither snow shoes nor skis-still less skiers. We must do our
best.
Thus began this ramshackle campaign."
THE SCANDINAVIAN OPERATIONS
SECTION 2-NARVIK
The Allied forces in Norway operated under various titles which will
give rise to confusion unless clearly understood.
The expedition to Narvik sailed under its original name of " Avonmouth"
which it retained until 19th April when, torn a name ce instructions, it
was re-designated " Rupertforce" (or
General Auchinleck
"Rupert").
On 13th May,
Lieut.-
assumed command of all Allied troops fighting
in
Norway and the title of N.W.E.F. was given to his command.
(It will,
however, be noted from the next section of this chapter that this was the
second time in the Norwegian operations that the title of N.W.E.F. was
used as the forces operating in central Norway under General Massey during
April, 1940, until the first week of May was also given the same title.)
66
1
Norway extends from 58° North to 71°: The country is over 1,000 miles
long and varies from 50 to 200 miles in width, with mountains ranging from
roads or small steam craft plying in the fjords.
Communications in the north were mainly bad
The only railway in the
north of Norway ran from Narvik to Lulea in Sweden through the iron ore
area at Gallivare (see Map 8).
Narvik is within the Arctic Circle, at a latitude of 68°, and has an average
temperature 14° less than the United Kingdom.
The rainfall is about the
same as in England but snow falls throughout the year except during the
Owing to its position in the Arctic Circle, Narvik
experiences almost continuous daylight at the time of year during which the
operation took place.
October to April.
Summer is from May to September and winter from
The short periods in between might pass for autumn
and spring respectively.
After a most disconcerting period of orders and counter-orders (and the
proverbial disorder) the " Avonmouth" convoy finally sailed for Narvik on
The fact that the convoy sailed at all on that date is not
without credit to the "Q" staff of the force, who were faced with last
minute alterations to the general scheme which might well have proved
The role of the force itself was actually changed twice within
three days, quite apart from countless minor upheavals which took place
Secrecy, much of it misdirected, added to the general
It seemed that the lesson learnt by the B.E.F. on arriving in
-that security if carried to excess, assists the enemy more than one-
self-had not yet been digested.
Advanced headquarters of the force was actually transferred from one
ship to another at Scapa Flow only ten hours before sailing.
This entailed
a very
considerable time.
net toe time to as any one a geray
The convoy finally consisted of H.M.S. " Southampton" with three liners
and two Polish ships, but still further alterations were notified during the
voyage and, as a result, two of the ships were diverted to Namsos.
The force finally consisted of: —
Force headquarters (mostly formed from H.Q. 49 Division).
H.Q. 24 Guards Brigade.
1st Bn. Scots Guards.
1st Bn. Irish Guards.
2nd Bn. South Wales Borderers.
Some divisional troops ex 49 Division.
H.Q. of a base sub-area together with certain base and L. of C. troops.
The force sailed with no clear-cut plan for administration after effecting
a landing.
Indeed, taking into consideration the state of confuson existing
at the beginning of, and during the journey, it would have been a remarkable
achievement of intelligent anticipation if any plan could even have been
considered.
C* 2
