Two instances
come easily to mind were the mobilization of all
available manpower to assist in the construction of defence works and the
large scale immobilization of petroleum resources, which will be referred
Long Term Plans
By August, 1940, the operational position had considerably clarified.
B.E.F. had been re-formed and re-equipped as well as could be expected.
The L.D.Vs. (now known as the Home Guard) had been properly organized
and placed under a War Office directorate for organization and administra-
The whole of the peace-time Territorial Army facilities all over the
country were placed at the disposal of the Home Guard, which was now
over five times as strong as the peace-time Territorial Army and affiliated
to county regiments; thus was its fitness to share fully in the defence of the
Invasion had not occurred in June, neither had it occurred in July.
the most pressing need of the Army, had been granted.
as if Hitler, having lost his opportunity to strike when we were most vul-
nerable, could never regain it.
Invasion would now have to be something
more than a series of airborne and sea-borne landings by troops who were
to brush aside the resistance of the depleted, half-equipped and dispirited
British Army and who, goose-stepping
over the prostrate British people,
would march in triumph to Buckingham Palace to heil their leader.
granted us this respite, the invasion would now have to be a carefully planned
large-scale operation.
Shipping to carry the large army required would
Large-scale troop
movements would fill the French and Belgian roads.
These obvious signs
of preparation would not pass unobserved by the R.A.F.
The R.A.F. itself would therefore have to be neutralized first and the
civilian population
subjected to mass bombing onslaughts which
would
destroy communications and generally weaken the will to provide effective
resistance.
It was evident that we had been given a breathing space and that
should invasion occur we would be given some degree of warning.
prospect ahead was grim, but forewarned is forearmed.
The
a position to look ahead and to consider a longer term policy for home
defence, which could be largely based upon the plans of the Chiefs of Staff
for the future conduct of the war and in general anticipation of the British
Army once more taking the offensive.
can therefore be summarized under two headings: -
Static Defence
By specially formed static formations consisting of county divisions,
independent brigades and home defence battalions which would be
deployed in a static role to defend beaches, aerodromes and vulnerable
Mobile Counter-Offensive
By mobile columns trained and equipped to take vigorous and rapid
counter-offensive action against any enemy who might have succeeded
240
WO277
7₴
1 p
in gaining a foothold in the country.
This was to be undertaken by the
armoured and infantry divisions of the field army which could at the
same time continue training for their future offensive role.
Denial of Resources to the Enemy
Throughout the " invasion period" one of the major considerations was
to ensure that there would be no repetition of the events in France when
the advance of the enemy was greatly facilitated by their being able to over-
run large stocks of such valuable items as food, petrol, etc.
Although their
would afford an obvious advantage to invading armies, it was a
matter of the greatest importance to maintain stocks of food and petrol at
the highest possible level because the attacks by U-Boats on our overseas
supplies were beginning to take effect.
Large quantities of food were removed from vulnerable areas by the
Ministry of Food, as was the more specially valuable and surplus livestock.
It was, however, decided that a complete disruption of the food distribution
organization and the farming industry would be likely to result in greater
damage to ourselves than to the enemy. The civilian population in any area
of operations would need food and it was therefore accepted that complete
destruction in such areas was not feasible even though the enemy could-
and probably would-make use of it.
For this reason the policy in respect
of holdings of foodstuffs was one of withdrawal of food stocks from threatened
areas and the dispersal of the remainder.
Petroleum products were, however, in a different category.
of petrol available for capture would increase the enemy's range of opera-
tions and would reduce his shipping commitments.
be completely denied to him even at the cost of denying it to ourselves as
In conjunction with the Petroleum Department, a map was issued showing
a coastal strip shaded in pink, varying in depth according to position, on
the east and south coasts, and parts of Scotland, north Devon and north
Cornwall. This area was known as the "Pink" area in which stocks of
petrol were drastically reduced even in
wayside pumps.
Installations and
pumps, etc., remaining in the "Pink" area were to be prepared so that
they could be immobilized at short notice.
Considerable thought was given to the possibility of contaminating the
stocks of petrol remaining and various methods were tried out, but it was
agreed that no really satisfactory contaminant could be found and reliance
was placed upon keeping the quantity held in the "Pink" area at a minimum
and satisfactorily preparing the installations
themselves for immobilization.
When the danger of invasion was at its greatest all pumps in the "Pink"
area were immobilized nightly by the removal of vital parts.
On the other hand instructions
issued that inland depots and
certain ocean installations which contained the stocks that we had been ai
such pains to build up should not be destroyed except in the last resort,
Total destruction of these maior denote could thorafar colo he authorized
241
