least some of the more valuable equipment.
Evacuation would have to
take place during the current period of moonless nights and was planned
to begin on 28th April, but on 21st April the principal Greek corps com-
mander capitulated and the date had hurriedly to be put forward to 25th
April. By this time, the planning staff had arrived to carry out the evacua-
but a serious and unfortunate weakness in their organization was
revealed when it was found that it contained no administrative staff and the
unfortunate junior
staff officer
who
had to be hurriedly imported was
naturally unable to take over all the administrative arrangements from the
existing stafis.
However, in spite of some initial chaos, beach staffs were put in position
and beach assembly areas were stocked up with food and some petrol for
lighters.
The two Australian and one of the N.Z. brigade groups were
withdrawn in turn to the beaches at Raftis,
Rafia and Megara according
to plan.
They were most efficiently evacuated by the Royal Navy, except
for some left at Megara owing to the loss of one ship.
There was then
left in Greece one N.Z. brigade group, which formed a rearguard just north
of Athens, and covered the withdrawal, across the Corinth Canal in to the
Peloponnese, of the third N.Z. brigade group, and all the base and L. of C.
troops, which were largely British.
The fullest possible use was made of
the narrow gauge railway at all stages of the evacuation in addition to the
few lorries which remained in the base area.
The G.O.C. and the last of
the staff of force H.Q.
moved back from Athens to the Peloponnese very
early on the morning of 28th April.
Some three hours later German paratroops were dropped near Corinth
to secure the bridge over the Canal, with the object of cutting off the
bulk of the British troops which, they must have assumed, were marching.
The N.Z. rearguards were thereupon directed to the beaches at Raftis instead
of withdrawing to the Peloponnese, and the warships, diverted at the same
time, retrieved them without a hitch.
A considerable number of ancillary troops together with the G.O.C, and
his staff were evacuated from Nauplion but, unfortunately, the only merchant-
man of this convoy was crippled by enemy bombers and eventually sank
together with three of the rescuing destroyers.
General Freyberg of the N.Z. Forces was thus, on the departure of the
G.O.C., left in command for the last phase with one brigade group in the
Argos area and a large number of miscellaneous personnel collected at
Kalamai.
He decided to embark the fighting troops at Momenvasia and,.
in spite of this not being one of the planned beaches, the
Royal Navy
succeeded in taking them off.
At Kalamai, one more disaster befell the unfortunate remnants belonging
chiefly to the British administrative services.
The enemy pursued them holly
but was
down the road and captured the small port itself for a time,
eventually
driven out by counter-attacks.
The naval commander
of the
rescuing warshins, however. deemed it foolhardy to expose his flotilla to
the risk of total lose of shins and crews by enemy aircraft, submarines and
minee in a dacharate fort to evacuato the remaining troons so they had
to be abandoned. In spite of such setbacks the military organization and
164
WO2TT
18
the efficiency and gallantry of the Royal Navy resulted in the exacuation
from Greece of some 48,000 of the Army and R.A.F. out of a total strength
of 60,000.
The End of the Campaign
The Greek Campaign ended simply and solely because the small Allied
force was well and truly beaten in an unequal battle with superior German
forces,
more than that required of it.
but throughout, the British administrative staff did all, and even
in its organization of command and staffs.
Undoubtedly the force was handicapped
not only affect administration.
This criticism naturally does
There was no commander-in-chief on the
spot to co-ordinate the three British Services, and throughout the campaign
the Greek C.-in-C. remained in Athens, in touch with the British G.O.C.
only by the most indifferent communications.
solution would have been to use
It might appear that a better
the Australian Corps to command all
Imperial and Greek troops on the Aliakhmon position whilst force H.Q.
remained at Athens with the staffs of the other British fighting Services.
Greeks, might have meant its retention in use for a little longer.
Control of the port of Piraeus by the Royal Navy, instead of by the
was, as will have been noted, no organization for fire-fighting, mine-spotting
and minesweeping ;
all of these require co-ordination by
responsible for the organization of air defence.
The lesson was fast being hammered home that both the existing field
service ration and especially the "flimsy" petrol container
were
most
unsuitable for mobile operations.
The maintenance of the force was not
the fact that the Imperial troops were organized
and equipped differently to the British.
While the New Zealand troops
caused no real difficulty, the relatively small number of common-user items
in use by British and Australian troops entailed considerable complications
in scaling, stores holdings, etc.
None the less, though circumstances contrived to bring about a swift
end to the venture, failure was in no way deserved by the Commonwealth
troops who, individually and collectively, carried out their task
in a most
gallant and exemplary manner.
THE MIDDLE EAST, 1939-1942
SECTION 6.—THE MIDDLE EAST BASE, 1940-1941
While the battles in the Western Desert, in East Africa, in Greece and
elsewhere were being fought, the main preoccupation of the "Q" staff at
G.H.Q., Middle East, ate ensuring the maintenance of the fighting troops,
was the formation of a main
base adequate fully to maintain the vastly
increased force operating, or likely to operate, from the command.
be remembered that a passing reference is made in Section 1 to two bases,
Abbassia and Alexandria, being located in the Middle East on the outbreak
These, however, were of a very modest nature and for obvious
reasons it was very soon decided that the construction of a major base was
165
