Southern Area: Fixed Defences, two Malayan infantry brigades and
volunteer and fortress troops.
Western Area: The Australian forces supported by an Indian infantry
Command Reserve : One Indian infantry brigade.
In accordance with instructions received from the Supreme Commander
South-West Pacific, certain units and individuals were despatched to the
Netherlands East Indies, amongst them being an Australian motor transport
.E.I. or returned there without being discharged from the ships.
Similarly the administrative staff of 3 Indian Corps H.Q. was reduced, and
the personnel thus rendered surplus were ordered to N.E.I.
the peculiar circumstances prevailing,
and indeed did, deal direct with divisions on
regarding supply and transport, ordnance and medical services.
field units had been ordered to hold seven days' reserve rations in addition
to emergency rations, and other drawings were made direct under divisional
arrangements from installations under command control.
link of corps H.Q. was thus made superfluous.
Careful plans were made for the implementation of the " scorched earth"
policy in Singapore, and, as far as the administrative
concerned, the policy was that the authority responsible for the depot, etc.,
concerned would be also responsible for the preparation and execution of
With regard to the orders to put the schemes into effect,
the G.O.C. reserved to himself this responsibility, if time permitted, but
to provide against contingencies, he laid down
that there should always
be on the spot, day and night, sufficient personnel with a reliable commander
who could, in the last resort, act on his own initiative to ensure that the
policy of H.M. Government was carried out.
As previously explained, the general policy regarding reserve stocks had,
throughout the campaign, been one of dispersion.
This was
done partly
to minimize the loss from air attack, and partly owing to lack of accom-
modation in the Singapore town area, a situation which became more and
more aggravated as refugees poured in from the north.
Some of the biggest
dumps outside the town area were adjacent to the Bukit Timah and Thomson
Roads (see Map 26),
where they were easy of access, and this fact will
be seen to have had a very large influence on the subsequent operations.
The civil stocks, on the other hand, were mostly in the town area, although
a large stock of rice was stored in the north-west of the island between
the River Kranji and the causeway. It is difficult to state with any accuracy
what food reserves were available on the island at the start of the battle,
but there was probably not less than three months' supply of the main
commodities for both troops and civilians, European and Asiatic.
Of the
six months' reserves originally laid down, about two months' had been
the mainland,
consumed, while the remaining month's supply had probably been lost on
The main supply depot was located at Bukit Timah, just east of the
main road, while at the Bukit Timah
rations backloaded from the mainland.
Racecourse was a large dump
Other dumps had been
established
296
WO27
1
at Bukit Panjang,
on the Jurong road, at Changi, Alexandra, and in the
A limited supply of fresh meat was held in cold storage at Alexandra
and Bukit Timah, and there was a large supply of atta for the Indian troops,
at Bidadari on the Serangoon road.
With a view to further dispersing the large reserves of rice and other
foodstuffs stored in the town area for the Asiatics, the population had been
allowed to purchase, and remove to their own houses, limited quantities of
The effect of this on the labour situation has already been noted ;
the labourers were thereby given the opportunity to evacuate themselves
and their families from the more dangerous areas with sufficient subsistence
for short periods.
It has also been mentioned previously that while there was no real danger
of a water shortage on the mainland, Singapore Island was entirely dependent
upon reservoirs and rain catchment areas for its supply, which could only
be assured provided that their control remained in our hands.
the greater contributory factor in the early surrender of Singapore was the
shortage of water, it is necessary that the lay-out of the reservoirs is fully
appreciated (see Map 26).
Singapore Island was dependent upon two main sources of supply;
(a) reservoirs at Gunong Pulai in Johore (ten miles west of Johore Bahru)
and (b) rainwater catchment areas and open-air reservoirs in the island,
i.e., the Seletar, Peirce and Macritchie Reservoirs.
From the former, water
was brought by above-ground pipe-line to the town, where it filled two
high-level covered reservoirs at Pearls Hill and Fort Canning.
from Johore pipe-line supplied the naval base and the Army and R.A.F.
barracks in the vicinity.
The Peirce Reservoir, by gravity, fed the Macritchie
Reservoir whence water was pumped into the distribution mains serving the
Singapore and Changi areas against the Johore water coming via the Pearls
Hill and Fort Canning reservoirs.
The capacity of the open-air reservoirs was ample to give a restricted
supply indefinitely, even if the population was increased by refugees, provided,
as previously emphasized, the control of these reservoirs remained in our
hands and the machinery for
Even during the advance of the enemy into Johore, the water situation
had not given serious cause for anxiety.
wells had been dug around Singapore Town, but this wark had been stopped
by the civil health authorities.
Measures for strict economy had, however,
necessity for such economy
constantly kept before the public by press publicity, posters and police action.
The wisdom of this campaign was soon evident when on 27th January the
island was dependent on water strom the three open-air reservoirs.
Japanese captured the main reservoirs
at Gunong Pulai, after which the
The water level in these reservoirs was rather lower than usual, owing
to an exceptionally dry season nervis sa, here was, with care, an adequate
supply even for the greatly increased population of Singapore, and the two
pumping stations, the one in read eich and the other near
were kept working at full pressure.
Such breaks in the mains as
