made to extend the existing pipe-line from " Charing Cross" to Hag Husain
time permitted, to the top of the escarpment at Bir Hukuma.
days' supply of water was also to be placed at the F.S.Ds. in containers, tanks
and " sporta-pools ".
When the preliminary arrangements were well in train news came of the
decision to postpone the operation for three weeks in order that reinforce-
ments including artillery,
A.A., R.A.F., and new equipment could arrive
This postponement greatly facilitated the administra-
tive preparations, for which previously there had been very little time.
dumping programme could now be spread over a longer period, and, as a
result, the daily convoys to the depots were reduced in size with consequently
less likelihood of our preparations being observed from the air.
of ammunition was also deferred until the last possible moment to reduce
the danger from air attack.
These preparations went according to plan
except that difficulty was experienced in extending the pipe-line to Bir Hukuma
owing to the type of pipe which was supplied (the only type available). The
pipes were made of asbestos and in order to withstand pressure had to be
was rocky for several miles short of
Bir Hukuma and, in spite of every effort, it was not possible to complete the
pipe-line before 9th December, the date fixed for the operation.
was realized arrangements were made for water to be carried by road from
Charing Cross and Hag Husein and stored in the Bir at Hukuma.
was successfully accomplished, and by 7th December 200,000 gallons of water
were available at Bir Hukuma.
Transport for the water was provided by
H.Q., Western Desert Force and, since at that time very few special water
tankers were available, ordinary lorries were either loaded with the standard
2-gallon container or fitted with normal rectuangular static tanks.
were not particularly suitable because they had no baffle plates to prevent
surge and were unequipped with pumps and filtration apparatus.
The estimated numbers of prisoners of war for which arrangements
were made were 1,000 on each axis and the two divisions were each instructed
to erect a cage for 1,000 prisoners in the vicinity of their F.S.Ds.
approximately 45,000 prisoners were taken and evacuated during the first
phase of the operations alone, but this could hardly have been foreseen.
necessity of feeding, watering, guarding and evacuating these large numbers
was later to cause considerable administrative difficulties.
Initially the F.S.Ds. were a divisional responsibility but, before the battle,
they were to be taken over by H.Q., Western Desert Force.
the depots were taken over too late by H.Q.., Western Desert Force, and issuing
personnel were not sufficiently familiar with the lay-out and could not find
their way about amongst the stocks, particularly when sand-storms were
Undoubtedly such dumps should be formed under the direction of the
staffs which will be subsequently responsible for issuing from them. In this
instance, of course, the cause was simply shortage of manpower. In the same
way, divisional second line transport was very hard worked at a time when it
badly needed all the rest possible and ample time for maintenance, and again
the reason was the same, in that H.Q., Western Desert Force was unable to
find the necessary third line transport.
Under later conditions such a task
1 Ф
would have been carried out by corps establishing a field maintenance area
for the
to rest as far as possible.
battle from its own resources, leaving the divisional second line
Heads of services and junior staff officers within
the divisions could not, of course, at the outset, be informed of the true
reason for forming these dumps and this imposed a great strain on the smooth
working of the administrative machine.
While the two divisions had at least full administrative resources, the
force formed from Matruh Fortress was not so fortunate.
its administrative services lacked mobility, and the effort of motorising the
entire force absorbed nearly all the vehicle resources, leaving the troops
remaining in Matruh with only just sufficient transport to guarantee daily
An ad hoc second-line element had to be
formed, and eventually consisted of civilian-type lorries (which had been
locally purchased in Alexandria for engineer work) and what remained of
the ammunition lorries of the field regiments.
With these pitifully small
resources, an advanced dump was formed slightly west of 4 Indian Division's
advanced dump (3 F.S.D.).
No supply personnel were available to man it
with the result that most of the stocks were at the outset taken by units
of 4 Indian Division who mistook it for their own. The force from Matruh
had then to turn to No. 3 F.S.D. until it became possible to dump further
supplies at a place slightly further west of the original location.
The attack was scheduled for dawn on 9th December although the R.N.,
and R.A.F. would have started operations before this time. In outline, the
plan was that while the support group of the armoured division prevented
any interference in the main battle by enemy camps round Sofafi (the southern-
most extremity of the Italian perimeter), the remainder of the armoured
division and 4 Indian Division were to pour through the gap between the
Sofafi and Nibeiwa camps.
The armoured division, less the support group
at Sofafi, would then cover attacks by 4 Indian Division on the camps of
Nibeiwa, Tummar West and Tummar East, and prevent any intervention
by the enemy to the north.
The infantry tanks of 7 R.T.R. would support
4 Indian Division, while Matruh Garrison Force would observe and contain
the enemy camp at Maktila the easternmost Italian camp on the extreme
Assuming success, it then was intended to attack
and capture Sidi Barrani on the following day, thereafter exploiting success
as far westwards as possible.
It was hoped that the superior morale and
training of our forces would compensate for the enemy's very heavy advantage
in numbers. Superiority of equipment might also be cited as a British
advantage certainly the quality of our equipment was in the main excellent
—the fault, as has already been shown, lay in its quantity.
The whole force moved forward from Matruh and the Naghamish area
on the late afternoon and evening of 7th December, keeping well south of
the coast road in the open desert and leaguering up for the night south-west
The final approach march was to be carried out under cover
of darkness on the night 8th-9th December, so that the force was exposed
to the attentions of the Italian Air Force throughout the daylight hours of
Surprisingly, no offensive action materialized and the odd
