Generally speaking, the standard of administration in field force units was
good and was probably improving as time went on.
Moreover,
"A" and
"Q" staft officers were of a higher standard in field force formations than
those in the area headquarters.
The weakness lay in the standard of ad-
ministration in the non-field force units which existed in very large numbers,
widely dispersed, loosely organized, and usually living under unfavourable
conditions.
The standard of administrative staff officers normally allocated
to area headquarters responsible for supervision of administration of these
units was comparatively low, and the commanders and senior staff officers
were often of a certain age and not very active.
Despite the somewhat pessimistic criticism made by the C.-in-C. Home
Forces, the War Office decided that it would be false economy to allow bad
administration to continue if a reasonable increase in area staffs would prevent
it and accepted the C.-in-C.'s suggestion for a War Office committee which on
15th June, 1941, was appointed with the following terms of reference: —
"to examine the respective administrative responsibilities of Field
Force formations, A.D.G.B., Areas and Sub-Areas in the United King-
dom, having special regard to administrative requirements in connection
with possible operations ...
The Army Council appointed Major-General H. M. Gale (an experienced
"Q" Officer who was then Major-General in charge of Administration at
G.H.Q. Home Forces) as chairman, and the committee became generally
known as " the Gale Committee."
In the course of their investigations the
committee visited the headquarters of all army commands, A.A. Command,
and 37 other formation, etc., headquarters. The members also heard evidence
from 23 War Office witnesses and, throughout their work, maintained the
closest contact with all branches of G.H.Q. Home Forces.
The committee's report, issued some three months later, was not only
notable for its lucid presentation but for the many sound recommendations
it contained illustrating the grasp the committee had taken on the problem
and the businesslike way in which it had approached the quest for a solution.
It covered a wide range of army administration including the reorganization
of the chain of command in the United Kingdom, the employment of A.T.S.
personnel, the Home Guard and many other subjects, not forgetting the
inevitable attack on the menace of " paper". The findings relating to the
chain of
relevant to this chapter.
command are, however, the only aspect of the
report that are
These were prefaced by the somewhat disconcerting accusation that.
network of operational headquarters so that the employment of local military
resources could be properly controlled until the mobile field force formations
were able to intervene.
On the one hand there was need for a self-contained static organization
designed to
shoulder, if
necessary, full operational responsibility,
dependently of field force formations. On the other hand, formations whose
operational role required them to be fully mobile were encumbered with
262
WO 277
10
administrative and other duties so that they tended to be rooted to a par-
ticular territory with resulting effect on their mobility.
mittee looked
Further, the com-
ahead to the day when we would again be undertaking
offensive operations outside the United Kingdom thus decreasing the number
of formations available for home defence.
Therefore any recommendations
had to be framed to cover the probability of a situation in the future in which
considerably fewer mobile formations would be available.
Since June, 1940, a variety of formations had been superimposed on terri-
tory administered by headquarters, which had not been designed for other
than purely
Some of these later arrivals,
although bearing names such as corps, division, etc., implying a mobile role,
had become static in varying degrees. Duplication of control was therefore
unavoidable,
especially in the commands more directly threatened by
invasion, and considerable confusion was caused to units, particularly in
administrative matters.
The committee's task of recommending a more satisfactory chain of
command was made easier by a recent ruling by the C.-in-C., Home Forces to
the effect that corps headquarters under his command, while located in Great
It thus became possible to recommend
that more use should be made of the resources of these corps headquarters
and that they should assume fuller administrative control of the territory
allotted to them.
For this purpose it was proposed that they should be classified as Ist
class districts and re-named " Corps Districts".
The proposed re-organization
of the home defences into corps districts is shown at Map 22
Wherever the creation of corps districts was recommended as operationally
necessary it was found possible to form them by making a slight revision
of functions at the existing corps headquarters. They were allotted territory of
the highest operational importance, usually in coastal regions, and to enable
them properly to shoulder the operational and administrative responsibilities
proposed for them, it was proposed that they should contain a suitable
static increment which would be additional to the usual W.E. of a corps staff.
Thus, should the operational element of the headquarters have to move
for any reason, the static increment could be " thrown off" either to act as
an independent area headquarters or to form an incremental staft to an incom-
ing headquarters.
Continuity of local static administration would be thereby
assured.
The next major feature of the chain of command which the committee
proposed was the creation of 2nd class district, to be known as " Districts".
These were required further to improve operational control, and, in territory
not covered by the new corps districts, to provide headquarters of suficient
standing for decentralization of administrative responsibility below command
headquarters.
They were mostly found from the expansion of existing area
headquarters.
The "county" divisions which had been hastily formed in 1940 were,
in time, to be replaced by field force divisions, suitably modified in composi-
tion for a static role.
Their headquarters staffs were somewhat increased
to meet this need, particularli headquarters sta to deal with local problems
263
