The speed at which the depots worked is illustrated by the fact that
five divisions
were re-equipped during June and the remainder by July.
Re-equipment is somewhat of a misnomer since it referred to the issue of
those stores that were in fact available for issue.
Shortages were widespread
and in some items,
mainly of the Vote 9 (warlike stores) category, units
were usually given only a token issue or none at all.
It was an unhappy fact that those stores that were most urgently required
were in the shortest supply.
In these circumstances it was obvious that
Ordnance could not make issues without General Stafl guidance, and the
system of "controlled stores" was brought into operation.
were classified as War Office Controlled Stores and issues were only made
by R.A.O.C. upon instructions of the Staff Duties directorate of the War
Office which worked on a very strict priority basis, according to the opera-
tional role of the unit concerned.
The "controlled stores"
It was patently the only system whereby the entire army could be
equipped from scratch and it became an integral part of army administration.
As the supply of any type of stores fell short of demand, a control was
Material of new design as it first trickled off the assembly lines
or arrived in the
United Kingdom from
immediately put under General Staff control.
The system grew up from small beginnings and although its introduction
was inevitable, its evolution and application cut across some of the basic
principles of Field Service Regulations.
As will be seen elsewhere in this
volume, the control of issues by the General Staff led in turn to the creation
of new General Staff directorates, some of which actually assumed certain
functions of provision and issue that had hitherto been the rightful work of
the "O" and Ordnance staffs.
This reacted later in other headquarters
to such an extent that by the end of the war, when the necessity for control
had largely vanished, there was considerable muddle and
regard to the duties of G.(S.D.), Q.(A.E.) and Ordnance in several major
however, a digression.
As the reformed divisions of the B.E.F. became available for active
service, so the defence of the country entered into a new stage.
of Mr. Winston Churchill in his famous broadcast on 4th June, 1940, " We
shall fight on the beaches, the landing grounds, in the fields, in the streets,
" now took on a more real meaning.
hitherto undefended except for the L.D.Vs. and the A.A. gun and searchlight
crews, were filled in.
Gradually the thin crust of men scattered around
the coasts was thickened until the whole of the vulnerable coast-line was
divided into corps sectors (later corps district sectors- see Section 2) con-
sisting of one and sometimes more divisions to each county.
Administrative Control
Before considering the maintenance arrangements made in 1940 during
the development of home defence and the plans for
invasion occur, it is necessary to keep in mind that the chain of adminis-
trative command had undergone little change from
that prevailing at the
It was the intention that the War Office would continue
to be responsible for the maintenance of the troops at home until such
time as invasion occurred, when
G.H.Q. Home Forces would
1 p
responsibility.
The difficulties in implementing this apparently logical plan
were manifold and it was not until 1941 that a workable compromise accept-
able to all parties could be formulated.
On the one hand, the battle would be conducted, in the field, by G.H.Q.
who were therefore obviously entitled to have an over-riding call on all
the available facilities
in accordance with the
operational requirements.
Also the War Office " machine" was not geared
up to meet the urgent and immediate calls that would be made upon it if
On the other hand, the G.H.Q. staff and particularly the services, although
greatly expanded upon the threat of invasion, were small and certainly not
sufficient to exercise control without War Office assistance.
for political and military reasons, it was obvious that the Q.M.G. would
have to retain responsibility for that sphere of military administration in
control at short notice without detriment to their efficiency.
By the close of 1940 it was still evident that the War Office and G.H.Q.
were not completely en rapport over administrative matters.
This was
made increasingly clear at the beginning of 1941 when a large-scale skeleton
Home Defence exercise was held embracing both the fighting and civil
This exercise (named " Victor") was of the utmost value and
brought to light many defects in the arrangements as they existed previously.
taken which did much to clarify the position:
(a) In the event of invasion, the Lieutenant-General i/c Administration
at G.H.Q. Home Forces would be responsible for the maintenance
of all troops in the country operating under invasion conditions.
(b) On invasion War Office would transfer control to Home Forces
of all reserves in the country less those earmarked for other theatres
Until then, War Office would notify G.H.Q. from time to
time of what these stocks consisted, and G.H.Q. would say how they
were to be distributed according to the operational plan.
(c) The working of the War Office depots would continue to be con-
the War Office who would maintain nucleus branches
of the various staff and services which would join G.H.Q. Home
Forces in the event of invasion.
Control would thus be exercised
in effect by G.H.Q. and although War Office would be responsible
for implementing the instructions of the C-in-C. it could at the
same time retain its responsibility for the overseas theatres.
Var one on lan with a dy mai to chin tho
The services at G.H.Q.,
which were embryonic only, maintained
liaison between their particular servichich were embryonic only, comintaines.
237
