and by personnel of other arms. Subsequently a force known as "X" Force
and composed of twelve R.E. companies of the Territorial Army accompanied
by units of the newly-formed Auxiliary Military Pioneer Corps, complete
with its own transport and special equipment, was sent out from home to
apply
mass-production methods in the construction of the "pill-boxes".
The defences had been considerably improved when active operations began.
Over 400 " pill-boxes" had been completed and a further 100 were under
construction,
new wire had been erected and existing wire strengthened,
buildings had been reinforced and many miles of anti-tank ditch dug.
The
work involved demanded a very much greater quantity of engineer stores
than had been initially forecast.
Two further infantry brigades arrived during October and November,
48 Division in January; these brought the number of divisions
up to a total of six, including 5 Division which had been formed in France.
During February 51 Division and 50 (Motor) Division arrived; the latter
was allotted to 2 Corps, while the former was the first contingent of 3 Corps,
which was subsequently made complete by the end of March upon the arrival
of 42 and 44 Divisions.
During January there was a re-organization of
divisions in order to spread the Territorial Army battalions more evenly over
the whole force so that, in the event of casualties, these would not fall too
heavily on one home county.
This led to some difficulty over vehicles and
spare parts since the original formations had tried to standardize on one
make or type of vehicle.
The German invasion of Norway and Denmark during April made neces-
sary the return to United Kingdom of a brigade of 5 Division,
remainder of the division was placed in War Office reserve (see Chapter III,
A British brigade was despatched to the Saar Front during November
and, until the end of April, successive brigades undertook tours of duty under
French command in this sector.
It was later decided to increase the Saar
force to divisional strength, and 51 Division with certain additional troops
under command, was selected for the role, taking its place in the line on
30th April, where they had valuable training in their day to day duties
when in contact with the enemy.
Plans for further expansion included a further corps (partly Canadian)
to be despatched during the summer of 1940 and 1 Armoured Division which
was to arrive during May, 1940.
As soon as the force totalled over eleven
infantry divisions, two armies were to be formed and, during the first part
of the year, plans for the formation of the armies, the headquarters of which
were due to arrive during early June, were well in hand.
Plans had also
reached an advanced stage for the reception of 1 Armoured Division in a
special A.F.V. area which was being developed around Pacy at great expense,
the cost of compensation alone amounting to nearly one million pounds.
The shortage of labour adversely affected the extension of the base installa-
tions and led to three further divisions (12, 23, and 46) being sent, partially
armed and equipped, to France in April to undertake temporary labour duties.
These divisions had only recently been
mobilized
and it was hopefully
envisaged that their training could continue at a slow rate during such time
as could be spared from their pioneer work.
32
WORT
The " Dyle Plan "
A source of concern to the Allied High Command was the possibility
that the enemy might attack through Belgium and Holland, and a series
of plans had been considered to meet this eventuality, of which only one—
the "Dyle Plan" or Plan "D"-need be mentioned since it was the one
actually put into operation.
The B.E.F. was, in the event of a German
attack through the Low Countries, to advance to the line Wavre-Louvain,
both inclusive, with the French First Army on the right, and the French
Seventh Army on the left.
from Namur to Antwerp.
The Allies would thus hold a line extending
The plan was worked out in great detail, and
orders and instructions, both operational and administrative, were kept up
to date on the arrival of new formations.
The final instructions were issued
on 17th April and in the event worked almost entirely to schedule.
The Main Base and L. of C.
In accordance with the maintenance project the main base had been
established in the Brest-Rennes-Nantes area.
far to the west because of the fear of air attack, while the use of the Havre
forts deti certain technical anti-aircraft dificulties were overcome, had been
This fear of air attack was uppermost in everybody's mind, amounting
sometimes to an obsession, and it undoubtedly adversely affected the setting
up of many installations.
The reason why heavy attacks did not materialize
is not relevant to this history but their possibility dictated the choice of
the western ports for maintenance in the initial stage.
This, in turn, caused
the B.E.F. to begin the campaign with lengthened lines of communica-
tion and therefore, as reserve road transport was virtually non-existent,
made the force wholly dependent on rail.
portation most vulnerable to air attack it does seem that the use of the Brest
wide open to the very danger that it was
considered most necessary to avoid.
Apart from the above, it soon became obvious that three factors-the
length of the L. of C.; the increasing administrative demands, necessitated
by the continued expansion of the force; and pressure by the Admiralty
to open up the Havre ports owing to shipping shortages attributed to the
long turn-round from South Wales to the
Cherbourg peninsula-made a
more advanced base essential, and in October work was begin in the Le
Havre Rouen area with this end in view.
At the same time, the medical
base sub-area was opened at Dieppe.
Later, when the channel ports were
opened fully it was intended to open more forward installations in the Pacy
area north-west of Paris, and, in fact, when operations began steps were
being taken to acquire sites and buildings for this purpose.
The maintenance project had laid down that the R.A.F. was to be
responsible for all services for the Advanced Air Striking Force forward
of rail-head, but unfortunately had not foreseen the large number of army
units that would be employed in the A.A.S.F. area around Rheims.
total military strength involved has been estimated as approaching 20,000
men, mainly in units working on airfield construction and anti-aircraft duties.
This large contingent soon experienced difficulty in obtaining administrative
services and it was found necessary to establish an administrative organization
33
12090
