for its efficient distribution throughout the island. Moreover, all civil motor
transport and nearly all animals had been requisitioned by the Greek Govern-
ment for the campaign on the mainland.
Owing to poor communications the force commander had no alternative to
splitting up his small force
into garrisons, mainly for the defence of the
aerodromes and also of the most likely beaches.
organized into the Heraklion, Retimo and Maleme fighting sectors, with a
central sector containing the base and the small reserve.
British artillery was entirely lacking, but the captured Italian pieces with
ammunition which had arrived from Egypt were distributed to sectors
Six of the nine infantry tanks sent were landed and
distributed, two to each of the three outer sectors.
A few light tanks were
also allotted to Maleme sector, but were old and played no real part in the
Equipped sappers consisted of one section only ; the few batteries
of anti-aircraft artillery were allotted to Suda Bay defence except for a few
guns at the small ports of Heraklion and Retimo.
The total number of
motor vehicles in the force was little over 100.
Force H.Q. was near the eastern outskirts of Canea, on the promontary
bounding
Suda Bay to
H.Q., R.A.F., rightly
senior naval officer ashore had to remain at Suda.
was excellent throughout, a welcome contrast to the experience
The German Attack
Before describing the maintenance plan it is convenient to outline the
sequence of operations which naturally affected its execution.
After intensive bombing attacks on the port and garrisons as well as on
the towns, the German assault opened on the morning of 18th May with
parachute and glider landings.
At Heraklion these were almost entirely mopped up, at least 1,000 being
killed with very few British casualties.
troops was aly fet entitly castled, at sial a dy let free fra:
fortified a strong stone-walled churchyard on the one road just west of
Counter-attacks by the garrison assisted by the force reserve failed
In the Maleme sector the initial enemy assault was more
Paratroops and some gliders were successfully landed, not only
on the outskirts of the Maleme airfield, but also south of Galatas, whence
they advanced and cut the main coast road.
Although eventually driven clear of the road, they continued to cause
embarrassment.
For some time no German reinforcements by air arrived
and an attempted sea-borne assault was effectively destroyed by the Royal
The enemy were clearly undecided as to the wisdom of pressing
home the assault, but eventually they landed more paratroops in the Maleme
area, gained physical possession of the aerodrome and immediately poured
in their troop-carrying aircraft regardless of crashes and losses from our anti-
In the end the attacks by these troops, supported by low-flying
air attacks and by flank attacks against the one road, pushed back the New
Our few aircraft had by this time been destroyed, either in the
air or on the ground, and the gallant attempt of a few flights based on Egypt
failed to affect the course of the battle.
WO217
Maintenance Arrangements
Even had time permitted, under the emergency conditions prevailing it
was neither feasible nor desirable to alter the lay-out of the main base depots.
which were largely Decauville-served, well dispersed and concealed in the
olive groves close to Suda Port. These contained adequate stocks of food
and some small arms ammunition, but little else. Immediately Crete Force
H.Q. had been properly organized and the general distribution of troops
decided, steps were taken to establish field supply dumps of approximately
15 days' rations, ammunition and a little petrol in the outlying sectors of
Heraklion, Retimo and Maleme.
The location of these in sectors was left
to local commands; all that was laid down was that each unit must hold
three days' rations in addition to the stocks in F.S.Ds. and that anything
in excess, held by units, would be in diminution of such stocks. All defence
and all ammunition stores were allotted to sectors as and when they arrived,
but except in the last stages, when some S.A.A. was accumulated, there were
practically no stocks of either contained in the R.E. and R.A.O.C. depots at
The first German parachute attack included the landing of some gliders
astride the main Canea-Suda road, so that access to the main depots was
In consequence, when the situation was cleared up, new
dumps of rations, petrol and ammunition were established in the outskirts
of Canea itself, where they would be readily accessible for distribution by
Every effort was made to utilize local resources, but
these were limited to the supply of vegetables and fruit and in the early
static days, to the baking of bread.
One feature of the short campaign was the acute shortage of medical
The proportion of killed was small, but the rate of comparatively
serious and " walking wounded"
cases was very high, and dressings and
other items were consequently in great demand.
In addition to shortage of essential equipment for cooking etc.,
other hardships, there was also a complete lack of minor amenities for the
Under such conditions this was obviously unavoidable but it was,
There was no English literature on the island
except the Force H.Q. newspaper, which was only produced with greatest
difficulty, and, to make matters worse, the stocks of cigarettes and beer
With the experience of Greece fresh in mind it was obvious from the
outset that there was grave danger of air attack drastically restricting the
tonnage which could be cleared through Suda. Immediate steps had there-
fore been taken to warn G.H.Q. of this possibility, to put some A.A.
defence at Heraklion and to reconnoitre the southern beaches from the
point of view of immediate use or possible development.
complete details of all essentials required by the British and Greek troops
and the civil population were forwarded to Cairo. These were necessarily
based on a modest programme of building up 15 days' reserve by Ist June,
22 days' by 15th June, and 30 days' by Ist July. All non-essentials such
as tentage, were ruthlessly cut out.
The daily tonnage cleared through Suda for several days exceeded 700
tons, in spite of enemy attack by aircraft based on Greece.
There was.
