Indeed, by the end of 1941 India had despatched overseas the equivalent of
5 divisions, these troops initially being very largely maintained from her
Iwa resources.
The fall of Singapore and Malaya, and of Burma, confronted G.H.Q.
with an entirely new situation.
Instead of facing west and planning on a
western basis, her whole military operational and administrative system had
to be re-orientated to face east.
The task of re-siting these major installations
well back into the heart of the country was a task of almost insuperable
The greatest limiting factor was shortage of road and river trans-
port and the inadequacy of rail communications, and this was increased by
the export, earlier in the war, of an immense amount of rolling stock and
river craft to operate on the lines of communication in the Middle East.
Nevertheless, even before the British forces had retired from Burma,
C. in C. India had put in hand comprehensive planning for the re-conquest
of that country, and by the end of 1942 offensive operations in both Arakan
and North Burma were being launched.
THE OPERATION TO CAPTURE AKYAB
The first of these was an attempt on a corps scale to secure the Mayu
Peninsula and the island of Akyab in the Bay of Bengal.
It set out in
December, 1942, to the accompaniment of widespread publicity that the
purpose was the invasion
of Burma, and its collapse with considerable
casualties unfortunately was exaggerated to an equal extent.
Although it is not suggested that failure was due to inadequate main-
tenance, there is no doubt that the administration of this small expedition was
conducted with
considerable
difficulty.
Rail communication from India
ceased at a rail-head that was some 25 miles past Chittagong, and from there
the L. of C. stretched over a road 150 miles long and breached by hundreds
of creeks and gullies.
After five months the campaign was over at a cost of 2,500 battle casualties.
Malaria cost even more, and there is no doubt that the morale of the British
troops suffered a considerable blow:
Threatened with encirclement on the
ground, the lack of air superiority and transport planes prevented any chance
of assistance from the Allied air forces.
WINGATE'S FIRST MISSION
In northern Burma, on the other hand, the success of Brigadier Wingat's
long-range march 200 miles into Japanese lines was most significant in that
his force operated by means of air supply and wireless without depending on
normal lines of communication.
Wingate's policy early in 1942 is worthy of placing on record:-
" The vulnerable artery is the L. of C. winding through the jungle.
Christmas, down the chimney."
have no L. of C. on the jungle floor-bring in the goods like Father
336
WORT
1
During July, 1942, he assembled in the jungle region of the Central Pro-
vinces a force approximately of brigade strength and trained them in jungle
warfare based on his own experience and theories.
For six months the force
was trained and by the end of 1942 it was ready to fight. Thus were the
Field-Marshal Wavell and
Wingate had originally schemed that the
brigade should drive deep into North Burma to cut enemy communications
south of Myitkyina as General Stilwell's Chinese armies advanced from
But early in February, 1943, it became plain that there would be
no Chinese offensive and, as the prospect of the original joint campaign
vanished, Wavell decided that the Chindits should be employed on a special
expedition of their own.
Their directive was to enter the country through the front that was held
in Assam by 4 Corps, to cut the main railway line between Mandalay and
Myitkyina, harass the enemy in the Shwebo area and finally-if possible-
to cross the Irrawaddy and cut the Mandalay—Lashio railway.
The success
of all these operations depended on the force reaching beyond the Chindwin
River to the Mandalay-Myitkyina railway, 150 miles to the east, without
being detected.
It is not our purpose to trace the paths of the various columns nor to
Suffice to say that the first part of the mission was
completed with speed and precision.
The project to cut the Lashio Railway
was begun but later had to be abandoned.
By June, 1943, the expedition
All those who took part had, in five months, marched some 1,000
miles over country where one mile equalled three or four on a road.
Wingate had insisted on having R.A.F. flying officers attached to his
force to ensure the maximum chance of success for his scheme of co-opera-
tion between ground and air forces.
He felt it essential that the messages
sent to the advance base in Assam should be drafted by a skilled pilot who
knew how to pin-point objectives and what could be done with particular
types of aircraft under given weather conditions.
In itself, the dropping of supplies was nothing new.
squadron that was to supply the Chindits had itself the previous year dropped
food, boots and clothing to the refugees streaming from Burma.
and Yugoslavia, guerrilla forces had been supplied with food, arms and
ammunition from the air.
or-miss" affair; never before had a force of several thousand men planned
a long-range penetration of enemy territory, relying solely on airborne supplies.
The Chindits wore regular tropical uniforms and army boots, but were
specially equipped with Australian type
slouch hats, anti-mosquito nets,
machets, and rubber-soled hockey boots for scouting and silent marching.
Their bedding was one groundsheet and one light cashmere blanket for each
and six days'
Each man carried a water sterilizing outfit, 50 rounds of ammunition
paratroop ration a 50-1b. load all told.
One day's ration
(usually the Chindits were on two-thirds rations) consisted of:
12 wholewheat biscuits
2 ounces of nuts and raisins
2 ounces of cheese
337
