Nevertheless
immediate
anxiely
for
the
safety
of India
inforcements
were arriving, much A.A.
artillery
lessened.
and other units were
ching India and the air forces were gradually increasing.
The Japanese
ce held in Manipur and our operations in Arakan, although unsuccessful,
ud given them much food for thought.
The Royal Navy
was still in
command of Indian waters and the enemy showed no signs of mounting an
invasion of India by sea.
The Allied forces had, therefore, a breathing space
to reorganize, train and prepare.
General Stilwell resumed in India the training of Chinese troops which
had been started in Yunnan before they were hurriedly called to fight in
Burma.
Later the Americans and the Chinese requested that additional
troops should be flown from China into India.
This was agreed and by the
end of 1942, nearly 13,000 Chinese troops had been flown in by the U.S.A.A.F.
across the Himalayas to India.
This transportation- over what became
famous as the "Hump"-was carried out almost without loss, not only
through the monsoon period but in an area where the Japanese had air
superiority.
OVER THE "HUMP"
This was only part of a two-way traffic that was developing into a maior
feature in
Allied strategy.
Before the fall of Burma, half a dozen old
transport aircraft had been flying across the Himalayas to reinforce supplies
along the " Burma Road".
When the road was lost and all land communi-
cations with China cut, it did not therefore mean a complete break in the
life-line, and U.S. pilots successfully strove to prove that even the mighty
Himalayas could be crossed throughout the year.
Almost as soon as road
traffic ceased along the road, traffic was started over the
" Hump":
Beginning as a skeleton service, this air ferry grew into one of the great
supply achievements of the war. By the end of 1943, over 130 aircraft were
employed, operating from four Indian bases, over peaks sometimes as high
as 17,000 feet, to Kunming, whose height above sea level is 6,300 feet.
aircraft made an average of about 125 round trips a day, which over a period
of several months worked out at approximately 17 trips a day for each
aircraft, the average pay load for each trip being 4•36 tons.
The route was the sole means of supply into China, and the American
Air Forces stationed there depended entirely upon it for carriage of fuel,
It was calculated that these forces required 7,000
tons a month and the " Hump" service normally delivered about 5,000 tons.
(To make up for the deficiency, the 14th U.S.A.A.F. had to make heavy
bombers self-supporting, each of the aircraft having to make approximately
two and a half trips over the
petrol for one operational sortie.
"Hump" into India to collect sufficient
As time went on this deficiency diminished
but it is an illustration of the uneconomical extent tos which the Americans
tended to throw all their effort into an all-out offensive.)
In point of fact the "Hump" service did not directly affect Briüish
operations in India and Burma,
but the significance of such activities by
the American air transportation organization nifidance of sical and psycho-
logical repercussions they had on militiation ant the physi be stressed 100
340
The Development of India as a Base
From the foregoing it will be seen that India had a full and eventful
time from the arrival on the eastern frontier of the retreating Burma Army
until the autumn of 1943, when Admiral Mountbatten was appointed Supreme
Allied Commander of the new South East Asia Command. Ever since the
beginning of the war India had sent troops abroad almost as quickly as
they could be trained, retaining in India only the minimum number of
formations and units essential for internal security.
of even these formations had been sent only half-trained in 1942 to Malaya
and Burma in the hope of holding up the enemy.
of Field-Marshal Wavell we learn that in March, 1942, India had not a
The fact that, six months later, she was
able to pass to the offensive was a considerable achievement.
Nevertheless, from the point of view of this history, the true significance
of India lies in her development as a main support area containing the
vast base from which the divisions of the Fourteenth Army were maintained
during the battles in the hills and jungles of Northern and Central Burma.
THE EASTERN GROUP OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE
East and south of the Suez Canal were British territories, whose area
equalled two-thirds that of the Commonwealth, and which had a population,
before the loss of Malaya and Burma, of five hundred millions.
Ocean was the link which held this Eastern Group together.
of Italy into the war during 1940 had made it necessary to divert British
merchant shipping from the Mediterranean-Suez Canal route and, in order
to relieve Britain of some of her heavy obligations, it was decided that the
British forces in the Middle East, North Africa, and Malaya should draw
as much of their supplies as possible from countries east and south of Suez.
With a view to co-ordinating the war effort of the Eastern Group of British
1940.
It was
attended by representatives of the different countries and by an observer
from the Dutch East Indies. In the following February, an Eastern Group
Council was established, whose aim was to intensify the prosecution of the
countries viz. India, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Southern Rhodesia,
East Africa, Burma, Ceylon, Hong Kong, Malaya and Palestine (see Map 28).
India was the leading member of the
Both on account of her central nosition and her Dotential war production
Eastern Group from
Her importance grew as the Japanese aggrescion lost us the productive
Australia and New Zealand.
capacity of Burma and Malaya and threatened the sea communications to
INDIA'S ECONOMIC BACKGROUND
Distances in India approach those of the U.S.A . for instance. fros
Karachi to Calcutta is shout as far as from Chicago to Can Francisco.
Distance alone, however is no sufficient comparison, because communications
in India are quite unlike those of the United Kingdom or U.S.A
India was nearl nineteen timac as hion Great Rritain. she had about
