drawn from the northern point of Lake Rudolf, through Harar to Berbera,
and contains the greater part of British
Somaliland, the whole of Italian
Ogaden and Boran.
In the west the plateau has no definite
edge, but steps down to the Sudan in a succession of vast terraces.
The climate of both the plains is very trying to Europeans.
ever, the plain to the north-east is almost wholly unproductive, that to the
especially Somalia, has been developed to a considerable degree.
On the plateau the air is cool, the ground suitable for agriculture and the
land fairly fitted for European settlement.
The rains there, which are con-
centrated in the summer months, are exceedingly heavy, and bring practically
except that along metalled roads, to a standstill.
naturally this limits military operations of any considerable scope.
During their occupation the Italians had done much to improve com-
munications, which enabled them to extend and consolidate their control
over the country to a degree that was never possible to the Emperor, under
whose régime a messenger from the capital might take six weeks to reach
outlying provinces.
The outstanding strategic feature of Italian East Africa is its immense
size, Abyssinia alone, 900 miles in length by 750 miles in width, being larger
and Italy put together.
Distances from the frontier to important
objectives are usually very long, and large numbers of troops are, therefore,
absorbed in the protection of the lines of communication.
an example, when General Napier landed at Zula near Massawa in 1867 with
12,000 combatants and 30,000 followers, all he could muster for his decisive
battle at Magdala was 3,500 men.
The remainder of his force had been
guard his 400 mile long L. of C.
It will be seen from
that the length of the lines of communication opened between
Mombasa and Addis Ababa at the end of the campaign exceeded 2,000 miles.
At the outbreak of war East Africa Command was for all purposes
directly under the War Office, but it passed to command of C.-in-C., Middle
East on 3rd February, 1940.
The very small force then in East Africa was
reinforced in June, 1940, by a brigade of 1 South African Division with an
air contingent.
Two West African brigades followed in July, while the
remainder of 1 South African Division arrived in the autumn of 1940.
by October, 1940, there was the equivalent of about three divisions in East
Africa together with some Rhodesian troops.
The force was organized into
1 South African Division and 11 and 12 African Divisions, but it must be
emphasized that none of these formations was of normal composition.
The presence of these troops in East Africa was the subject of some
criticism, and there was constant pressure from home to move them further
However, in view of the very real
Italian invasion of Kenya and the capture of the port of Mombasa, and the
fact that there were then limitations on the employment of South African
General Wavell successfully resisted the
pressure, and the force
remained in Kenya, Lieutenant-General Cunningham taking over command
on 1st November, 1940.
In the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan with its long and vulnerable frontier it had
place small
possible with the small Sudan Defence Force to do more than
mobile forces at principal points on the frontier. When, as was
126
WO217
1
inevitable, these places were attacked by a superior force our forces withdrew
under cover of a delaying action.
This policy was carried out successfully.
The Sudan Defence Force (or S.D.F.) was the responsibility of the Sudan
Government for administration and fortunately lived largely on the country.
It was at the time in the process of being mechanized, mostly with vehicles
of dissimilar pattern to those in general use with the British Army.
On the arrival of 5 Indian Division, Major-General Platt, commanding
the troops in the Sudan, was instructed to make plans for minor operations
An operation against Gallabat on the Abyssinian
frontier took place in November and resulted in its capture and in our
inflicting heavy losses on the enemy.
Owing chiefly, however, to the enemy's
regaining temporary air supremacy, the British force was forced to withdraw.
Later Gallabat was again captured and occupied as an outpost position.
Kassala on the Eritrean frontier, was also the scene of frequent actions; it
had been occupied by the enemy shortly after the declaration of war by Italy.
In spite of the original ban on actions which might precipitate Italy's
entry into the war and which earlier had prevented subversive activity, action
to raise the Abyssinian patriots against the Italians, when it was taken,
prospered exceedingly.
A mission and various columns were formed, arms
and money were made available, and the general effect soon began to cause
the Italians considerable concern.
The Advance from the Sudan
General Wavell was originally of the opinion that our main effort should
be devoted
to furthering and supporting the rebellion in Abyssinia by
irregular action and that operations in the first place should only be carried
out for the capture of Kassala and Kismayu in order to safeguard our
flanks.
As we have seen in Section 2, 4 Indian Division left the battlefield
of Sidi Barrani in December, 1940, and was sent to the Sudan to take part
in what was thought to be the action to recapture Kassala. The move took
place partly by sea and partly by rail and river boat up the Nile valley.
The arrival of Force "Emily", as the reinforcements for the Sudan
were known, taxed the Sudan staff and railways to the utmost.
Owing to
the fact that the country possessed no L. of C. signal units, the difficulty of
issuing instructions and orders was enormous.
The most assiduous efforts
were made to issue to each unit arriving at Port Sudan or Wadi Halfa, a
complete set of documents, code lists and special instructions appertaining.
to the Sudan, but these efforts were not always successful.
The railway was
only single line and the enemy had cut the circuit at Kassala.
Extremely
accurate timing was thus needed so that the necessary rolling stock and flats
should always be available to meet units as they arrived in the Sudan.
short time usually available made it impossible to keep stock waiting and
it was for this reason that some units had to be sent forward to concentration
areas without their transport.
This meant that on arrival they were immobile
and unable either to move themselves away from the railway or even to draw
their own rations
In the main, however, these difficulties caused no great
hardship, and the concentration was
accomplished successfully despite a
bombing attack on one train and the difficulties with the "I" tanks.
127
