At the end of June the expression " Intendant-General" was taken into
general use but General Haining's position was still indeterminate, and the
War Office
had still not dispersed the confusion over exactly what the
functions of an Intendant-General were, or ought to be.
None the less the
department went ahead in its work, particularly with a proposed reorganiza-
tion of Q (Movements) to include the transportation service.
(In this, and
similar matters, the local representatives of the Ministry of War Transport
played a prominent part.
Though not part of General Haining's department,
nor in any way connected with it, they gave the most valuable assistance
and co-operation, and made the most thorough investigation of the current
delays in shipping turn-round in the Middle East and their causes.)
The Minister of State
On 29th June, 1941, the appointment of a Minister of State to the Middle
East was announced.
At this time no reply had been received from the War
Office to General Haining's report, but a cable from the Prime Minister to
the C.-in-C. Middle East on the appointment of the Minister of State laid
down that the latter would exercise a " general supervision over the activities
of the Intendant-General including all matters locally connected with supplies
from the U.S.A.". It was therefore assumed that General Haining's report
had been accepted in principle.
The Intendant-General's staff was officially authorized on 5th July, 1941,
on the arrival of revised proposals from the War Office for a directive.
These
were as follows: -
"ONE
You will examine and co-ordinate
where necessary such
projects as are submitted to you by
the
War Office, the
Admiralty, the Air Ministry, the Ministry of War Transport
or by the commanders-in-chief of the respective Services, or
Government departments in the Middle East in connection
with administrative problems particularly in regard to the
development of the various ports, bases and lines of com-
munication serving theatres of war in the Middle East.
You
will take similar action when necessary on administrative
projects of this nature which have not been specifically
referred to you but which appear to you to require attention.
TWO.
You will advise the C.-in-C. Middle East as to the reorganiza-
tion of his administrative staff and services, which may prove
desirable an further investigation, more especially in con-
nection
with
problems
of
maintenance,
servicing
manpower.
THREE.
Nothing in this directive relieves the commanders-in-chief of
their existing responsibility for the day-to-day administration
of their forces.
You should discuss this telegram with the
Minister of State, and let me know whether in your view
and his the above are suitable."
General Haining and the Minister of State duly discussed these proposals
and finally there emerged the following which is the text of a cable sent by
the latter to the Prime Minister: —
" 1. I have issued the following statement, with which commanders-in-
chief agree, on the duties of the Intendant-General.
188
WO 277
1 P
2. The Intendant-General, Middle East, derives his authority direct from
the Minister of State, who will exercise general supervision over
his activities.
His principal duties will be: —
(a) To direct rearward organizations for the administration of
shipping, ports, railways and roads.
(b) To co-ordinate organizations for the provision of supplies in
the Middle East.
(c) To supervise the maintenance, repair and servicing of A.F.Vs.
and mechanical vehicles.
(d) To collaborate with the R.A.F. and Fleet Air Arm in their repair
work in order to ensure economical use of resources.
(e) To examine and advise on
(i) The problem of military manpower other than manpower
embodied in tactical units or employed in military zones.
(ii) The need for any general reorganization of Army administrative
staff and services.
3. In order to avoid duplication of personnel, the I.G. will act on Army
matters through the Army administrative staff and services.
4. Commanders-in-chief and the I.G. will exchange information on
matters of mutual concern.
Nothing in this statement affects the control by commanders-in-chief
of operations."
Now at last the functions of the Intendant-General were clearly defined,
his terms of reference established, and the next step was the formation of a
"Joint Intendance Board" comprising the nominees of the Commanders-in-
Chief of the Army, Navy and Air Force, under the chairmanship of the I.G.
It will be noted that Paragraph 2 specifically stated that the I.G. derived
his authority from the Minister of
State.
This was important, because,
for the first time, the ascendancy of the I.G. over the C.-in-C. on adminis-
trative matters was clearly defined.
Nevertheless there was obviously much in the I.G's. department which
was not operating in accordance with the spirit of the Prime Minister's
instructions.
Differences arose between the I.G. and the staff of Middle
East Command leading to an agreement that the I.G. would not issue orders
to the latter contrary to any policy approved by the C.-in-C.
obvious that though the 1.G's. department had been of assistance to G.H.O.
in planning, suggesting and inspecting, the prime intention of the appoint-
ment, i.e.
that the I.G. should relieve the C.-in-C. of his administrative
responsibilities, had not been achieved and furthermore seemed impossible
of achievement.
Apart from personal letters between I.G. and the Ö.M.G..
the only cheat. entart from el Kingdom to refer any question of major
policy to the La was the Ministry of War Transport, and no doubt this
was largely due to the early and powerful liaison that had been established
between the I.G. and his staff and the local representatives of the Ministry of
War Transport.
189
