by the C.-in-C., Home Forces, although authority for disruption (i.e., action
to deny easy access to the fuel including perhaps limited damage to the
installations) was delegated to army commanders and in some cases to area
The majority of other stores or commodities that might be of use to the
enemy were dispersed or withdrawn to safer areas.
large stocks of such items as ordnance and defence stores was forbidden in
Ammunition did not present a serious problem as most
natures were unsuitable for immediate use by the German Army.
and vehicles presented no problem at all, as there were no reserves.
In accordance with the general policy, military depots which were not
essential were moved from the coastal area and any stocks remaining were
Public utility services such as water, electric
light and power and gas undertakings were not generally prepared for des-
The nuisance value to a hostile force which would be achieved
by their denial would be negligible compared with the hardships which
would have been imposed on our own people.
It has not been possible up to now to describe the detailed army main-
tenance system current at the time because the development of administration
did not follow the same stages as the defence arrangements.
paragraphs summarize under the main headings the steps taken to meet the
altered circumstances.
It is regrettable that space does not permit proper
reference to the achievements of the R.E. works services or more than a
passing
reference to the transportation service.
B.E.F. the authors can only remind the reader that no depot could be opened
without the assistance of the Royal Engineers whose works services organiza-
tion, expanded to meet the new demands made on it, covered the whole
country with a network of Garrison Engineers, who were to be found any-
where and everywhere work was to be done.
There were two "Q" requirements.
Firstly, to modify or adapt the
existing static machinery to enable a large field army to be satisfactorily
maintained under normal conditions and secondly, to evolve a system whereby
the
same army could be maintained while engaged in active operations.
A very important limiting factor in both instances was the grave shortage
of first and second line transport and the almost complete absence of third
The position with regard to road transport was that there were very
few third line units and they were only partly equipped
furthermore the majority of formation first and second line units, while for
the most part in being, were anything up to 100 per cent. deficient of their
war establishment in W.D. type vehicles.
establishment in cases
unit had no operational role.
This authority, while providing very much
needed assistance, gave rise to complications, as obviously the vehicles hired
242
WOZY
were of all makes, types and vintage, and it was impossible to evolve any
really economical system of maintenance and repair.
Hiring was not under-
taken by the unit direct but was obtained on application to the officer i/c
transport, R.A.S.C., or C., R.A.S.C.
War Department transport proper to complete units to their war establish-
ment was issued on a War Office priority list.
Notification of vehicles for
issue to units from ordnance depots was given to formations as and when
the vehicles became available.
Formations were instructed to hold sufficient second line transport to
meet the contingency that deliveries of supplies and ammunition to units
might have to be made from rail-heads up to a distance of 25 miles from the
The question of petrol delivery did not arise to a great
extent in respect of second line transport requirements, delivery being made
mainly from pumps; nevertheless corps commanders were given the discretion
to authorize second line reserves being held in vehicles of petrol companies
in the case of units which had a mobile role and could not, therefore, rely
upon replenishment from pumps.
Third line transport was, as already stated, virtually non-existent.
was initially thought that it would be possible to rely entirely upon railways
and the use of civilian transport columns. Also the assistance of the Ministry
Transport could always be called for in emergency.
"Victor" proved the dangers of relying on these assumptions when the lack
of third line transport proved a serious obstacle in the efficient maintenance
of the Army even under home conditions.
Several decisions were accordingly
taken to counteract this deficiency.
For instance, a number of special home
reserve M.T. companies were provided from the R.A.S.C. training brigades.
Before this scheme training brigades R.A.S.C. were only to be utilized to
meet operational commitments, e.g. guarding bridges,
that while any stocks of vehicles remained unused in vehicle reception depots
this was an alarmingly wasteful diversion
thenceforth were regarded as specialists
and treated as such,
personnel with less than 6 weeks' training who were not classified as specialists
and were available for other duties.
The War Office controlled a reserve of vehicles either in V.R.Ds. or
These vehicles were offered to Home Forces for disposal but
G. H.Q. had not the necessary staff to undertake this aced for dis.
reserves which were not distributed to meet the requirements of the home
reserve M.T. companies were issued under War Office arrangements to provide
transport for the various static home defence organizations which were being
formed, e.g. county divisions, and to provide troop-carrying vehicles for the
in armoured divisions, as a temporary measure
provision of R.A.S.C. sections.
200 lorries were also given to Canadian Corps
to increase their mobility in the operational role which they had been given
in South-east England.
It should be noted that despite the overall shortages of vehicles through-
out the Army, a certain amount of difficulty was encountered in disposing
of these reserves since the shortage of drivers was even more acute than
In the instances mentioned in the preceding paragraph,
units had to provide drivers from their own resources.
