Africa, and a bridge company improvised.
As has already been mentioned,
some 70 bridges varying from 25 feet to 220 feet in length, apart from the
bridges over the Tana and Omo, were constructed, the majority, it must be
admitted, from captured Italian materials.
Road work was never-ceasing-
and the force was fortunate in having some mechanical equipment.
cases auto-patrols followed close on the heels of the forward troops.
Although not strictly a "Q" concern-the very low incidence of sickness
of both white and native personnel is remarkable when the appalling condi-
tions of weather and terrain are considered.
The figures make a remarkable
those of the 1916-1918 East African campaign.
of the admission rate for all diseases, of 500 a thousand per annum, as
contrasted with the 1916-1918 figure of 2,200 a thousand per annum is a fair
and convincing sample.
Fortunately too, casualties were very low.
air was practised for some of the more serious cases, but shortage
of aircraft limited its use and made evacuation by motor ambulance, often
over long distances, inevitable.
Later such evacuation by road was only
either Kismayu, Mogadishu or Berbera-where
hospital ships could take patients off.
Petrol was the most important single commodity of the campaign and, as
will be remembered, the force was fortunate enough to capture considerable
Here, as in the Western Desert, the method of packing left much
We had yet to learn from the Germans the value of their
jerricans and, as a result, the flimsy containers in their wooden crates
sometimes lost as much as 30 per cent. of their contents.
thing was particularly noticeable on the long Addis Ababa-Berbera L. of C.,
were necessary.
Indeed the majority of the
damage occurred through handling, and although " leakers" were set on one
side at trans-shipment points, rapidly decanted and the stocks at such points
persisted until 44-gallon drums
But, while these largely obviate leakage they constitute awkward
loads, and complicate handling at trans-shipment points, while distribution of
their contents is made difficult by the necessity of using a pump.
Although it was not normally possible to provide an alternative to
"hard" rations with the inevitable
advantage was taken when fresh meat, grain and vegetables, etc., were to be
It was surprising, in fact, how often the apparently arid and desolate
terrain did produce something.
The result was that an enormous quantity
of unbalanced stocks grew up in every supply dump chiefly preserved meat
-full, balanced rations being always despatched from Mombasa.
In so far as ammunition was concerned the problem was not very great-
chiefly as a result of the shortage of artillery.
Furthermore, certain natures
of captured enemy ammunition were suitable for use in British small arms.
Some of this ammunition was,
indeed. of British origin, having been made
for the R.F.C. in 1918.
Mention has already been made of the way in which transport was.
continually worked, and of the difficulties in keeping pace with the supply
of spares and in the provision of workshop facilities.
Some relief became
available after the capture of Addis Ababa here much valuable machinery
and workshop accommodation was available.
18
N.A.A.F.I. supplies fluctuated.
When transport permitted, every
effort
was made to get stores forward, but as usual they were only allotted a very
low priority
Noble work was, however, done by mobile canteens and by
voluntary organizations.
Finally, the postal service was far from what it should have been. The
speed of advance and distances served made it impossible to maintain a
regular service.
In spite of these latter disadvantages and of the difficulties of the
campaign, both white and coloured troops maintained excellent spirits and
a high standard of cheerfulness, which undoubtedly constituted a valuable
asset towards victory in one of the most arduous and gruelling campaigns of
the War.
THE MIDDLE EAST, 1939-1942
SECTION 5-GREECE
Many critics take the view that the campaign in Greece during 1941 was
an ill-starred venture which frittered away part of our slender Middle East
resources in what could only be a futile effort to honour a moral obligation.
General Wavell, however, took a different view:-
"... the effort was worth while both morally and militarily as it
held up the German attack on Russia for six weeks, saved Moscow
and probably changed the whole future character of the war.
moral effect on the U.S.A. was tremendous and the operation was a
far greater success than generally realized."
Certainly it is easy to disprove the contention that had not the Greek
campaign diverted so many troops from the Western Desert it would have
been possible to continue the advance to Tripoli.
Not only were 7 Armoured
Armoured Division had arrived from the United Kingdom with but a mini-
Furthermore the latter formation had not
gained the necessary experience of desert fighting, a fact to be amply demon-
strated during the coming enemy offensive in the Western Desert (see Sec-
tions 2 and 8 of this Chapter).
Administration in the Middle East had been strained to the utmost to
carry the offensive as far as it had. and resources of landing craft by which
the force might have been maintained in the absence of adequate ports
beyond Benghazi were virtually non-existent save for the local manufacture
of a few "Z" craft. (See page 181.)
However controversial the events surrounding the campaign may be, it
was certainly dogged by every form of ill-luck from its very conception.
disastrous change of plan by the Greek commander, the uncertainties and
the final collapse of the Yugo-Slavs, and the rapid disintegration of the Greek
armies before the Germans following the heroic stand against the Italians,
all gravely affected the British plan of campaign.
Administratively the cam-
paign was an improvisation by an inadequate staff short of much neces-
sary equipment, and as will be seen, hurriedly assembled at very short notice.
