The original key plan for the base was now completely revised in the
light of fuller reconnaissances than had been
Greeks.
previously allowed by the
It was decided to establish it in the Thebes area mainly because
the previous lay-out in Athens was impracticable and would certainly lead
to congestion.
The lay-out of the advanced depots at Larissa was much
more difficult than appeared from any map, owing to the flooding of the
Larissa Plain
in winter and the
there of small Greek
depots.
planned.
To obviate congestion, unnecessary marching to and from camps, and
delay in the concentration of formations forward, it was decided that Athens
should be used only as a transit area while the actual assembly of the force,
unit by unit, would be around Larissa.
Troops were to be railed up as soon
as possible after disembarkation and "married" at Larissa to their trans-
port, which was to proceed by road.
In the event this plan worked admirably
owing to good staff work at the base and also to commendable initiative
displayed by units and formations themselves in collecting all their scattered
components.
In the base organization it was found necessary, as later in
many other theatres, to have some kind of " port commandant" to co-
ordinate labour allotment and quick turn-round of transport, A.A., welfare,
etc., in the port area.
direct British
Endeavours to get some invaluable caiques under
control for coastal maintenance was.
however, an almost
complete failure.
The possibility of using other ports was fully explored.
Volos was
available although its use was limited by lack of an all-weather road to
Larissa, poorness of port clearance facilities and the fact that it was served
by only a narrow gauge railway to Larissa and Kalabaka.
Moreover it
could not be used even as a subsidiary base until defence by A.A. guns with
fighter protection had been established, and until labour for the port, and
coal for the railway, had been provided.
Even a base sub-area staff was
lacking, but this was found by utilizing the most useful unit to hand-a
pioneer group H.Q.—which was fortunately available and adequate.
The port of Stylis, just east of Lamia, would have been useful, especially
was rail served.
The Greeks, however, refused facilities there
because they wanted that terminal of the line for the storage of railway
wagons withdrawn from Macedonia before the German advance.
port facilities were very poor, but it was in fact used for the successful
clearance of more than one shipload of M.T. after the German attack had
After the port of Piraeus was put out of action, it was found that the
channel in Elevsis Bay had recently been dredged deeper than was supposed
and a few ships were able to clear there (including one shipload of pack
animals), although the rail service was only by narrow gauge to Athens.
in the Gulf of Corinth, had a good road to Lamia which had been
built by us in the 1914-1918 War.
provision of pack transport units proved so difficult for G.H.O.
Middle East, owing, amongst other things, po the demands of East Africa
WO27
18
Force (see Section 4), that in the end mules and saddlery only were sent
for units to be formed from personnel in Greece, but although one shipload
of mules was landed the other was sunk.
The German attack in any case
developed before the mules landed could be fitted with the saddlery and
issued to units in the mountains.
Last but not the least of the complications was the vigilance with which
both the German agents and the Greeks watched all unloadings in detail.
The German agents, as might be expected, reported all arrivals to Berlin.
The Greeks, on the other hand, filled with envy and amazement at the
seemingly lavish quantity of British transport, rations, etc., began pressing
force headquarters to part with some, particularly transport. Supported, as
they often were, by the British Military Mission, the demands for transport
were impossible to resist and over 100 vehicles had to be handed over
although it was pointed out that the fighting efficiency, and even the final
safety, of the British force might be thereby endangered without materially
increasing the fighting powers of the Greek Army.
Considerable quantities
of Italian transport captured in the Western Desert had already been allotted
The final decision to send troops to Greece, at the eventual request of
was not taken until the end of February.
proceed in the following order: —
1 Anmoured Brigade.
6 Australian Division.
Polish Independent Brigade Group.
An unexpected
German offensive in the Western Desert, however (see
Section 8), meant that 7 Australian Division and the Polish Independent
Brigade Group were retained by Middle
As late as mid-March the C.I.G.S. asked for an opinion as to the feasi-
bility of maintaining the
British force, plus a Greek force, on
River line covering Salonika from the east, and was told that this was well-
nigh impossible in view of the certainty of complete command of the air
Apart from the tactical danger of envelopment of such a
force on the left flank by the obviously impending failure of the Yugo-
Slavs to resist the German armoured columns, the administrative situation
Some small dumps might have been created
"running the gauntlet", but the main L. of C. would
have had to be from Athens via Larissa.
From Larissa to the Struma
position across the plain west of Salonika, there ran only one railway, and
there was only one road with bridges able to take road convoys. No bridging
which could be maintained on
the Struma Line would be a mobile delaying force consisting perhaps of an
armoured brigade with some attached units.
Finally it was decided to hold the line of the Aliakhmon River with the
Commonwealth force of two divisions and the armoured brigade assisted by
a Greek corps of three divisions.
The British right was to be on the sea,
just north-east of Mount Olympus, and the Greek left in the region of Florina.
159
