WO277
7₴
these home visits, while a publicity campaign explained the matter to
the British hosts, so as to save their pride and preclude embarrassment.
In every direction where we expected trouble we instituted
measures— generally with success.
preventive
The keynote of the campaign was
avoidance of mawkish sentimentality and the basing of all our pro-
grammes on facts-
with emphasis on opportunity for personal discovery
of facts.
Everyone who occupied a responsible
position in Britain
during that time will always have a feeling of gratitude and admiration
for the almost universal spirit of co-operation, tolerance, and friend-
ship displayed by both sides."
(General D. D. Eisenhower: " Crusade in Europe " pp. 65-66).
282
CHAPTER VI
THE DEFENSIVE IN ASIA, 1941-1942
SECTION 1-RETREAT FROM MALAYA
Malaya is some 400 miles long as the crow flies. The length of the main
road and the west coast railway from Singapore to the Malaya-Thailand
frontier is approximately 600 miles.
The width of the country varies from
about 200 miles in the widest part to about 60 miles in the narrowest.
Singapore Island lies at the southern end of the peninsula and is separated
from it by the narrow straits of Johore which are crossed by the famous
Johore causeway.
The area of Malaya is nearly equal to that of England and Wales.
The
Island of Singapore corresponds approximately in size and position to the
Isle of Wight.
The distance from Singapore to the Thai border is much
the same as that from the Isle of Wight to the River Tweed.
An extensive mountain range forms a backbone to the peninsula and
separates the western and eastern areas between which there are only few
communications.
Apart from this mountain range the country is for the
most part low-lying and rather featureless.
Malaya is thickly covered with vegetation.
Where the country has not
been brought under cultivation it is covered with jungle of varying types.
Some of it is dense and difficult to penetrate, while in other parts it consists
of heavy timber and, while providing cover from view, constitutes little or
no obstacle to the passage of animals or man.
Of the cultivated areas the
greater part was planted with rubber.
Rubber plantations, while providing
good cover from the air, can egsily ha traversed hu men on foot bu animal
and in most places by light-tracked vehicles:
There were also coco-nut and
other plantations.
Rice was grown in the north of the peninsula, which is
generally more open, and also in certain areas on the west coast.
In the
centre and parts of the north there were rich tin deposits, the mining of
which had resulted in more open areas.
Except in the rice-growing and
yards or even less.
tin-mining areas visibility was almost avaruwhere restricted to a hundred
The
west coast
populated than was the
area was much more developed and more thickly
east, and through it ran the main road and rail
communications linking Singapore with the north.
There were also a coastal
road, a number of lateral roads, especially in the central area, and branch
railway lines linking the main line with canstal centres
The east coast
railway branched from the main line at Gemas and, running east of the
mountain range, struck the moist in the State of Kelantan in north-east
Haad-Yai in Thailand.
Malava and then. running narallel to the coast reinined the main line at
There were very few roads in the east coast area,
the only ones of importance being those constructed to connect the ports
coastal track.
state and the rest of Malaya were a single line railway and a fine-weather
of the State of Kelantan.
of Mersing, Endau and Kuantan with the interior and the internal road system
The only land communications between this latter
283
