was that Royal Artillery units did not look after their ammunition
properly, especially in regard to protection from damp.
Much had to
be returned to the base on account of damage caused by carelessness
or ignorance.
On the other hand, the R.A.S.C. had a useful pamphlet
on the subject, which was evidently studied.
In the B.A.Ds. and at
A.R.Hs. proper storage arrangements were always a nightmare, owing
to shortage of waterproof covers and dunnage, lack of space, ignoring
of safety distances, and guarding difficulties."
The initial requirements of labour for the first contingent were estimated
To meet this demand, 6 labour groups and 48 labour companies
were formed from reservists and from men enlisting into R.A.S.C. depot
As has been seen, a shortage of labour was experienced from
The demand for labour always exceeded the supply, and
immediate action was required to meet the increasing deficiency.
reservists could only be regarded as providing a temporary solution because
it was expected that they had, in time, to return to their parent regiments ;
and the personnel from the depot companies were in many cases quite
unsuited to the work required of them.
In October, upon the formation of the Auxiliary Military Pioneer Corps,
the quality of the personnel improved greatly, although the deficiency in
numbers still existed, and in December,
1939, it was estimated that the
total requirement by the end of 1940 would be 220,000,
of which 18,600
only were then available.
Arrangements were put in hand for making the
maximum use of civil and foreign labour, but difficulties were encountered
which prevented any rapid progress.
French civil labour was virtually non-
existent, owing to the mobilization of the French
national defence requirements, and did not exceed 5,000 men a day, while
the employment of other foreign labour was beset with political and economic
The arrival of 12, 23 and 46 Divisions for pioneer duties in
• April did little to ease the situation.
They arrived too late to be able to
assist when most required, and active operations began within a month of
It was soon proved that the original system adopted, whereby labour
units were permanently allotted to services, was uneconomical.
withdrawn into departmental control by the labour directorate
and allotted to services in accordance with
availability and requirements.
Needless to say, this policy was most unpopular with employing services
who had previously looked upon their pioneers as a small " private army" ;
but there is no doubt that the decision taken was correct.
Other "Q" Services
Apart from the major services mentioned above it is necessary to record
the activities of those other "Q" services which, although smaller, are none
the less essential components of the administrative machine.
word must be said of the Royal Engineers.
But first a
It just is not possible in a
chapter of limited length to give adequate recognitis is not feats of the
works services.
They were indeed ubiquitous.
Beset with difficulties from
the beginning, they were concerned in the establishment of every administra-
tive area, in the building of every depot, and the maintenance of every billet.
48
18
The Royal Engineers were also concerned initially with the formation
of the hirings directorate which had been under discussion at the War Office
for some time before the outbreak of the war. As it was expected that the
force would only have to occupy a limited area, it had been decided that
the work of the service could be the responsibility of the works directorate
as allowed by Field Service Regulations.
With this decision in mind, the
first hirings staff arrived in France on 6th September under the Director of
Works, but within a matter of days the original decision was reversed and
a Hirings Directorate, the head of which was also president of the Claims
Commission, was formed under the Q.M.G. of the Field Force.
Directorate was responsible for the hiring and requisition of all lands and
buildings required for the purposes of the B.E.F. and for the settlement
of all payments in respect thereof.
Assistance was also given to the "Q"
staff in the issuing of instructions covering billetting procedure (billetting
is not normally the concern of hirings) and such things as payment of
electric light bills, while the presence of a senior hirings officer on recon-
naissances greatly facilitated the setting up of G.H.Q.
were entered into with the French Government, of which the most important
were those on the hiring of bulk petrol installations and filling points, and
cold storage plants.
The establishment of a suitably qualified claims and hiring staff at a
higher headquarters is of much assistance to the "Q" staff in a theatre
of operations, and it will generally happen that "Q" will invite the directorate
to enter into spheres of activities outside their normal duties.
The net
results are, however, of immense value to both parties and it should be an
inflexible rule that the advice of the hirings staff is called for on all matters
concerning the acquisition or use of land and property.
With regard to the Army Postal Service, early in the campaign the
C.-in-C. had successfully impressed upon the War Office the importance of
an adequate and speedy delivery of both inward and outward mails.
base post office was located at Cherbourg.
Postal units were located one
divisions, G.H.Q. troops and with the Advanced Air
Striking Force.
Three units were also located on the L. of C. Correspondence
posted in the United Kingdom was circulated by civil post offices to the
home postal depot of the Army Postal Services.
There the mail was sorted
for each headquarters and unit, and despatched via Southampton to the base
post office.
From there mails were sent forward by pack train to supply
rail-heads and distributed to units through the appropriate supply column.
Stationery, army forms and office machinery for the whole of the B.E.F.
were initially held in bulk at No. 1 Stationery Depot, which arrived at Nantes
Three months later an advanced stationery depot opened
at Arras in order to reduce the time lag between the submission of indents
A publications depot opened at Nantes and later
moved to Arras.
A mobile printing section was located in the vicinity of
G.H.O.
but met with early setbacks in that their equipment arrived nearly
two months after the personnel, none of whom, in any case, were conversant
with the printing machines.
Later
this section was assisted by a civilian
press which was acquired and operated by military personnel.
