known as "Piccadilly Circus" south of Sidi Barrani to be stocked up with
supplies and petrol, and with two days'
Division were ordered to dump all second line ammunition at this new F.S.D.,
and stocking was assisted by the formation and manning of M.T. sections
transport arriving at Matruh, and by 7 Armoured Division
finding the maximum number of
spare drivers to man vehicles captured at
Nibeiwa, which returned with stocks for 5 F.S.D. after a trip eastwards loaded
At the same time it was decided to open 7 F.S.D. at Sidi Barrani
to feed Matruh Force, and because Sidi Barrani was an important junction
on the L. of C.
The task of stocking 7 F.S.D. was given to the convoy of
Egyptian lorries.
Sidi Barrani was no port, and it was indeed only shown on the map by
reason of the fact that, in default, there was nothing else worthy of note
in the surrounding desert. It was merely a collection of some few dozen
native shacks with some three or four Egyptian Army huts.
of brackish wells in the
significance ended.
It is, or rather was, however, the end of the tar-macadam
and beyond it to the frontier there lay the foundations of the new
Italian road that was to supplant the original track.
In spite of the lack of port facilities, it was decided to attempt to land
stores at Sidi Barrani by lighters from a store ship.
fully landed from lighters but, owing to sea-way, it was not possible to off-load
on to the lighters from the ships.
This was the more unfortunate since it
had been intended to
use the store ships, which now had to return to
Alexandria without off-loading, to evacuate prisoners, but again the sea-way
prevented their embarkation even as deck passengers.
By 14th December, with 7 Armoured Division on the point of driving all
enemy forces out of Egypt, it was obvious that No. 5 F.S.D. was too far
back; orders were therefore issued for the establishment of 6 F.S.D. to
which stocks from 5 F.S.D. were ferried. All this time 7 Armoured Division
had had to go right back to Bir Hukuma for water, and their resources had
had to be stepped up by a water tank company from H.Q. Western Desert
Certainly, small quantities of water of a sort could be found for
radiators from birs in the desert, but water for drinking remained a problem
until it was found at Riquett, within reach of 6 F.S.D. It had a capacity
of 5,000 gallons a day, which was completely absorbed.
At this time assistance to Greece, then successfully resisting the Italians,
was beginning to gain higher priority for the provision of equipment.
ments were, broadly, vehicles, small arms and machine guns, 75-mm. field
A.A. guns (both light and heavy), in that priority.
Fortress H.Q. with one battalion, had therefore been ordered to remain at
Sidi Barrani in the role of salvage collectors, and to glean from the desert
and captured camps what it could towards meeting the Greek needs.
impromptu small arms overhaul and repair depot was set up at Matruh,
and to it and a third line workshop were sent the various types of salvage
en route to Alexandria for shipment to Greece.
By 15th December all that remained of the much-vaunted Italian army
in Egypt was in custody, and as advertisements for Fascism they were a sorry
In examining the causes of their defeat the thought cannot escape one
WO217/7₴
1 0
that a major reason for the pathetic Italian failure was their inability to
reduce administrative non-essentials.
In contrast to the British, who then
marched with only the lightest of equipment with everything pruned to the
lowest level consistent with efficiency, and with luxuries omitted altogether,
the Italians had apparently fixed no limit on luxury.
doned kit and equipment was enormous.
The amount of aban-
Full-dress uniforms,
sets, gramophones and even pianos were found in the camps, while every-
could be found crates of bottled spa water.
a windfall to our troops constituting as it did a welcome relief from the
brackish water available from the overworked wells round Sidi Barrani: the
transport effort involved in building up the enormous stock of bottled water
might well have been spent on more worth-while loads of ammunition.
Furthermore, from the amount of foodstuffs found in the camps, it would
appear either that little or no control was exercised over issues or, alternatively,
that sufficient rations were issued for considerable periods ahead—with ill-
disciplined troops, a most unsatisfactory arrangement.
doubt, hindered the Italians, it proved a godsend to the British in the
difficult and unforeseen task of feeding our many thousands of prisoners.
On our own side the lessons learnt were many. It was our first large-scale
offensive in the theatre, and our eclipse in France under such vastly different
conditions could not point many administrative lessons applicable to the
Middle East theatre.
Of possibly the greatest importance was our employ-
ment of field (or forward) supply depots in replacement of the normal third
line link between divisional R.A.S.C. and rail-head.
thoroughly justified the expedient as far, anyway, as supplies, water, P.O.L.,
and ammunition were concerned.
Owing, no doubt, to the fact that the
operation was originally envisaged as only lasting a few days, provision
of the following was inadequate :-
R.E. stores.
Ordnance stores.
N.A.A.F.I./E.F.I.
Obviously, when resources are slender, provision must suffer accordingly,
and as regards E.F.I. stores in particular, it will be seen that throughout the
War they have been the first
to go by the board when essentials have
Later, however, when greater experience in operating F.S.Ds. was
gained, such shortcomings
overcome, but the problem of
adequately supplying a fast-moving armoured force with ordnance stores
was never entirely solved.
The lack of trained personnel for the operation
of the depots a direct result of the shortage of manpower in the Middle
East (see Section 1) was a handicap inevitable in any ad hoc experiment.
Later in the War, with ordnance and E.F.I. depots under corps control for
the handling of their own commodities within the F.M.C. or F.M.A., this
difficulty became less pronounced.
There was no clear-cut division of responsibilities between H.Q. Western
Desert Force and divisions. It was asking much of a division when drawing
from one F.S.D. to supervise and control the lay-out of the next.
operation the basis was, one F.S.D. to each division, and indeed it was
