The total supplies despatched to the B.E.F. from the United Kingdom
were as follows: —
Ex Supply Reserve Depots
At the close of the period covered by this Section the reserves amounted
to 64 days for a feeding strength of 400,000 men.
A fortnight after the
of active operations the reserves
had dropped, as a result of
abandonment, destruction and capture, to 15 days.
Thus, in little over a
week of fighting nearly 20,000,000 rations were lost.
Petrol and supplies were treated, in the early stages, as parallel items,
and the distribution of packed petroleum
products was originally
out by one of the base supply depots which included a petrol sub-depot.
Petrol was supplied to L. of C. units from detail issue depots, and to corps
and divisional troops, after leaving the assembly area, by rail to the petrol
and thence via the corps petrol parks and divisional
During this period petrol was supplied in 2-gallon returnable cans which
had been shipped from the United Kingdom before the outbreak of war and
stored at Donges under arrangements made by the Anglo-Iranian Oil Com-
Reserves were held in non-returnable tins and were authorized at
30 days for each of the northern and southern bases, plus 15 days working
stocks, but the build-up of the reserves took longer than expected and did
not approach the required amounts until November.
5,000 tons of M.T. spirit, a filling plant and 200,000 returnable cans
were also held under the arrangements of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company
in Donges as an emergency bulk reserve which was only to be used in the
event of failure of the cased supply, and even then for base and L. of C.
This policy was the opposite of that adopted later in the war,
but was due to the fact that no facilities were available for the speedy refilling
and turn round of cans, and although the advantages of a returnable con-
tainer system of supply to the forward troops were appreciated, the enormous
number of cans that would be required to operate it made the scheme imprac-
The early fallacy that rations and petrol are parallel items of supply
to be handled by the same units was soon exploded, and a decision was
taken early in the campaign to divorce the two commodities.
depots were separated from base supply depots and were later given inde-
pendent identities as petrol depots.
Road-served depots were first estab-
lished at Blain, St. Tregonnec and Sigy, until rail-served depots could be
made at Blain and Abancourt.
petrol port, a further depot was improvised at Moult-Argences.
Upon the opening of Caen as the major
dump was established at Vignacourt.
Shortly after the arrival of the force in France representations had been
made by the B.E.F. that petrol should be supplied in bulk by making use
40
WO27
1 p
of tankage belonging to the various oil companies.
curred with this suggestion,
hand.
The War Office con-
and the necessary arrangements were put in
By agreement with the French, bulk storage facilities at Le Havre,
Honfleur and Rouen and, later, other suitable coastal and inland locations
were placed at the disposal of the B.E.F.
A bulk petroleum storage company
was formed in November and, arriving in France in February, was located
at Rouen, with sections at the various sites where storage facilities were
available.
A further type of petrol unit was now required for the distribu-
tion by road of bulk supplies to consumers or to can-filling centres.
led to the formation in United Kingdom of bulk petrol transport companies,
of which three were despatched to the B.E.F.
The need for returnable containers had not been forgotten, and action
had been placed for large quantities, and delivery was to begin by the end
Production was, however, retarded by supply difficulties,
and when these were overcome a further delay was experienced owing to
the lack of suitable storage accommodation in France, so that it was not
until January that the first load of 25,000 cans was shipped.
campaign a total of nearly 1,300,000 4-gallon returnable cans was shipped
to the B.E.F. (The returnable can in use by the B.E.F. must not be confused
with the "jerrican"-universal in the later stages of the war—to which it
bore little or no resemblance.)
The filling and repair of the containers was in the hands of base petrol
filling centres established at Rouen and Lille.
These units were cumbersome,
and required careful siting and considerable engineering work before they
could be installed in a theatre of mobile operations.
The introduction of
mobile petrol filling centres at a later stage in the War was a belated
recognition of the unsuitability of the former units under conditions of
mobile warfare.
The daily rate of petrol consumption by the force was causing concern to
the staff.
The delay in the establishment of the installations, the high
rate of leakage from the 4-gallon non-returnable tin, a disturbing lack of
M.T. discipline, and the fact that the move forward to the Belgian frontier
had been made nearly a fortnight earlier than expected, were all contributory
factors to the serious situation in November when the consumption was in
excess of 600 tons a day (representing over 40 miles a vehicle a day for
the whole force); a figure which was little less than the average daily
receipts.
An intensive economy drive was introduced, and all commanders
were
informed personally by the Q.M.G., B.E.F., of the gravity of the
Gradually, however, the force settled down to a more or less
static existence, and the economy campaign began to bear fruit; consumption
dropped to about 350 to 400 tons a day, a satisfactory reduction considering
Conversely the delivery rates
became more satisfactory and the forward supply of petrol subsequently
exceeded the demand, especially in the forward areas where huge unwieldy
dumps were formed, which later gave rise to considerable embarrassment
Fire precautions, especially in the port areas, were adequate and rigidly
enforced.
Berths were railed off and guarded, smoking was prohibited, as
was the
use of steam engines and electric cranes.
Even the wearing of
