The situation had grown even worse by 22nd May, when the ports
at both Boulogne and Calais were out of action, and the greater part
Railhead Mechnical Transport Companies had been captured.
Furthermore a reconnaissance of Ostend had shewn that the port could
not be worked for military requirements at short notice.
amount of rations and small arms ammunition was sent by air up to
23rd May, but from then onwards it became impossible for aircraft to
On 23rd May therefore, on the advice of the Q.M.G., I decided
to place the B.E.F. on half rations.
Dunkirk, though its water supply was destroyed, remained available for
unloading supplies till 26th May,
but constant air raids imposed a
well nigh unbearable strain on the stevedore battalions.
However, they
remained at duty until, in the end, all the quays and cranes were put
Thereafter supplies could only be landed on the beaches.
Lighters arrived to embark troops loaded with a portion of supplies,
ammunition, and water, and these were unloaded and distributed by
The delivery of supplies to
Corps was maintained, albeit
irregularly, up till 30th May when the last convoy went forward from
the supply depot on the beach at La Panne.
By 20th May all the General Hospitals had been cut off from the
forward area and improvised arrangements had to be made for the
evacuation of casualties.
Some of the Casualty Clearing Stations had
to be diverted from their normal function
and used as Hospitals.
Hospital ships continued to berth at Dunkirk until the night 31st May /
1st June and casualties were evacuated to them by
road and by rail.
Ambulance trains were running as late as 26th May."
Shortly after the enemy attack began the War Office made tentative
preparations to feed the B.E.F. in the event of the base being cut off, and
a special ration scale was drawn up to form the basis of shipments to act
as a reserve for possible requirements by the force.
This ration scale was
known as Scale
and comprised the following items:
Preserved meat
12 oz.
a.m.
Biscuit
Tea (in tins) ...
12 oz.
Chocolate (eating)
3/4 oz.
Cigarettes
sugar (in tins
2 oz.
Matches
Condensed milk
Cheese (in tins)
2 oz.
Rum
1OZ.
217 oz.
1/448 gallon
Shipments of this ration
were started as soon as the emergency base
was opened, and were increased until a continual train loading programme
by night and by day was operating from the supply reserve depots at Barry
The supplies were rushed across the channel in all types of
craft and off-loaded on to the beaches.
Initially they were sent forward in
bulk, but this method was soon changed to a system of pack loading whereby
ships sailed with a number of complete rations so that adequate supplies of
a minimum balanced diet would be available.
During the period 19th May
to 2nd June a total of 6,500 tons of supplies was despatched from supply
reserve depots, but a proportion of these was returned when the evacuation
The supply by air referred to by Lord Gort was short-lived.
On 22nd
and 23rd May a total of nearly 50 tons of preserved meat and biscuit was
54
flown in, but the scheme was abandoned on the second day owing to the
size of the escort required, the number of aircraft casualties and the diffi-
culties of off-loading on the other side of the channel.
The supply of petrol did not give rise to the same anxiety as food. There
were considerable stocks of packed and bulk spirit in filling centres and
dumps both along the L. of C. and in the forward areas.
filling centre at Lille was in full operation and was a convenient source of
supply even after most of the dumps had been destroyed or captured.
In fact, the main problem regarding petrol was not so much the lack of
it as the enormous stocks that were potentially available to the Germans
Accordingly plans were made to institute action so that the
maximum amount would be denied to the enemy.
been prepared for the use of small demolition parties (known as XD parties)
to be made available from Royal Engineer units and earmarked for this
These parties were sent out on specific missions under the control of
the War Office and, in conjunction with the R.A.S.C. personnel of the
depots, a large proportion of petrol stocks was destroyed. It is not possible
to determine the exact amount nor to describe the methods used, informa-
tion being scanty on both these points, but it is known that at least 40,000
tons of bulk and packed petroleum products were destroyed in the depots,
etc., at Blain, Moult, Honfleur, Le Havre and Rouen by either R.E. or
R.A.S.C. efforts. After the evacuation was completed the R.A.F. continued
the destruction by bombing targets indicated by the War Office as having
escaped destruction owing to the XD parties being unsuccessful.
No change was made in the pre-established postal working principles
The rapidly changing conditions, however,
obviously interrupted the smooth operation of the postal service and, in
mail was delivered and disposed of on an expediency basis, in the
light of current conditions.
It is significant that only a very small propor-
tion of correspondence failed to secure ultimate delivery to the addressees.
In spite of the most strenuous efforts by the N.A.A.F.I./E.F.I. staff, the
bulk of the large variety of "attractive" stores held in the various ware-
Goods that were abandoned were normally handed over
to the local civilian authorities so that, rather than the enemy, the French
troops or refugees might have the benefit of them.
to this rule was at Lille where the E.F.I. stocks were issued to divisional
supply officers in order to alleviate the worsening ration situation.
of praise must be given to the small number of mobile canteens operated
by E.F.I. and the voluntary organizations.
They remained with the troops
during the withdrawal, replenished their stocks as and when possible, and
contrived, by producing cups of tea and cigarettes on the most improbable
occasions, to maintain the spirits of the weary marchers.
The rapid advances by the enemy and the over-running of French terri-
tory containing premises and land, hired or requisitioned for the use of the
B.E.F., made it desirable for the situation to be regularized and the owners
notified of the termination of existing contracts.
It was obviously impossible
for this notification to be served individually and a " projet de décret-loi"
was therefore prepared by the hirings directorate and the French Government
for issue by proclamation.
At the same time, orders were issued to local
hirings officers to record for future reference all normal day to day claims
