Middle East had sent one squadron of the Royal Tank Regiment with
Mik. II
tanks (" Matildas").
The move of these from Port Sudan was
implicated by the fact that the Sudan Railways had been given the wrong
reights and measurements of the tanks, and flats which had been specially
strengthened to
carry them were found to have been modified the wrong way.
This factor had long-lasting effects throughout the campaign and it was never
possible to move the whole squadron at once.
process of concentration active patrolling continued in the
Gallabat and Kassala areas, causing the enemy much loss and giving them
a completely false impression of our strength -while at the same time giving
us much valuable information as to theirs.
At the same time reports were
received of enemy concentration between Gondar and
of his strengthening garrisons in the Upper Blue Nile sector
the motor road from Asosa to Kurmuk, thus constituting a
constant threat to the Nile L. of C., and the railway at Sennar.
January indications began to be received of the enemy's possible intention
of evacuating Kassala.
At first it was not possible to decide whether the
activity actually represented a proposed withdrawal or whether, in fact, the
enemy was strengthening his positions.
At the same time our preparations
were far from complete and it was most undesirable to launch a premature
attack which might fail from lack of sufficient strength. With this in mind
General Platt was ordered to be ready to bring forward the date of his
operation to prevent the enemy's withdrawal, and to calculate the earliest
date an advance could be made in sufficient strength. The date finally
selected was 19th January, 1941.
Originally 5 Indian Division was quartered in the Gedaref area and one
brigade of 4 Indian Division joined it there and came under command.
of defence it was necessary to
maintain a force of nearly
brigade strength in the area Port Sudan-Gebeit under direct command of
Sudan, and one complete brigade group to contain the enemy
lines at Gallabat. This left the two Indian divisions with two brigades each
for operations, since the brigade under command 5 Indian Division reverted
to command of 4 Indian Division on the enemy's abandonment of Kassala
although it remained at Gedaref until called forward.
Originally it had
been intended to concentrate 4 Indian Division in the area Derudeb-
Aroma by 1st February, but the news of the enemy's proposed evacuation
from Kassala had its effect and they were rushed forward by road and rail
Being a rush move, and mobile operations
being anticipated, all surplus stores and baggage were left in unit dumps
to be subsequently moved to Kassala.
A composite force known as "Gazelle", consisting of all arms and
including Indian, British and S.D.F. troops, came under command of 4 Indian
15th January and operated in the Gash area.
was now poised for operations against Kassala.
THE LINES OF COMMUNICATION FROM THE SUDAN
Headquarters of the Sudan Railways was located at Atbara, which was
point of the railway system in the Sudan.
From Atbara the
line runs northwards to Wadi Halfa, eastwards to Port Sudan and southwards,
following the course of the Nile, to Khartoum.
From Khartoum the line
128
WO277
1 0
runs south to Sennar, where it branches westwards to El Obeid and eastwards
meets the Atbara-Port Sudan line at Haiya.
From Kassala the line runs north again until it
few and, as stated, the railway consists of a single line of which the circuit
had been cut by the enemy possession of Kassala.
Railways were fortunately a great deal more efficient than the neighbouring
State Railways, and this was a contributory factor to the
administrative success of the campaign.
Roads in the Sudan were another matter altogether. In general, long
distance movement-and, as has already been stressed earlier, distances are
enormous-was carried out by rail. Such roads as existed were little more
than tracks, except those in the immediate environs of towns, and the main
Khartoum-Atabara, Atbara-Kassala, Khartoum-Wad
Gedaref-Kassala and Khartoum-Kassala. Maintenance of the British force
was necessarily, in view of the scarcity of road transport, a rail commitment.
the original plan was primarily a defensive one, i.e., the
Kassala to secure our flank, the actual withdrawal by the
Italians from the town, which took place on 18th January, raised further
Kassala in our hands constituted a good supply base for
operations against Eritrea, and with the recent experiences in the Western
Desert to emphasize the weakness of Italian opposition, it became feasible
to consider the advantage of the capture of Asmara and Massawa.
more, our successes in Cyrenaica allowed a revision of plan since it was not
now necessary to consider withdrawing troops from the Sudan for service
in the Western Desert. (At this time there was no question of sending
British troops to the aid of Greece.) Massawa with its well-equipped harbour
would enable us to exchange the second-rate base of Kassala with its difficult
and extensive lines of communication for a first-class supply port and a
connection with Asmara less than 40 miles in length.
Asmara, high up on
the plateau, yet closely linked with a sea base and, as the capital of the
province, a focal point for all roads from the south, was probably the best
point from which to dominate Abyssinia until its re-conquest was completed,
and later to protect the subject races while law and order were restored. Last
but not least, less than two hundred miles separated Kassala from Asmara
whereas elsewhere in Abyssinia the nearest objectives were three or four
The disadvantages lay in the natural difficulties of the
Kassala-Asmara route, which would probably require too great a force
for the single road by which it would have to be supplied. However, after
the re-occupation of Kassala, General Platt was ordered to continue his
pursuit and press on to Asmara.
Administration was based on the two railway lines Khartoum-Gedaref-
Kassala (the southern line), and Atbara-Haiya-Kassala (the northern line).
Ammunition rail-heads or advanced sub-depots were, on the northern line,
Adarot with an emergency reserve dump at Adarama.
These were replen-
ished by H.Q. Troops, Sudan from the A.O.D., at Atbara. On the southern
line Gedaref and later Qala-En-Nahl were the advanced sub-depots replenished
from Khartoum, Qala-En-Nahl being the rail-head proper. The field supply
depot for 5 Indian Division was at Khashm-El-Girba, while that for 4 Indian
