strongly recommended at that time that divisions should always be respon-
sible for selecting the site of the F.S.D. Under later conditions this problem
was consistently a source of anxiety.
In subsequent campaigns,
piped water was to minimize the difficulty, but, in this campaign, water was
Water-carts were few, and most were undesert-
worthy; furthermore, the water-can in general use was a 2-gallon petrol-
type tin of which the wastage was enormous.
The situation was not eased
until craft from which water could be pumped ashore were put into Sollum.
Both divisions suffered from a shortage of wireless for administrative
The wide area of desert over which formations were operating
and the speed and frequency with which units changed their location made
it extremely difficult to communicate changes of replenishment areas, since
once a R.A.S.C.
company had started for the replenishment area it was
completely out of the control of C.R.A.S.C. Without wireless it was difficult
to ensure that "B" echelon was brought up at the right time, and that it
was refilled by second line early in the day so that it was ready to go forward
In both divisions it was found advisable to put " B" echelons
control; otherwise they rapidly became lost. 7 Armoured
admittedly better provided with wireless for administrative
than 4 Indian Division, but even so it could only equip a few
workshop and medical detachments with an R/T. link from rear divisional
Mention has already been made of the difficulties incurred as a result
of the enormous numbers of prisoners, and of the methods adopted to deal
It should be added, however, that the docility of the prisoners
was invaluable-lorries loaded with as many as 70 prisoners at a time being
sent off without escort, and driven by Italian drivers.
made of Italian mechanics to make the captured lorries serviceable.
knew where, if anywhere, spares existed, and the majority of British drivers
were unfamiliar with large diesels.
It is almost unnecessary to conclude this recapitulation by adding that
from the outset of the battle, first line transport far exceeded the normal
expected of it-but this was to become a commonplace of the
desert and was characteristic of every subsequent operation.
Maintenance by Sea
With Sollum in our hands, it was decided to make the most of its some-
what exiguous port facilities especially as preparations were now in hand
for an attack on Bardia.
Sollum consists of a large bay sheltered from
the north and west, though the water is, as might be expected, very shallow.
There was a short quay, but the port was not capable of accepting other
than light coasters. A few scattered buildings along the south shore comprised
the town while, on the escarpment above the bay, were some modern Egyptian
barracks which by then had not suffered the extensive damage they later
H.Q. Western Desert Force had decided to establish 8 F.S.D. at Sollum,
to replace 7 F.S.D. on the coast road, the intention being that 8 F.S.D.
together with 9 F.S.D. (to be established for 7 Armoured Division on the
Italian side of the frontier) should both be stocked by sea-borne supplies
110
WO277
1 0
That the administrative situation was tenuous can be gauged from the
fact that on 16th December a critical situation arose when it was found
that 7 Armoured Division could not complete a second line refill of petrol
at 6 F.S.D., and all their available vehicles had to be diverted to 7 F.S.D.
at Sidi Barrani, where there were fortunately available some 40,000 gallons
In the desert, December and January can be counted
on to produce the most blinding sand-storms, and at a time when the
force was living on a hand to mouth basis, the delay of a convoy as a
result of a sand-storm could be a serious embarrassment.
Egyptian Army made a further offer of two A.S.C. companies and sixteen
ambulance cars. and these, used in the back area, freed British units for
The arrival too of the first sections of a ten-ton L. of C.
company constituted another step towards putting further operations on a
sound administrative basis.
Certainly it would have seemed that our captures of transport, which
were relatively enormous, should have sufficed for the continuation of our
advance without respite.
There were, however, two main reasons why this
was not the case.
Firstly, they were regarded by all units, and even
formations, as legitimate loot; vehicle casualties had been high, the machinery
for their replacement was inadequate, and Italian vehicles were somewhat
naturally looked upon as heaven-sent substitutes.
which had stripped non-essentials to an absolute minimum was only too
delighted to relax and avail themselves of the greater comfort enjoyed and
abandoned by the Italians, thus messes, etc., expanded from their Spartan
standards with a resultant demand for extra transport. Once much of this
valuable transport had been dissipated through the many units in the field
it was almost impossible to regain control of it. Numerous orders were
without success, and British R.A.S.C. companies which had been
formed to be equipped with captured vehicles stood idle.
officer commanding the vehicle reception park was given authority to con-
fiscate all captured vehicles no matter in whose possession they might be.
This, with the help of provost, achieved some results, but it was necessarily
most effective in rear areas, and most offenders thereafter took care to keep
their captured vehicles well forward.
The reason for the issue of this order
was made abundantly clear, and formations were warned that failure to
hand in these vehicles was prejudicing the operation.
The second main reason was
the Italian standards of maintenance.
Although they are, as a race, noted for the excellence of their cars, it seemed
that they took too little pride in the mechanical condition of their vehicles.
No great stocks of spares were found, and indeed the Italian spares organi-
zation seems to have been as sketchy as their maintenance system. Men-
tion has already been made of the average British driver's ignorance of
diesel engines and, as the majority of the Italian vehicles of any value were
diesel, this meant that many
sound vehicles which, after appropriation
developed minor faults, were abandoned, often in locations far from the
beaten track and so virtually lost. Others were abandoned on main routes
to be " cannibalized"
have been a most valuable asset was virtually wasted and dissipated by
those to whom it would have afforded the most assistance.
On 22 December, information was received that two ships, both loaded
Such news could not
with water, were due at Sollum on the next day.
have been more opportune, since it came at a time when 9 F.S.D. had
