were made during the next five years, both for simplicity and to meet the
altering circumstances, it is somewhat surprising to learn the lay-out shown
above served as a basis for the division of duties between the C.I.G.S. and
the Q.M.G. in matters regarding army equipment for the whole of the war.
It was an
unsatisfactory
division, and responsibility overlapped consider-
ably between the General Staff and the Q.M.G's. department, especially in
the
D.S.D. (W) and Ordnance
branches.
This was reported on towards
the end of 1940 by the Standing Committee on Army Administration (see
Chapter V, Section 2) which recommended the appointment of an officer to
direct and co-ordinate the three
Ordnance directorates, and the eventual
abolition of D.S.D. (W), whose duties in many instances ran parallel to
This recommendation was approved by the Secretary of State and, in
1941, the Director-General of Army Equipment (D.G.A.E.) was
appointed under the Q.M.G. to co-ordinate the activities of the D.O.S.,
the Direotor of Warlike-Stores (formerly D.O.S. (W)) and the Director of
Mechanical Maintenance (formerly D.O.S. (E)).
The D.G.A.R. had been
appointed an additional member of the Army Council in August, 1940, and
had ceased, temporarily, at least, to be under the Q.M.G.
During August,
1941, the branch of the Directorate of Military Training dealing with military
training films (M.T.9) was formed into the Directorate of Army Kine-
matography (D.A.K.) and placed under the D.G.A.E., whose responsibilities
at the close of 1941 were as follows :
Q.M.G.
D.G.A.E.
D.A K
1.K. branches
D.O.S.
D.W.S.
O.S. branches
D.M.M.
W.S. branches
M.M. branches
1942 saw further changes in nomenclature in that the D.O.S. was re-
styled the Director of Clothing and Stores (D.C.S.) and the appointment of
C.O.S. was re-instituted and held by the senior R.A.O.C. director serving
The Directorate of Mechanical Maintenance
abolished as a result of the formation in October of the Directorate of
Mechanical Engineering and the creation of the Royal Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers.
The recommendations of the S.C.A.A. in regard to the abolition
of
D.S.D.(W) were not fully implemented although
1942, the
Directorate was restyled the Directorate of Weapons and Vehicles (later the
Directorate of Special Weapons and Vehicles) apdons sether with other G.S.
Branches concerned with equipping the fighting forces,
placed under the
A.C.I.G.S. where it had a special and urgent task in allotting priorities to
all stores in such short supply that General Staff control was essential.
Issues of such " controlled stores"
were made by Ordnance on the instruc-
tions of the General Stafi until the position improved to such an extent that
availability approached equality with demand.
Consideration had also been given to a report by a committee formed
early in 1942 under the chairmanship of Sir Robert Sinclair to investigate
14
1
the higher organization of the War Office. The Sinclair Report recommended
that the D.G.A.E. be given the status of a deputy to the Q.M.G. and that
the D.G.A.R. be returned to the Q.M.G's. department.
These proposals, which obviously made for simplification, were not fully
implemented for some time, but during August, 1942, the (then) civilian
was appointed to a post in U.S.A. and the vacancy was filled by an
officer of the rank of Major-General who was placed directly under the
Some months later, in accordance with the new policy now being
followed, the title of D.G.A.E. was altered to D.Q.M.G. (A.E.) and the two
recommendations of the Sinclair Report had been fulfilled, the result being
best illustrated by the diagram below :
Q.M.G.
D.Q.M.G.(A.E.)
I., R.E.M.E.
Q(O.M.)
Q (Stats)
Brig. Q(A.E.)
Q(A.E.)1
War equipment
tanes and scales.
Q(A.E.)2
Q(A.E.)3
R.A.O.C. and
Policy for
R.E.M.E. policy
civilian personnel
and equipment
in R.A.O.C.
production.
Instead of being responsible for the co-ordination of the directorates of
the D.W.S., D.C.S.,
and D.A.K. as had been the D.G.A.E.,
D.OMG A E) became responsible for co-ordinating the work of all
directors of the Q.M.G's. department in respect of the provision, storage,
issue, maintenance and disposal of army equipment.
It will be noted that
the creation of the D.Q.M.G. (A.E.) involved the establishment of several
new staff branches and the introduction of a new War Office nomenclature.
The branch of Q (Stats.) was formed from the statistical branch of the
D.G.A.E's. department and was expanded to cover the co-ordination of all
Q.M.G.
statistics, while an
" Organization and Methods" branch was set
up to advise directorates on the application of scientific business methods
to their various activities.
The new Q (A.E.) staff branches were formed
from those formerly under the D.G.A.E.
This division of duties continued with little major change except that
in May, 1944, the D.G.A.R. was placed under the D.Q.M.G. (A.E.), whose
duties at the cessation of hostilities in 1945 were:
1. Co-ordination when necessary, within Q.M.G's. Department, of pro-
vision, storage, issue, repair, salvage and disposal of army equipment
of Ordnance,
Engineer,
Transportation and S.T. supply, and co-
ordination on questions of policy relating to the foregoing with G.S.
and V.Q.M.G
2. In addition to the above, co-ordination of provision, storage, issue,
repair, salvage and disposal of items of medical supply.
3. General policy and co-ordination of statistics (including
machine
calculations) for Q.M.G's. department and for the General Staff on
equipment matters.
15
