The Directorate of Quartering
the technical term used for the provision of housing for
throughout the war the responsibility of the Directorate of
What remained of the original Directorate of Movements and
Quartering after Q.M.G. 2 and Q.M.G. 13 had been thrown off comprised
only Q.M.G. (O) and Q.M.G. 1. Q.M.G. (O) was abolished immediately on
the outbreak of war, to be later resuscitated as Q (Ops.), but Q.M.G. 1
remained to form the basis for the war-time Directorate of Quartering.
Quartering proper governs all forms of accommodation from peace-time
barracks to bivouacs in the forward areas.
The latter, however, are governed
by tactical considerations and do not really come within the orbit of the
Thus, although the directorate exercised a fairly close control over
quartering and the resultant R.E.
works services at home and in non-
operational theatres, it confined itself only to matters of policy and guidance
as far as the operational theatres overseas were concerned.
The directorate, apart from giving staff direction to the Directorate of
Fortifications and Works, also directly controlled the Army Postal Services,
the canteen service (N.A.A.F.I.) and, later, the Inspectorate of Agriculture.
The inclusion, during war-time, of the A.P.S. and N.A.A.F.I. under a direc-
torate dealing mostly with non-operational matters was in point of fact
illogical, particularly after the creation of Q (Ops.), since it meant that
operational matters concerning these two services could not always be dealt
with as expeditiously as if they had been placed on the same footing as
other directorates.
cessation of hostilities both N.A.A.F.I. and the D.A.P.S. passed to the control
of the V.Q.M.G.)
By 1945, the organization of the Directorate of Quartering was as follows:
D.Q.
Inspector of
Agriculture
D.D.Q. (A)
D.D.O.(B)
D.A.P.S.
D.D.Q.(C)
Q.1.
Planning
0.2
NAART
0.3
Accommo-
dation
allowances,
funds,
Requisitioning,
derequisi-
tioning,
building.
Q.5
Quartering
and Works
Services at
nome.
Q.6
Quartering
and Work
nervices
abroad.
messes.
barrack
damages, etc.
Other "O" Services
The foregoing has dealt with the Ouarter-Master-General's department
during the
Second World War as far as what may loosely be called the
major "Q" services are concerned.
But before passing to the real purpose
of this history, which is maintenance in the theatres of war, it is necessary
22
WO217
1 8
to say a brief word concerning the War Office organization of the other "O"
services which, although small in number, were no less essential to the
execution of efficient military administration.
The oldest of these was the Directorate of Army Veterinary and Remount
Services.
Contrary to what
was probably the general expectation,
Veterinary and Remount Services had plenty of scope for their activities
the
in a war which was fought by an Army that had been, in Great Britain at
all events, almost entirely mechanized.
Although mounted cavalry made
only one appearance in the field, pack and animal transport was used
extensively in Italy and Burma, to a smaller extent in Abyssinia and Tunisia,
and often in the base areas of other theatres to save transport and petrol.
Shortly after the outbreak of war the Directorates of Remounts and of
Army Veterinary Services had combined to form a single Directorate of
Army Veterinary and Remount Services and it was generally conceded that
this amalgamation was successful and that the method of working as one
service produced important economies in manpower and time.
The Directorate of Labour, by far the largest of the services dealt with
in this sub-section, was, on the other hand, entirely a war-time creation.
In September, 1939, the labour branch at the War Office was part of the
Directorate of Recruiting and Organization in the Adjutant-General's depart-
ment and remained so until 1940 when the Q.M.G. assumed all responsibilities
in relation to pioneers and labour.
When taken over by the Q.M.G. the
labour branch re-formed as a directorate under the Director of Labour, and
from then onwards its importance grew until at the end of the war it was
employing at home and in theatres all over the world a total labour force
of one and a half million men of all nationalities, including 166,000 British
personnel in companies of the Pioneer Corps (later the Royal Pioneer Corps).
Finally, two directorates, which had been created solely as a war-time
expedient, dealt with military salvage (The Directorate of Salvage) and Army
Kinematography (The Directorate of Army Kinema Services).
Service and the Printing and Stationery Service, although under the senior
"Q" officer in overseas commands, were not represented in the department
of the O.M.G.
The Department in Retrospect
What are the conclusions to be drawn from this chapter? The useful
ones will be those which can help to guide future organization.
Lord Esher
in 1904 set up an organization which, in his view and for his day, combined
in one harmonious whole the several civil and military elements which were
necessary in combination to train and administer the Army in peace.
was concerned largely with the design of a suitable Ministry, and more
with its functions in peace than in war.
Modern operations demanded amendments to his organization and it
was inevitably subjected to the " tinkering
" processes.
The structure of the
Quarter-Master-General's department was changed a little here and a little
there, but it tended with each alteration more nearly to reflect the structure
in the field.
It does not seem that this tendency was a planned one or one
that was guided by conscious effort.
It seems rather to have resulted naturally
from the knowledge that a sound and efficient organization existed in the
