demolitions had been carried out in the harbour and in other installations.
was nearly 30,000 prisoners, 236 guns and 87 tanks.
vehicles were also captured but, for the first time, the Italians seemed to have
made serious attempts to immobilize them.
Reconnaissances were immediately carried out in the harbour, and though
attempts had been made to destroy the jetties, they were found to be still
A refrigeration plant was discovered intact with sufficient meat to
permit of a quarter ration being issued to 6 Australian Division.
was extremely unpopular with the remainder of the force, who had not
enjoyed fresh meat since the start of the campaign, on the grounds that the
Australians had arrived late and should await their turn.
However, as the
Australians had captured it and had quickly issued it with due underdrawal
of preserved meat, the argument was academic.
The plan for disposal of the prisoners chiefly depended on the opening
of the port which, it was expected, would take some seven days because the
harbour had to be completely swept for mines.
Some 500 prisoners a day
were evacuated to Sollum in empty supply lorries for onward despatch by
sea, but this was only a pittance and the remainder were kept in cages in
Fortunately reasonable quantities of Italian rations were captured
and some 10,000 tons of water were found in cisterns together with an intact
water distillation plant capable of turning out some 100 tons a day.
Every effort was now made to stock up sufficient supplies to base the whole
of 7 Armoured Division on 12 F.S.D.
Supplies in general were adequate
except for petrol, of which there was only sufficient for 7 Armoured Division.
To meet this deficiency, Sollum sub-area was ordered to give complete priority
to unloading of petrol for two days, while H.Q., B.T.E., were asked to divert
Tobruk. It was also represented to H.Q., B.T.E., that
Sollum should continue at full capacity until Tobruk was in use, and no
port units should be taken away from Sollum until then.
Royal Navy were hopeful that mine clearance of Tobruk might be completed
more rapidly than originally forecast and, in fact, shipping actually entered
Tobruk and began unloading on 28th January-only six days after its capture.
G.H.Q. had in the meantime sent up a reconnaissance party to assess the
suitability of Tobruk as an advanced base, while a town commander had
been furnished by 6 Australian Division and an Australian infantry brigade
arrived from the Delta to assume administrative control of the town.
Every effort was at the same time being made to build up both 12 and
13 F.S.Ds., in the first place by ferrying forward stores from 10 and 11
F.S.Ds., and then by road convoys straight from Tobruk.
In so far as 6 Australian Division was concerned it was
possible to find water near the coast, but inland it was a much more difficult
Initially water had to be carried from wells near the coast to
12 F.S.D., but work was started by Royal Engineers on the construction of
cisterns with a capacity of 2,000 tons at mimi, from which water-tankers
would supply 7 Armoured Division. At the same time a well-boring section,
R.E. was sent to prospect for water at Mechili.
The Capture of Benghazi
On 30th January the enemy surprisingly evacuated Derna, after blowing
the road leading down to the town. An immediate reconnaissance and sound-
ings in the harbour proved that it would be quite suitable for small ships.
116
WO277
A decision was therefore taken to use it for one commodity-petrol - and
G.H.Q. was asked to divert petrol ships from Tobruk.
in accordance with a plan to send 7 Armoured Division in a rapid advance
south of the Jebel country to cut the road south of Benghazi, while the
remainder of the force pressed the enemy along the northern route, instruc-
tions were issued to the division to reconnoitre a site in the Mechili area
for an F.S.D. from which it could be supplied during such an operation. A
sit was accordingly chosen some 25 miles south-west of Mechili for No. 14
F.S.D., as it was to be known.
Stocks for this depot were planned to
consist of ten days' supplies and P.O.L., and two refills of ammunition, the
total tonnage of which was estimated as 2,840 tons; but on a five day turn
round from Tobruk with an available transport lift of some 1,225 tons, this
was more than a ten day job.
When, however, petrol ships arrived at Derna,
the requirements of P.O.L., which, in tonnage, were almost exactly half the
total, could be brought from Derna on a two-day turn round. In view of the
essential delay imposed by such preparations, the date of the advance was
provisionally fixed as 12th February.
While these plans were being made
13 Corps were informed that, as the result of their representations regarding
the control of their own base, they came under direct command of G.H.O...
Middle East, as from 1st February.
During this time news was coming from all sources indicating Italian
retreats everywhere, and by 3rd February air reconnaissance proved that the
enemy had decided on further withdrawal. Large columns were moving
westwards, tanks were being entrained at Barce, and a general cessation of
hostile air activity indicated the abandonment of airfields south of Benghazi.
In view of such activities, plans had to be accelerated, and 7 Armoured
Division was ordered to move south-west across the desert to Msus with all
available resources in order to be able to operate against Soluch or Agedabia,
as required. 6 Australian Division were given the task of pressing the enemy
along the northern route.
This enforced acceleration of the plan somewhat naturally made a drastic
revision of the administrative preparations essential. Fortunately, Tobruk was
now working up, and some 900 tons a day were being received, with the result
that more shipping could be diverted there from Sollum with a consequent
saving in transport over the road link between Sollum and Tobruk. All the
available road lift was concentrated on the building up, with supplies and
P.O.L., of 14 F.S.D., on which 7 Armoured Division was based, while as a
secondary task it was decided to move forward 13 F.S.D. to a new F.S.D.,
No. 15, to be established near Slonta in order to enable 6 Australian Division
to operate well forward on the northern route.
Furthermore, as 7 Armoured
Division had been ordered to move to Msus, from where it might operate
either to Soluch or Agedabia, it was obvious that an F.S.D. had to be
established there, and must be, established immediately upon the arrival of
the division to give it some freedom of manoeuvre.
The date for this advance was fixed for 4th February, and it was estimated
that it would be possivan te wast up some four days" supplies and 97,000
gallons of petrol at 14 F.S.D. by this date in order to enable 7 Armoured
Division to carry on the advance.
Later it was decided to send on one
convoy of supplies with 1 Armoured Division to establish 16 F.S.D. at Msus.
Mention has not previously been made of the intention to relieve
7 Armoured Division by 2 Armoured Division which had lately arrived
