supposition that sufficient quantities would be available from local resources.
The normal scale of equipment and accommodation stores was taken together
with additional accommodation stores to meet the extreme temperatures, such
as extra blankets, leather jerkins, sheepskin coats, and heating stoves.
rounds of S.A.A., with mortar ammunition and grenades in proportion, were
also carried in the personnel ships.
G1098 equipment of the small
administrative detachments travelled with the convoy.
delay experienced in France and Norway caused by the divorcing of units
their essential equipment was avoided.
All Naval ratings,
Marine and Royal Air Force personnel were rationed and provided with other
administrative facilities from army sources.
Since the Great War of 1914-1918 Iceland had suffered from a housing
In later years great progress had been made both in the quality,
and quantity, of dwellings erected, but it was not considered that adequate
billeting or hiring arrangements could be made for the whole force, particu-
the districts outside the capital.
Tentage for half the personnel
the force in the first convoy, followed by 50 Nissen huts in
the first stores sailing.
Subsequently Nissen huts became the standard method
of accommodation for the force.
possession of their first line transport (less bren gun
carriers) and a pool for general transport duties was provided by the section
of the reserve M.T. company R.A.S.C., which was equipped with thirty-nine
30-cwt. lorries. Six ambulances were also shipped to provide a small reserve,
additional to the eight in possession of the force Field Ambulance.
Disembarkation was carried out smoothly and without incident.
Royal Marines who had arrived previously were of great assistance, and
the presence of the docks detachment and military pioneers emphasized the
immense value of including adequate transportation personnel and labour
stage of disembarkation.
force H.Q. and the
base were established in Reykjavik while the brigade deployed in the three
main areas, i.e., Reykjavik, Akureyi in the north, and Seydisfjordur in the
Reykjavik possessed a good anchorage with some 600 feet of quays.
The adjoining port of Hafnafjordur, to the south, also had good facilities
allowing a slightly greater depth of anchorage than Reykjavik.
the large ships used in the first convoys were unable to draw alongside the
quays at either port and had to be discharged in mid-stream.
rise to considerable difficulty in regard to the discharge of M.T., which was
by the shortage of winch drivers and M.T. lifting nets. Akureyni
piers alongside which small vessels could lie, with depths of
The provision of the field ambulance allowed for the possibility of active
operations and also permitted of medical facilities being available for dis-
persed stations.
A 200-bed general hospital ensured that full hospital treat-
ment would be available without calling on civil resources, but difficulties
in shipment of the equipment made it necessary in the initial stages 10
with the local medical authorities for ye treatment of serious
cases in civil hospitals.
WO277
1 Ф
For the first month activity was confined to the establishment of the
force, breaking down the rather aloof manner with which the local inhabi-
tants had first treated the troops, and as far as the administrative services
the force under conditions which were
difficult only through the paucity of communications, and the vagaries of the
climate and terrain.
A Canadian contingent arrived to augment " Alabaster"
and, although
it was only partially self-supporting, no real difficulties arose, and an impro-
vised system of " lend-lease"
Canadian units.
was soon operating between the British and
In the meantime operations had ended disastrously in Norway and the
forces which had achieved landings at Narvik, Namsos and Andalsnes had
49 Division (less, of course, 147 Brigade, already in
Iceland) was re-constituted from the evacuated forces and it was decided
that the division, when re-formed, re-equipped and suitably augmented,
would proceed to Iceland to re-inforce the small garrison there and, at the
same time, train in mountain warfare with a view to later becoming a
Mountain Division.
The re-equipping of 49 Division for the Icelandic occupation is not
without interest, since it is believed that for the first time a formation was
brought up to full war scale by merely submitting Deficiency Lists-a method
which was soon to be a commonplace.
commanding officers and quartermasters, and they were instructed to prepare
(a) A.F. G1098 entitlement,
(b) items of equipment already held, and
(c) balance required to complete.
These lists were then distributed by the War Office to the various
Ordnance depots who made up the deficiencies in bulk to A.D.O.S., 49
By this method the division was completely re-equipped within a
matter of weeks.
49 Division, with supporting troops, sailed on 22nd June and four days
later arrived off Iceland.
Divisional headquarters and the majority of the
administrative units disembarked at Reykjavik, after which the convoy
proceeded first to Akureyri to disembark 146 Infantry Brigade, and then to
Seydisfjordur where one battalion was landed. On 27th June, Major-General
H. O. Curtis, the divisional
commander, assumed command of all forces
on the island, and the
division assumed the title of "Alabaster" Force
from 147 Infantry Brigade which reverted to its normal command of three
The force now totalled over 16,000 all ranks and was composed of
British and Canadian Troops, and a number of Royal Navy and RAF.
personnel. It was spread over the island to a very great extent and, although
the maintenance of the fore was only complicated by virtue of the apalling
communications, it was necessary to ensure that adequate administrative
arrangements were made to meet the possibility of the outlying detachments
being cut off from the base either by an enemy landing or, as was more
bad weather conditions.
However, by making use of the
