with bewildering rapidity.
Improvisation had been the order of the day
and consequently formations and units had become separated and divorced
and the time had come for a comprehensive programme of re-organization,
re-equipment and training.
The operations had revealed several deficiencies
in the maintenance system of the Western Desert Force, and during this period
efforts were made to overcome two serious weaknesses in particular, by the
provision of a proper staff to man the F.S.D., and the creation of a unit for
tank delivery.
The Western Desert remained the chief theatre of activity and the advent
of a new C.-in-C. did not result in material alteration to the policy of his
It was considered that the enemy superiority in armour would
until mid-September, by which time our own troops would
have been re-equipped and reinforced, and therefore a directive was issued
in which the defence of Egypt was based on a system of fortresses at Tobruk,
Matruh and Bagush supported by new fortifications being constructed by
1 (S.A). Division (which had by now arrived from East Africa) and which
controlled the El Alamein
bottleneck between the sea and the Quattara
Three months'
supplies and ammunition were accordingly held
at Matruh and Bagush, together with a quarter of a million gallons of petrol
By this time work on the extension of the Desert railway beyond Matruh
From Matruh the new work took the line southwards
to the escarpment.
Rail-heads at this time were Matruh, used for all com-
7 Armoured Division; Qasaba, for the garrison of the Bagush
Arties fed titions mashing the frontiers and for the supporter vit
the exception of ammunition and R.E. stores which went to Sidi Hanêish;
and Abu Hagag and Itnuh which were respectively a relief station and a rail.
head for Indian troops.
rail-head for local and transient troops.
The personnel to man F.S.Ds. had up to now been found by placing at
each location a complete detail issue depot, R.A.S.C., supplemented by a few
R.A.O.C.
men to operate the ammunition dump.
This had never been
considered a really satisfactory solution but, as the primary function of the
F.S.D. had been to provide the troops based on it with those commodities
normally handled by a D.I.D., with the addition of ammunition, no great
complications had arisen.
As the force grew, and with the development of
fairly static conditions, however, the F.S.D. was beginning to grow into a
considerable township and was being joined by many newcomers.
pioneer companies (for off-loading and loading which had previously been
carried out by vehicle drivers with consequent delay to turn-round of trans-
port), P.W. cages, reinforcement and transit eat des, C.M.P. and traffic contro
detachments, A.A. defence and so on were all located at F.S.Ds.
FS.D. was becoming a desert centre to which clung naturally and
inevitably all the unconsidered
trifles of the administrative world.
result the commander of the D.L.Dies of the adminis tintents and purpos
the commander of an area of desert as much as 15 square miles in exten
dotted with small units
not perform this task in addition to his normal duties.
evident that he could
A suitable headquarters to command the whole area was therefore evolved
bv H.O. Western Desert Force and aDorated in princinla huG HO. although
200
WORT
1 P
owing to non-availability of personnel, it could not be implemented for some
time.
It was commanded by a major or a captain and consisted of two
officers, about eight other ranks for administrative duties and two vehicles.
It was christened a " field maintenance centre" (F.M.C.) and provided the
basis for the unit which was later given War Office recognition under the
title of "Control Centre,
Forward Maintenance Area"
or C.C., F.M.A.
To test out the new organization a spare R.A.S.C. company H.Q. was used
to establish an F.M.C., specifically for the use of 7 Armoured Division. Many
further lessons were learnt and later, when the new units were being formed,
it was possible to use this " prototype F.M.C." as a sort of training centre.
The reader must not be confused by references made in this history to the
various nomenclatures given to or used for these administrative areas.
Whether field (or forward) maintenance centres (or areas, they were all one
and the same thing.)
The lack of any proper A.F.V. delivery organization was the more manifest
by reason of the long I
Many A.F.Vs. driven up from Matruh were
found to require workshop attention by the time they had reached the frontier;
small faults at the start of the trip had become major defects by
end, owing,
largely, to inexperience of drivers and lack of supervision.
7 Armoured Division had, it is true, improvised a delivery organization from
its own personnel, but clearly this could only be a temporary expedient and
official sanction and an authorized war establishment for a proper " tank
delivery unit" were accordingly sought of G.H.O.
Thus again, experience
in the desert led to the formation of a unit which grew in importance as the
war progressed and was found to be essential in every theatre.
The Middle East base was meanwhile developing to meet, in the first
place, the needs of its ever-increasing command.
It was this stage of early
development which the authorities in the United Kingdom seemed so slow
to appreciate and which had earlier led to the appointment of the Intendant-
General.
There was continual criticism in the United Kingdom over the
actual strength in Middle East in contrast with its effective fighting strength,
and invidious comparisons were constantly being drawn between the strength
of the Germans in North Africa (who were after all relying largely on the
Italian administrative machine) and the ration strength of Middle East
Command.
Those in authority at home were finding it very difficult to
reconcile the military strength in the Middle East of 530,000 with the apparent
difficulty of finding a force of brigade, or even battalion strength, when some
new emergency arose.
Middle East had for long steadfastly resisted proposals constantly made
by the United Kingdom for the despatch of a complete formation each time
a convoy was made up.
With the intention of bringing up to strength his
various formations,
the majority of which had been under strength at the
outbreak of war and had since suffered many casualties, General Wavell had
been insistent on receiving only drafts and details and this policy was con-
tinued for some time by his successor.
Limitations of shipping space were most severely felt in connection with
and it was always necessary to choose between fighting troops
administrative units.
between complete formations or units and
drafts.
It was only later that it became possible to ask for the greater part
of the available space to be
allotted to fighting formations in preference
201
12000
