This position and the allotment of three divisions to it was the only solution
to which the Greeks would agree.
They would not abandon their eastern
territory without a fight nor would they withdraw from the Albanian front to
a position farther back in face of the despised Italians.
Moreover, by mid-
March they were probably physically incapable of extricating their forces in
The decision, however inevitable, came as a shock to the "Q" Staff for
the more the administrative repercussions were explored, the worse the possi
bilities, seemed. Indeed, a hurried withdrawal, and probable evacuation, even
at that stage seemed likely to be the only hope of saving the British forces
from being annihilated, having done little more than come to the assistance
of an ally as a matter of moral policy.
The use of the railway to Florina running in front of the position was
bound to be lost early.
This meant that maintenance of the right flank of
Albanian front, and of the Greek corps under General
Wilson's command as well as that of the British force, would all have to be
from Athens via Larissa.
From Larissa to the Aliakhmon position there
was only the one road and this ran roughly parallel to, and close behind, the
road throughout
and in places was
mountainous and tortuous, while concentrated and continuous air attack was
South of Larissa to Athens, a distance of some 200 miles, the one railway
included some long frail bridges which could be easily destroyed by a near
miss from a bomb, or by comparatively inexpert sabotage.
The only road
could certainly not be called modern and the large number of vehicles
required for the lengthy turn-round could not possibly be made available.
Every effort had been made to get the Greeks to improve the only alternative
route which ran from Kalabaka to Kozani via Grevena but this was not
possible in the time available.
Directly, therefore, that it was known that 1 Armoured Brigade was to
fight delaying actions north of the Mount Olympus Line and that the main
force was to hold the Aliakhmon position, drastic measures had to be taken
The principle was
adopted of establishing "field supply dumps" well forward to act as buffers
These dumps were to include
all natures of ammunition, defence stores, rations, petrol, and medical stores,
on the basis of seven days' requirements and were located as far as possible
to conform with the probable course of the battle including, for example, the
falling back of the armoured brigade.
These installations were, of course,
similar to those which had been used in the previous desert campaign (see
Section 2) although on a much smaller scale.
For the armoured brigade in its delaying role some of the dumps were
established forward of the Aliakhmon position between the east coast and
Armyntaion.
Luckily the brigade possessed a strong second-line transport
echelon and was therefore able to move the dumps at will.
For the troops
holding the Aliakhmon line, dumps were established on the main road, just
in the rear of the position, and within reach of first-line transport.
For all
the dumps, daily replenishment to replace consumption was to be continued
160
WO 277
as long as possible. To provide both further reserves and freedom of action
to the fighting force, the resources of the advance base at Larissa, together
with all the transport and labour which could possibly be spared from the
base and the L. of C., were put entirely at the disposal of main H.Q. at
Ellasson.
The primary responsibility of rear H.Q. at Athens was, of course,
to keep the advance base stocked up and to meet any demands from main
Command and Control
As he had to command directly in the field, General Wilson decided to
establish main H.Q., containing his operational staff, well forward at Ellasson,
some distance north of Larissa.
It was hoped that the Greek C.-in-C. would move forward simultaneously,
but he did not do so.
railways, ports, shipping and all other local resources.
His G.H.Q. at Athens retained complete control of
communications between main H.Q. and Athens could not be anything but
slender, while inter-communication aircraft were few even before the battle,
and it took at least eight hours in a high-powered car to make the journey
by the one indifferent road. In spite, therefore, of a strong desire on the
part of G.H.Q. Middle East to have the whole force H.Q. forward, it was
finally realized that this was not a sound solution at this stage.
especially so as the headquarters staff was nowhere near complete, even to
its meagre establishment, and there was no staff available to form a head-
quarters for the L. of C. area.
It was therefore decided to have at main H.Q., a first-grade administrative
staff officer and a senior officer of each administrative service, with a similar
The brigadier i/c administration and the heads of
services were thus freed either to visit main H.Q. or to go further forward as
In addition, there was an Australian corps staff available to assist
in organizing forward British maintenance.
The staff machinery, hurriedly improvised, naturally creaked
badly, and the administrative staffs of the main H.Q. were perhaps too weak
in calibre and size for what they were called upon to do in the absence of
no ill effect on the course of the battle from weakness in the administrative
organization and all the needs of the troops were met from such resources
as G.H.Q. Middle East were able to provide.
Only a third-grade General Staff officer was left behind with rear H.O...
although an additional first-grade General Staff officer was supplied by G.H.O.
Middle East when the battle began.
This had the effect of making General
Staff representation in Athens too weak to cope properly with the increasing
demands of the Greek G.H.Q. supported by the British Mission and, in the
face of the poor communications,
was unfortunate.
proved, there were important defence and demolition issues to be faced in
the base and on the L. of C., for which the presence of a senior General Staff
officer was essential.
The German Attack
By the evening of 6th April it became known that two flights of German
aireraft were on their way to bomb Piraeus. It was a bright moonlight night
and a few bombs and magnetic mines were dropped but the only direct
161
12000
