THE SCANDINAVIAN OPERATIONS
SECTION 3-CENTRAL NORWAY
(Map 9 refers)
In central Norway, two landings were made between 16th and 18th April,
1940, by the force originally known as " Stratford ".
Within 14 days, both
of these forlorn gallant efforts had ended in failure.
One landing in the Namsos area was under the command of Major-
General Carton de Wiart, and was known as " Maurice".
The other, in the
under the command first of Brigadier Morgan and later
of Major-General Paget was given the name of " Sickle". The two landings
were to form part of a concerted attack (operation " Hammer") by land
and sea to capture Trondheim and thereby obtain a base for further operations
Sweden if necessary.
Subsequently, the frontal
assault and bombardment of Trondheim was cancelled
and the operation
confined to a pincer movement on the town from north and south.
On 19th April, Lieutenant-General Massey was instructed to assume the
Commander-in-Chief of all forces operating
Norway, which became known as the (first) N.W.E.F. He exercised this
command from the War Office since the course of events did not permit
the opening of a Headquarters in Norway.
Namsos (" Maurice ")
On 14th April, Major-General Carton de Wiart was instructed that with
and 148 Infantry Brigades under command, he was to land forces
at Namsos and, after the Royal Navy had cleared the Trondheim fjord, he
was to carry out a direct attack on Trondheim.
As we have seen, this
plan was later changed and the direct attack on Trondheim was cancelled.
148 Infantry Brigade was diverted to Andalsnes, while 147 Infantry Brigade
the United Kingdom and subsequently sailed for Iceland.
changes were not known to General de Wiart when, accompanied
only by a junior staff officer, he landed by flying boat at Namsos to confer
parties who had already established a footing there.
that he learnt that his force now consisted only of 146 Infantry
Brigade which had been destined for Narvik before it was diverted to
It was therefore not tactically loaded, and as it was carried in
large ships it was quite unsuitable for an operation involving an opposed
General de Wiart was still unaware that the central attack on
Trondheim had been abandoned.
During 16th and 17th April, the brigade was transferred to destroyers
and effected landings at Namsos.
On 19th April, in order to be in a favour-
able position to make the direct attack on Trondheim, it took up a position
at Steinkjaer which commanded all
routes to the north from Trondheim.
That night a contingent of French Chasseurs Alpins landed at Namsos.
The force had landed with no administrative echelon but was self-
contained to cover the initial operations.
No administrative staff accompanied
the first landings and obviously the force commander by himself could not
WO277
1 Ф
be expected to attend to matters concerning the establishment of a base. The
War Office directive to General de Wiart, on the other hand, had stated that
until Trondheim had been secured.
administrative facilities should initially be developed about Namsos for use
The failure to notify the G.O.C. of the
abandonment of " Hammer" was, to say the least of it, unfortunate.
By night there were no more than four hours of darkness at Namsos, and
the lack of anti-aircraft protection made it quite impractical to unload stores
There were two berths only in the docks, at which ships
from 300 to 350 feet long of about 22 feet draught could be worked.
meant that no more than 240 tons of stores or vehicles etc., could be unloaded
in any one night by direct unloading to the quayside. There were no tugs,
lighters or cranes on the dock to permit other means of unloading.
As a result of the limited facilities and the absence of administrative
staffs or units, conditions at Namsos soon became chaotic. The day after
the arrival of the Chasseurs Alpins large quantities of supplies and stores of
all kinds which could not be cleared from the jetties were spotted by enemy
aircraft and for two hours, the quay, station and town were heavily bombed.
The station and most of the town were destroyed and one of the two jetties
badly damaged.
On 21st April, supported by heavy air attacks and by a naval bombard-
ment, the enemy landed in the rear of 146 Infantry Brigade.
lacking artillery and being unable to move anywhere off the roads on account
of the deep snow, had to withdraw to a position north of Steinkjaer where
they could hold the enemy who-like us—was deficient in wheeled transport
adequate to combat the intolerable snow and thaw conditions.
The heavy air attacks on Namsos continued however, and on 23rd April
General de Wiart reported that the heavy scale of the enemy attack might
make the evacuation of Namsos inevitable.
He was nevertheless instructed
to keep his force in being while remaining on the defensive.
Aircraft of the Fleet Air Arm appeared over Namsos for the first time
on 25th April, but three were forced to land owing to lack of petrol. Their
intervention, though temporary, had a beneficial effect on the air situation,
but since their effect could not be sustained, enemy air activity was again un-
hampered during the next few days.
Deep snow preventing movement off
the roads, it was not until 26th April that an R.A.F. reconnaissance party
was able to search for landing grounds in the area.
On 27th April, the advance party of the force headquarters landed with
the first administrative personnel.
The H.Q. was based on the headquarters
of the recently formed 61 Division, had carried out little if any training, and
had been assembled in very great haste.
It was in possession of a first
maintenance project but had no opportunity to study it with the units who
had to work it.
In fact, owing to the constant changes of plan and the
alteration of the destination of a large number of the units, the maintenance
project was of little value.
In the same ship as the advance party there arrived a Royal Marine
howitzer batter, a feld the aval. part of an H.O., base sub-area, tiles
and ammunition for the Norwegians, various stores and articles of equipment,
and some docks labour personnel.
