The Future of the Base
Where possible all the measures necessary to insure against the " worst
case " were put in hand immediately, and although, happily, the " worst case"
did not arise, such precautionary action as was taken proved of incalculable
value later in the campaign.
The strength of Middle East administration
in the early war years undoubtedly lay in the bold foresight and intelligent
anticipation which characterized every step in the planning of the base.
This foresight proved perhaps an even greater asset during the later campaign
in the desert.
London, however, with an eye to the financial and manpower implications,
was not unnaturally apprehensive, and grave doubts were appearing in the
minds of those in authority that all was not well in the Middle East.
These
apprehensions to some extent were shared by G.H.Q.
Improvisation was
becoming rife and the necessity for providing for current needs was taking
precedence over long-term planning.
There were signs that there were certain
weaknesses in the structure of the command, especially in its ability to keep
pace with this vast military base which was gradually taking shape from the
small peace-time garrisons.
The feeling that insufficient control and co-
ordination were being exercised over the vast new projects and that their
capabilities
would not be put to the best or to the most economical use
now gave rise to a decision by the War Cabinet to intervene by sending an
officer of high rank out to Cairo armed with wide and sweeping administrative
powers.
This decision resulted in the despatch to the Middle East of an officer
holding the appointment of Intendant-General and the situation which arose
from what proved to be an ill-conceived project is briefly described in the
next section.
THE MIDDLE EAST, 1939-1942
SECTION 7.—THE MISSION OF THE INTENDANT-GENERAL
The authorities in the United Kingdom were of the view that the C.-in-C.
in the Middle East had quite sufficient of strategic import to concern him
fully and that he should, as far as possible, be spared from more than the
minimum of administrative work.
They thought, for instance, that he ought
not to be expected to solve problems connected with the increasing pressure
upon the dock and base accommodation and railway facilities in his rear.
As we have seen, there was a consistent belief in the United Kingdom that
all was not well in the Middle East and that manpower was not being used
to the
best advantage (the
" teeth "
versus
"tail"
controversy mentioned
in the previous chapter is an illustration of this belief).
The result was the
creation on 20th May, 1941, of 108 (later 333) Military Mission at the head
of which General Sir Robert Haining was placed with the Cromwellian title
of Intendant-General.
182
WORTY
18
The declared purpose of his mission was " to go to the Middle East to
enquire into the administrative organization and facilities", and his instruc-
tions upon appointment were as follows: -
" 1. You have been selected to proceed to the Middle East on behalf of
the War Office to examine the military administration in the Middle
East Command.
2. You will report on arrival to the Commander-in-Chief, Middle East,
in Cairo, and will be accorded all the facilities for investigating the
administrative organization including: -
(a) The working of the administrative staff at G.H.Q. and subordinate
H.Qs.
(b) The size, location, and functions of the rearward services and
installations.
(c) The further development of these services and installations.
You should pay particular attention to the organization for the
repair and maintenance of armoured fighting vehicles, and to the
arrangements for the location, safe custody and evacuation from
the Middle East, of German and Italian prisoners of war.
3. You will report and make recommendations for the improvement of
the administrative machine.
Your reports will be made to the War
Office, through the C.-in-C., Middle East, to enable him to record
his observations before the reports reach the War Office.
Any
important matters should be dealt with by telegram without waiting
for a full report.
4. It will be of great value to the C.-in-C. to receive from you a full
account of the general war situation and of recent decisions and
discussions on matters of importance at home.
In giving this account
you will only be passing information to the C.-in-C., and no reports
are required from you on this part of your instructions."
Initially, General Haining, whose staff included a D.A. and Q.M.G., and
an A.A. and Q.M.G., remained in London, while his staff busied themselves
in collecting information about the Middle East from the War Office.
was presented with an elaborate questionnaire which included such questions
as whether Middle East Command should be empowered to approve all
new war establishments
commanded by
a lieutenant-colonel or less, and
whether the spares scaling for 18,000 U.S. vehicles (then on the way to
Middle East under "lend
lease") which had been worked out by the
Americans, would be adequate of whether it would result in overstocking.
Meanwhile General Haining himself was meeting the Prime Minister,
the Secretary of State for War, the C.I.G.S., and other prominent individuals
and on 30th May, possibly as a result of the various interviews, he received
new instructions.
These were quite different, and seemed to cut right across
the basic principles of army command.
No longer was he to be an observer
only to report and recommend.
He was given executive administrative
powers in the Middl recommen. and in order to relieve the C. in-C., in the
same way in which t East CoC. Home Forces was being relieved of cerain
administrative responsibilities by the War Office.
(It is not clear why it was
thought that Middle East Command was comparable to Home Forces in
183
