As a result of the rapid withdrawals from north and central Malaya,
there had, naturally, been losses in material and reserve stocks.
loss was in petrol, which required more transport than was available.
whole, however, it had been possible, by careful organization, to evacuate
a good proportion of the reserves which had been dispersed on the mainland.
The troops now left on the mainland were entirely located in Johore, and,
for issue to them new dumps were created in South Johore.
(a) Further congestion was avoided on Singapore Island itself, which
uncomfortably overcrowded as a result of
evacuation from the mainland.
(b) Traffic congestion was avoided on the causeway.
(c) The length of the forward carry was reduced.
Dumps were accordingly formed at Segamat, Batu Anan, Johore Bahru
and near the waterways in south-west Johore, but owing to loss of records
it has not been possible to ascertain either their type or capacity.
The tactics adopted by the enemy of striking at our communications
forced us to modify the general principle of keeping supplies in forward
It was therefore directed that seven days' reserves of food-'
stuffs, ammunition and other essential stores were to be maintained at all
times by forces whose communications might be in danger of attack.
A considerable amount of civil transport had been requisitioned, especially
became available owing to the enforced closing of business.
In consequence,
the transport problem, at this stage, presented no great difficulty, and sufficient
vehicles were available to undertake backloading of supplies,
petrol or oil, from the reserves in the north, where operationally practicable.
The railway was also used.
Indeed, as the situation deteriorated, and the
withdrawal continued, so the amount of transport available became more
At length, too many vehicles, both military
and civil, were on the roads and serious traffic blocks began to develop,
especially on Singapore Island and on the causeway.
all military transport no longer required was parked on open spaces, while
restrictions were placed on the use of civil transport.
In general the ammunition position remained satisfactory, although the
series of defensive battles that had been fought, and the resultant heavy
expenditure of field
A.A. ammunition,
these types, it will be remembered, were the only ones of which there were
serious shortages at the outset of hostilities.
War experience again proved that, while the organized military labour
worked, on the whole, satisfactorily, this was far trom the case with civil
Trouble first broke out in Kedah where civil labour disappeared
as soon as the operations started.
majority of the Asiatic municipal employees disappeared, leaving the troops
carry
in other centres.
on their functions; an
In the Singapore area the trouble first started on the airfields.
It had,
from the first. become obvious that a secure base from which nur siraf
292
WO277
Maintenance of the existing Singapore airfields,
and the construction of new air strips, was therefore given priority over all
other military work, and large labour gangs were organized for the purpose.
After each raid, however, the greater
part of these gangs disappeared, and,
after a time, it became difficult to get labourers to work on the airfields at all.
To ease the situation working parties had to be found from reinforcements,
even though this meant that little or no work could be done on defences.
The trouble soon spread to the dockyards.
Reference has already been made to the difficulty in obtaining sanction
for the raising of two Hong Kong labour units, and now a similar experience
befell Malaya Command in its efforts to form up to six Malayan companies,
for which War Office authority had been received just before war broke out.
Unfortunately, the War Office refused to increase the original fixed rate of
45 cents a day for coolies as against the current rate in Singapore of about
one dollar a day, plus free rations and accommodation. It was not surprising
that even the most strenuous recruiting efforts thus met with little success,
and by the middle of January only one company had been formed.
The coolies understood little of the war, and many of them were quite
content to hide in their villages unpaid, and this situation was to some
extent aggravated by the distribution of rice to each Asiatic household, to
This commendable measure acted in a boomerang
manner, as, of course, it made it quite unnecessary for the labourers to earn
As a result of the rapid withdrawal, great congestion had occurred on
In particular, there were insufficient sidings in the southern
section of the railway to accommodate the rolling stook.
An effort was made
to solve this difficulty by building new sidings in southern Johore and on
Singapore Island, where rolling stock not actually in use could be parked,
but unfortunately these were
withdrawal through central Johore took
place, 13 fully laden
trains had to be abandoned on the Malacca branch alone.
On 7th January, General Wavell had arrived at Singapore to assume
the appointment of C.-in-C., South-West Pacific Command (or A.B.D.A. as
it became known) but also immediately moved his Headquarters to Java.
On the establishment of H.Q. South-West Pacific Command, the appointment
of C.-in-C. Far East, lapsed.
This was only one of many changes which
were made in the higher command during the troubled months of December,
1941, and January, 1942, and there was general inter-Service agreement that
these rapid changes- necessary though they may have been-had an unsetling
effect, and did not make for continuity.
The Withdrawal to Singapore Island
27th January, General Wavell telegraphed the G.O.C.,
authorizing him to withdraw to Singapore Island if he considered this
On that day also it became apparent that the Japanese successes
on the mainland and the landing on the
East Coast, had made the position
of our forces in Southern Johore almost untenable.
Our remaining troops
not strong enough to
on the east
stop the enemy advance for long,
and there were no reserves available.
