Those units formed on mobilization, and those which did not hold their
A.F. G1098 equipment in peace-time, in most cases had the equipment
despatched overseas by the officer in charge of the mobilization store, etc.,
on whose charge it had been held.
The equipment was consigned to the
overseas port c/o the docks directorate which was responsible for its receipt,
custody and eventual issue to the owner unit.
This arrangement was not
successful and led to universal complaints by the units concerned.
In many
instances the equipment was never found, necessitating complete re-issues.
One Royal Artillery unit from Catterick was surprised to receive a consign-
ment of dental chairs.
Delay was experienced everywhere, and the confusion
that resulted was detrimental to the morale of harassed officers arriving in a
strange land with hastily mobilized and often untrained units.
On the other
hand, those units which had their mobilization equipment with them in
their peace-time stations were fully prepared.
The inference is obvious, but
as many of the affected units did not exist in peace-time the solution of the
It was the first time that a fully mechanized army had sailed from the
United Kingdom, and this, coupled with the fact that the ships were not
tactically loaded, caused added confusion.
Personnel and vehicles of the
same unit sailed in different ships to different ports,
ports, and in some cases drivers were further separated from the remainder
The confusion and loss of equipment that could and did
result from even the slightest error in the arrangements can easily be imagined,
and was usually increased by the unbelievably high (although commendable)
degree of secrecy that surrounded all the arrangements.
As the formation of Army H.Q.s was not envisaged until a later stage
in the build-up of the force, G.H.Q. had what was, in effect, a dual role.
was the sole military headquarters in France dealing
and the French Commander-in-Chief at Grand Quartier-Général (G.Q.G.),
and it was also responsible for the direction of the operations and administra-
tion of the formations under its command.
This was of course taken into
consideration when the establishment of G.H.Q.
was prepared, but it is
difficult to resist making the criticism that G.H.Q. was over-burdened with
responsibility from the outset.
No. 1 Military Mission joined G.Q.G. for liaison between the War Cabinet
and the C.I.G.S. on the one hand and the War Cabinet and the Allied C.-in-C.
No. 2 Military Mission represented the British Commander-in-
Chief at the H.Q. of the French Commander-in-Chief, North-East Theatre of
under whose command the B.E.F. had been placed
Q.M.G. of the force was represented in No. 2 Military Mission by an A.A. and
Q.M.G., but in No. 1 Military Mission, " Q" problems were handled by one
The Outline
Maintenance Project
In accordance with the maintenance project, the main base was to be
established in the area Brest-Rennes-Nantes, the ports to be used being
Nantes, St. Nazaire, Brest and St. Malo where advance allotments of berths
WO217
1
had already been arranged in the pre-war staff talks. The base was sub-
divided as follows: —
No. 1 Base Sub-Area (The Northern Base)
The Northern Base consisted of the general area Brest-Rennes and
the depots were initially located in and around both those towns.
installations in the Brest area were to be treated as temporary and
used for initial maintenance only.
The permanent base was
established in the Rennes area (see Map 2) and all constructional work
attempted at Brest.
Little or no new work or expansion was to be
No. 2 Base Sub-Area (The Southern Base)
The Southern Base was on the other hand to be immediately developed
in the Nantes-St. Nazaire area by expansion on initial sites and making
the best use of existing accommodation and communications.
Cherbourg, administered by H.Q., 1 L. of C. Sub-Area, was the main
port of entry for personnel.
Troops were generally sent forward on the
day of landing to an assembly area sited in the vicinity of Le Mans-Laval.
Unit vehicles arrived through the ports of Brest, Nantes and St. Nazaire,
assembled in vehicle marshalling parks, and were then sent forward in
convoy to the assembly area to join their units.
Drivers were sent to
Cherbourg and then went by train to the ports where their vehicles had
arrived; this sometimes involved a rail journey of 36 hours before
the
drivers could be married up with their vehicles.
The administrative personnel for the transit camps and vehicle marshalling
parks required at the ports were intended to be found from the
first
reinforcements of an infantry
battalion, the L. of C. transit camp not yet
having been formed.
Supplementary technical personnel were to be detached
as required from the local port workshop detachment and vehicle reception
depot, etc.
In the event the first reinforcements failed to materialize and
the installations were forced to operate in a very improvised manner.
It
seems that insufficient importance was attached to the early provision of
adequate transit camps.
Reinforcement depots,
on Tne
other hand,
were
opened relatively early at Rouvray and Epinay.
Routes allotted for rail and road movement to the assembly area from
are shown at Map 3.
All the road movement took
place in the French Zone de l'Interieure, and traffic control and sign-posting
were in the hands of the gendarmerie and local police,
although recon-
naissance and additional sign-posting were also carried out by provost under
Personnel trains were
each
made
up to
carry
approximately 800 men, and arrangements were made for the provision of
"halte repas" en route for the issue of a hot drink.
Road convoys were
self-contained in respect of rations and petrol, while a breakdown service
on the roads to the assembly area was provided under corps arrangements.
The French also offered the help of existing supply, petrol and breakdown
stations should they be necessary.
In this connection one notes that in
his first despatch,
Lord Gort spoke of "
the hospitality of the
French inhabitants, which all ranks will remember with gratitude ".
Arrival
" control posts" in the assembly area were formed under corps arrangements.
27
B 2
12090
