been in British Somaliland and they acquitted themselves well in local
rushes.
In East Africa Force, however, the standard of training was far
-low that required, and the shortage of M.T. such that it would be impos-
ble fully to motorise the six brigades and maintain the force,
particularly
vith water, over the wide stretch of waterless country between the Tana and
Juba rivers.
The main thing therefore, while bringing up the standard of training of
East Africa Force,
was to establish moral ascendancy over the Italians by
every means possible and to make all feasible preparations to
smooth the
way for
the ultimate effort.
Somewhat naturally administration was the
keynote of future operations.
The operation to capture Kismayu entailed the crossing of some 250
miles of waterless bush between the Rivers Tana and Juba, and administra-
tive preparation consisted of devising and providing for the maintenance of
the force of two divisions taking part.
The resources of East Africa Force
could not be deployed entirely on this sector because 1 (S.A.) Division was
concentrating some hundreds of miles north at Marsabit with the intention
of encircling Mega and outflanking Moyale.
This operation will be dealt
with later.
Supply from the base depots in Kenya as far as rail-heads at Thika and
Nanyuki presented no problem.
The Kenya and Uganda Railway could
easily handle the tonnage involved, and sidings and loading areas were all
adequate.
were one some 250 miles from the River
Tana, and another 250 from the River Juba, so the first and most obvious
step was to build up an advance base somewhere between rail-head and the
objective.
There were two roads of sorts leading from Kenya to Jubaland—
one—the southern-from Thika to Garissa-Afmadu and Kismayu, the other
-the northern-from Nanyuki via Isiolo and Wajir to Bardera.
They were,
however, little more than game tracks and could carry but the lightest motor
traffic and that only in dry weather.
Work on these roads had been started
as soon as war broke out and by January, 1941, they were decently surfaced,
though not metalled, as far, respectively, as the Tana (which was crossed
by ferry) and Wajir.
Beyond these limits they were in enemy
occupation
and it was thought unlikely that their standard further on would be as good
as that reached in our own territory, although in point of fact they were
decidedly better.
The places eventually chosen for an advanced base were
on the line of the River Tana at Bura and Garissa.
Of course the capture of Kismayu would see the abandonment of this
but in the meantime every available
lorry was put on to the run between
Even bear-
ing in mind the comparatively large amount of transport that was made
available to the force, the time in hand was too short to see the dumps fully
established.
Of all the preliminary problems, however, probably the most difficult was
the supply of water.
Within the a however, pro the problem did not exist.
Unlimited quantities could the advanced base thRiver Tana which runs
throughout the year, so the problem resolved itself into providing water over
the 250 mile track between the Tana and the Juba.
Although in the event
138
WO27
drilling rigs followed close on the heels of the leading troops, and small
quantities of water, brackish but drinkable, were obtained by boring, plans
had to be made to meet the worst contingency, that of no water being found,
and that all water must be carried forward from the Tana.
The ration of
water was laid down as a gallon a man a day and half a gallon for each
The climate was such as to make this ration possible only for a
short period, but fortunately the advance to the Juba was very rapid.
For the carriage of water there were about a hundred specialized water
tankers of South African origin of 450 gallon capacity and fitted with a
vulllo.
Having a discharge pipe fitted with bibcocks, they were eminently
suitable for distribution of water to units and were chiefly so used, leaving
the bulk carriage of water in large quantities to normal general purpose
Much of the transport available was South African, and it was found
that ten 44-gallon petrol drums, when stood on end and wedged together,
would fit into the well between the seats of the South African 3-ton Ford
troop carrier. After unsuccessful experiments it was found virtually impossible
to remove the taint of petrol from drums that had once been used for its
carriage and arrangements were therefore made for tens of thousands of
clean drums to be sent from South Africa distinctively marked and painted
Four South African reserve M.T. companies
(equivalent to eight East African reserve M.T. companies) were selected for
the carriage of water, and as water was considered so vital a commodity,
companies with white drivers were selected.
posal about a quarter of a million gallons of water on wheels, apart from
the water with units or the afore-mentioned tanker lorries.
was not kept under force control but was allotted as necessary to divisions.
Not unnaturally these improvisations needed not only special filling arrange-
ments for the large water convoys, but also the distribution of numbers of
small 2- and 4-gallon containers, semi-rotary pumps and hose, to facilitate
First and second line transport was normal, and third line resources
fortunately were considerable.
Altogether they consisted of some 4,800 two-
and three-ton lorries about half of which were East African and half South
The East African companies were each equipped with 75 Ford and
Chevrolet box-bodied lorries and were driven by native drivers.
The South
Africans, in companies twice the strength of the East Africans, were equipped
These lorry bodies, welded in one piece, had
a seat along each side and a well in the middle.
About a third of the South
(For ease of subsequent reference it will be
more convenient to convert all transport resources into terms of East African
companies, i.e., of a strength of 75 vehicles.)
Apart from normal third line maintenance and for the more specialized
task of water carriage already dealt with, this transport had to meet the
demands of the air forces, special engineer requirements and finally, troop-
carrying demands.
To this end, therefore, it was not permanently allotted,
but remained at the disposal of H.Q., East Africa Force.
The air forces
had their own maintenance proanizations. but not infrequently their own
resources were insufficient to compete with the pace of the advance, and help
