certain commodities and petty luxuries beyond the ration scale.
(In this
respect, the liberal manner in which such items were issued to their American
allies did nothing to lessen the demands of the British soldiers.)
Most of the items most urgently required had to be imported, some from
within the Commonwealth but the main source became the U.S.A.
In fact,
until U.S. supplies came forward in quantity the stock position of rations
was generally unsatisfactory and many items including milk, vegetables, fruit
and tinned fish had to be restricted. In the early part of 1944, however, the
import programme from U.S.A. got into its stride and a steadily increasing
flow of supplies reached India until the end of hostilities.
Centres for the packing of composite rations were established at Delhi
and Benares, where all such packing was concentrated ; the average monthly
output reached 750,000 rations.
Cold storage requirements of 13,000 tons
were calculated on the basis of a minimum of three issues of fresh meat each
week, and to meet this demand extra refrigerating facilities had to be provided
to supplement the original cold storage capacity of only 2,000 tons.
India had only a very small indigenous production of petroleum amount-
ing to about 5 per cent. of war-time requirements.
The local oilfields could
not produce aviation and high octane spirit nor any suitable lubricants, and
thus almost all the P.O.L. required for India, S.E.A.C., the U.S. forces, and
China, had to be imported to and stored in India.
The movement in India and into S.E.A.C. of very large quantities of petrol
was a major problem and, apart from considerable development of existing
facilities, many hundreds of miles of fuel pipe-line were laid by the Allies
from Bengal and Arakan to Assam and north Burma and even into China
itself.
The two main arteries were each a thousand miles long, and within
three years the capacity of the system grew from almost nothing to over
200.000 tons monthly.
Essential services for all the foregoing called for large quantities of stores
of all kinds, some of which were never supplied to requirements.
Conse-
quently the essential services required were seldom provided to the planned
standards.
This deficiency obviously caused a reduction in amenities but it is
doubtful whether a great loss of efficiency resulted.
To the above details add a serious famine which occurred in Bengal
during the period of building up the base, and a flood which for a time
isolated Calcutta, and a picture can be obtained of the difficulties which beset
those whose task it was to establish in war-time a maior base from which to
mount offensive operations.
The Chiefs of Staff required from the C.-in-C,
India that the India base should be ready to function by June, 1945.
"It was ready, not of course finished to the last door knob, and
deficient of many items which never came to us trom the U.K., or the
U.S.A., but it was ready to function.
It would, I am quite sure, have
met every need of S.E.A.C., had the end wothe war not put an end to
major fighting in Malaya and beyond."
(Lieutenant-General Sir Wilfred Lindsell)
348
WO277
1
The Assam L. of C.
Having outlined firstly the operations mounted by India against the
Japanese until the formation of S.F.A.C., and secondlly, the establishment oe
the India base to support the coming S,E.A.C. offensives, we must now turn
to what was perhaps the most important of the purely military problems of
maintenance ever undertaken in the history of India; the development of the
Assam lines of communications by road, river, railway and pipe-line. This
L. of C. was required, firstly to maintain the S.E.A.C. forces on the Assam-
Burma frontier, and later in Burma itself, secondly to supply to the U.S.
airfields in north-eastern Assam the tonnage for their maintenance and for
forward delivery over the " Hump" into China, and thirdly to make possible
the building of the "Ledo Road" and the pipe-line into China itself.
CALCUTTA TO DIMAPUR
Apart from having to provide the vast organization required to build up
the base, the task of G.H.Q.(I), was complicated by the poverty of the com-
munications between Assam and eastern Bengal and the rest of India. Assam
is cut off from the rest of India by the great Brahmaputra river which was
unbridged throughout its length.
The river level fluctuates during the year
by as much as 25 feet and the course sometimes by several miles. A proposal
was made at one time to bridge the river at Amingaon, but this project had
to be abandoned owing to the engineering difficulties involved and the fact
that it could not be completed within the required time.
Calcutta was of major importance, being the geographical and physical
link between India as a whole, and the Assam-Burma border.
neck through which all troops and most of the stores traffic from all over
India had to pass, and thus must be considered as the terminal of the Assam
L. of C., whether by road, rail or river.
From Calcutta the railway ran north to Parabatipur, where a break of
gauge and subsequent trans-shipment caused considerable delays.
metre-gauge it ran east to
Amingaon on the north bank of the
Brahmaputra, where there was a wagon ferry running to Pandu on the opposite
All traffic had to trans-ship at Pandu on to the single track
metre-gauge which ran east of the river to Lumding and thence to the lines
Chittagong in the south.
branching to Dimapur (Manipur Road) and Ledo in the north-west,
The main rail link on the Assam L. of C. was the line from Lumding to
Imphal and Ledo, from
Manipur Road, the princinal advanced hase and mil head for the roade to
where the Americans were building the
Road", the new link with Lashio and China (see below).
RAIL-HEAD TO KALEWA
Brahmaputra. while the onlv west to east road in Ascam was a second-class
all-weather road from India to the west bank of the
the river to Dibrugarh.
single-width raad from Dand. it aanttivent e iling tha sanaanl linana
Hence the deficiencies of the railway could not be
replaced by road transport. indeed ricinallu al vehicles for Assam had to
349
