comp
DA
WO 171/566
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.—1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.- In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
mportant phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(i) A unit, in each na native or hes ot app rerations treet to by pier nate tomation
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
organision de data nist lich to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
To effect this commanders of all ra
their formations or units any ideas, opinio
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
on A.F. C. 2118.
Aw. diary wil is entered up taly, hach ear in tille ey the oficer detailed to keep it,
extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
of oner per in ment be made deaf, that the offer who inito the entric ie commander
PARA. 3.—Omitted.
(See F.SR. You diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
an at rate, a can in them arenty don hour and present dispotions.
are attached.
( The duplete copy day to a such a brigad o in ma t vin, bo
tamarie on to the eater Sect vatio paro of as
the won No. h the t
tered should be the time the information or order r
e ot the event recorded should also be given i
in the text, if kr
oom
ORIGINAL
WAR DIARY
Month and Year...
JUNE
Date
Hour
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form
Unit. HO CRASE 53 DIV
Commanding Officer AT CoL TE BRI
2118.
Place
BOUGHTON
MONCHELSEA
References to Appendices
Aara B.
9/3.
430
Vit by Đ. D.5T.
12 Cope
ROYAL ALGEET
25
26
2030
27
HORASC enlasted a MT. Sle "IdE. Vane"
left Thane Estrang Me Fore
Anved Of Gart S France (Norad)
Disembarte and proceded te Dis Cra lea atSalls
(Shut 6=/2. (St ls) map l 2575)
Cathed HORASI batia de Hopel 887T67 Stat 67/2
Under Cond 8 Cops.
WAR OR IRREGATION
a DOST Cops
12 JUE 1944*
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
ers
e/s.
61-1541)
aizt NOOT P9L1/68898 3M1 (0118)
HIN
