pg_0015.pdf:
WAR
DIARY
SECRET.
_ EN. THE GREAT HOWARDS.
SANDTITE ORDIRS (OPS)
STADING INSTEUCRIOUS JOR JE. AND MORMAT, IN ME.
1.
1. londor (noma 1ly the T.O.
in Int 15 out truel).
(b) Sufficiont porconnol on p/ea to contrel coln.
Il the nurbor of vohe requiron it (10. 1f 16 du a ln tove) tha be 41a be elet into
Coy goa oach of hich vi,12, havo ito own locdor.
Op Londora will bo componeblo bant the
corroct ith is mintainod by their ova voh; thoy wiin MOr ondo vour to citeh an the
von ched of thom,
2. Voho vill elugo bovo a ders unto, mo von poreide vill be civor o rep or
route-ord. Both dvr und nto cro romonoblo the the corroct couto 1a follord.
3. Ror look outo vill bo portod on au may vohe do poosiblo.
Thoy will. ondovour to
direat the attontion of n DR patrolling the coln if y voh following thom epro.re to
have tukon n wrong tuming or to bo in difficultion.
4.
(a), When tho route io NOI picquottod a nurbor of Dro dotillod for truffle duty
rill. follow behind the lo. dorts voh and work undor ordoro of Pro Sjt.
5. Whon tho routo is NCT picquottod whon cay pt is ronghod where thore enn be any doubt,
0•3. coute loaros min road and thero in no triffic cig, to Sit will drop off a DR to
direct tho Unit vohs on the corroct route.
Thia DR vill rejoin vhon the tuil of bn hea
pennod.
6., Sigo my bo aployed co on did to
noveront but thoir proponce vill not absolve londorn,
aves and intes fion their rosponsibility for following the corroct route.
Won staring fron harbour in doylight vohs vill nove off direct, vithout tires
tonine up, unleas adoquato covor fron vir in cilblo. Dvre ruct warn up enginon 5
nino bofore moving.
(3) Di no circunotineda will vohe bo fornod up on a movenent routo, or halt on thin
routo in ordor to chock thoir order of mrch.
Bde and In will oach ordor n SP. Bn SP vill bo mikod and Coys will be chocod pat
by T. 0.
Should ba or a doy arrivo oarly at a SP it vill drow into tho ride of tho rond boforo
reaching the SP to nIlow othor unito to pass.
10. It in tho romonsibility of overy cond to onauro that his unit or sub-unit ontoro tho
coln in the correct sequonce.
It my hoppon through onory notion that the En arrives Into
at tho Bde SP.
In this cago n DR will? bo wont ird to infor the 0 i/c Bảc SP tho approx
numbor of rins that tho unit will be late.
11.
To nata will bo nt 10 idnt to ovory oron ailool hour and it in the duty of ovosy
londer to halt at the corruct tino.
In addition a long halt of one hr will normlly
bo indo whon a novo laste for nore than nix hra.
12.
The overall density ordered mat be maintained nt holts, but adventage will be taron
of cover on eithor side of the roud in tho positioning of individual vehs.
vohs halt, evon momontarily, they will pull as far off the roadway as possible and the
dvr's nito or anothor mon will imediatoly dismunt and stand on the opposite side of tho
TOnG.
Ho will bo romponrible for controlling any traffic parsing his voh in either
Should the dve foll asloon, whioh ao often happens at night, the mate vill
vito him up in bino to novo fed. dp aonde vill onsure that this in done, if nocossary
sending A IR bad.
13. In tho ovent of an unuthoried and prolonged halt the loador of a unit or gp vill
innodi. toly ture stepa to find out the onume,
by conding a DR up the coln to onquire.
This de opoolly obsential at night shon dre ar apt to foll asloop.
14. 16 nomol holte windsorona will be sovorod, but enmouflago note will not bo.
orooted.
At holta of a hilt hr or more, erdore for cumouflnging of vohe will bo given by
gp condo by monding a D.R. down tho coln.
/2

