Today
the aroa 6964-
at 1400 hrs the inorions foreed a crossing over the rivor in
bridgos fron the NOull while
undor considorablo it fire and whoaled round to attrol tho
Those attacks word
This does
in our hands, but thore
gunning on tho SOUTHl sido of tho rivor.
On the right flonk there has been considorablo opposition
Around
DERK 7560 the onony holds the line 729628 - 735615 - 748602 with nbout a
battalion of infantry, sono dug in tonks ana soveral 80 mm guns.
There
They have bown attacking Na
boon idontifiod.
force there,
in an obsoleto
since roginont l nunbors have no noro signifionce than those
tole phone dircetory.
Iven so,
cInost as ruch trouble ns ARMINI in the next fow days.
)
It will not therefore ba sur-
prising if tho prosont force of four bettalions or so incronses considor-
ably in the noor futuro.
Fron ARNt thore is littlo coheront news.
rnd it is not known whothor wo still hold the bridge.
The onony holds the town
in the area 6978 are boing attacked fron the EaST and veST.
On the loft flin:,
our arloured cars reached the SOUll bank of tho
WAl Opposite TIN 4267 whore the onony soized the forry and sank fowr
barges and one tus.
Further SOUTII our patrols to OSS 4754 yostordry
chased out the onony and stumblod upon in FIC of no near dinonsions ind
ono, precious to the oneny, for it was not long before thoy were back in
again trying to roplonish.
Idontifications aro fron 3 In 1 Para logt
and 12 Paro Recco En, both newly forned units and not present in strongth.
If this dopot is ronily important however the anony will obviously nece
sone offort to hold it.
in our loft our noighbours have jeined the line of the road botwoon
3815 ind 3010, but roport stifi opposition fron the inST at 3002.
There
are however no frosh idontifications on this front.
on the right our friends havo secured Chit and HAMMONT both just
short of the Dutch frontior.
There are no dotails of tho nony opposition,
but thore apponr to bo only partohute idontifiontions, and the ss troops
who wore there (two battlions of 10 ss Division) my hnvo withdrewn NI.
I NOND is reportod by civilins to bo hold ly mout
ono battalion with
sono tanks and sappers who ap our to be mining thu InST bank of the canci.
Furthor SE, the iorions havo taken SITUID K.66 ind hold & rough
Lino fron thore to CmN whore they nre round tho tom on thruo sidos
nd through tho SINGERID line to the ST of it.
12 Division, nowly
icontified hore, is fighting hord.
In the SIBERIN lino itsolf, our
Ilies report that ip shot has achieved good rosults agrinst the concrote
works, and that a good wey to snothor a pill-box is to bulld the do
Tho 2ir bés. .....
Tho 27 bag in DRUSI was 7,000.
Inside GINNY itsolf, the onory is mising frosh divisions out of
eu such divisions ro sS Divisions
"SeRLAND" Od RIBINLND"
hich will crop up sonowhore or othor in tho nonr futuro.
also of more in odinto intorust to this dorps is a capturol nap which
shows in tho
(strongth unlown)
newol aftor thoir Connors "SCLINWNING" rnd "RAnSSIan", both undor
Corps "FLy" whose Ilg is shown nt IüLs 1.1509.
in vixition, porsistont roports of HITiR JUGIND troops
mom no, thn titost on sin ting that thay do đấ gảng along tho
Tust rivor bo twoon DIVUNTER Z•90 mel ZVOLLE 15 milos NORIH of thoro.
It is a striking corincidone thorofore that the nay
should show Hogt
win" as ono of the rogimonts of Division "SCURNING".
TRASHIONE
was Inst known ns n, ruginontal conndor in 12 ss Division "HITIE JUGIND".
of Conndion Mil.
His guilt,
00, 12 SS,
Tank Rogiment,
who was
captured about a tonth ngo.
Of courso it my not bo tho sona TRiBall, but
the scont is worth following.
Io sun up therefore the chony forn is so follows:
Iwo Hono Guard Divicions lus tink a flnk oddmonts thought to
Do NORIll of the MDTHIN, ind posibly ongogod right now at AloM.
SE of NIJINGUY about helf a division end the pronieo of nore to cono.
On our I of C aru parrichute fi Gif ramants, and likoly to
reninst the loft
push
flank aro drovos of ill orsenised infintry vithdrawing
fron tho BUSE-ZSCLUI conal (for vithiraval is invitablo iftor our
success today) nd coning over fron the SCIDI forcios.
Lastly, flak, both hoovy ma light, ill ovor the pinco.
11h.
I rigadior,
donoral Strft.
iran 119, 30 Corps
2.0.S. 0300...
Document orde
Document 1:
Docun
Reserve 1:
Reserve 2
WO 171/3
14625591
Return by (20/11/2u
9991969 (Albert duan
