pg_0180.pdf:
V07794 (179) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VIII. Sec. 77.]
151
to be carried out should be made by night as well as by day,
whenever possible, and by as many of the commanders
concerned as is practicable. Preparations include : the most
careful calculations of time and space, checked over the
actual ground, if possible; precautions against the danger of
loss of direction (e.g. marking of the route, taking of compass
bearings); plans for the removal or crossing of obstacles;
provisions for distinguishing friend from foe (badge or pass-
word); organization of means of intercommunication;
devices for maintaining silence and secrecy and for deceiving
the enemy; arrangements for the rest and feeding of the
troops; details of the equipment to be carried; and any
other measures that prudence, forethought and ingenuity
may suggest. It is important that troops embarking on a
night operation should be rested as much as possible and
given a meal before starting. The thoroughness and care
y at on into a beatin to tane
careful preparation; but all troops taking part must fully
understand their roles in the operation.
3. Night operations may be divided into :—
i. Night marches, i.e. movements in normal march forma-
tion; the force may either be responsible for its
own protection or may move behind the protection
of other troops ;
ii. Night advances (or withdrawals), i.e. movements made
in some battle formation, in proximity to the
enemy,
iti. Night attacks, i.e. attacks delivered in darkness, either
by troops already in position, or after a night
advance or night march.
Attacks at dawn are not included in the term night
operations; but the approach, assembly and other pre-
parations, which will usually be made under cover of dark-
ness, will be governed by the rules for night operations;
these are applicable also in many respects to operations 1n
thick fog or mist.
4. If a night advance is the sequel to a night march, a point
known as the assembly position must be selected beforehand;
at which point the normal march formation will be abandoned
and a battle formation adopted.
V07794 (179) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association
www.vickersmg.org

