pg_0186.pdf:
V07794 (185) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VIII. Secs. 81 and 82.]
157
2. Withdrawals at night will be carried out on the same
general principles as by day (Sec. 48), and with the same
precautions as regards previous reconnaissance, careful
preparation (marking of routes, etc.), silence, avoidance of
unnecessary lights, and so forth, as in other night operations.
A carefully worked out and strictly observed time-table is
the basis of a well-organized withdrawal.
82. Night attacks
1. Night attacks have the advantages of avoiding the
aimed fire of the enemy (except of machine guns laid on
fixed lines), of surprise (if proper preparations have been made
and precautions taken) and of moral effect, especially against
less well-trained troops. At night, in fact, superiority in
discipline and in training has even better opportunity to
exploit its full value than by daylight.
The objectives of night attacks must be strictly limited
both as to frontage and as to depth; even the most highly
trained troops cannot safely manœuvre in darkness or exploit
a success beyond a certain point. Hence night attacks
should usually be directed against well-defned objectives
limited in size, such as an enemy advanced post or a salient
or detached feature in the enemy's position.
If a portion of
the enemy's main line is to be carried at night, care must be
taken that it will not be overlooked from the flanks and
enfiladed at dawn. Other suitable occasions of night attacks
may be to regain by counter-attack a position which has been
previcusly lost the attackers will have the advantage of
familiarity with the ground—or to carry an enemy outpost
position as a preliminary to attack on the main line by
daylight.
Night attacks are usually executed by infantry, with or
without the assistance of artillery and engineers. Only
exceptionally favourable circumstances will justify attacks in
the dark by armoured fighting vehicles or by mounted troops.
2. The smaller the force, the less likelihood of confusion;
a brigade of intantry is the largest force that can be used
against one objective without risk of serious mischance; if
it is desired to attack on a larger front, it is usually advisable
that two or more distinct operations should be carried out-
each with its own objective: the attacks may be timed to be
simultaneous but should be executed independently of each
other.
RSMO
V07794 (185) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

