pg_0067.pdf:
V07794 (66) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
38
[Chap. II. Secs. 18 and 19.
In theatres of war where private messages are accepted,
special instructions for their disposal will be issued in routine
orders. Such messages will always take precedence after
ordinary service traffic.
3. The staff at a headquarters will make their own arrange-
ments for checking the acknowledgment of any messages
which the recipients have been ordered to acknowledge (e.g.
operation orders, which should be acknowledged as a matter
ot routine). Signals will be responsible, however, for advising
the staff of any undue delay in transmission and the delivery
of messages, orders, etc., whether acknowledgment has been
ordered or not. It will usually be advisable for the staff
of a headquarters to draw up suitable instructions to signals
on the procedure to be followed in reporting delays.
4. When messages of special importance are sent, for
example operation orders or
"emergency operations"
messages, signals may be instructed to inform the staff of the
time and method of despatch and the probable time of
delivery, as well as of any undue delay in acknowledgment.
5. Any interruption or delay in signal communications will
be reported to the operations section of the general staff
immediately it occurs. Should any delay be caused or
anticipated by reasons of an unusual pressure of traffic, the
operations section of the general staff will take steps to
regulate the despatch of messages in their relative order of
urgency. In the absence of general staff instructions, the
signal officer in charge is authorized to use his own judgment
in the regulation of the despatch of messages.
19. Security of messages
1. All messages sent by wireless telegraphy or radio tele-
phony are liable to interception by an enemy with modern
equipment. The approximate position of a wireless station
can also generally be determined by an enemy with direction
finding apparatus.
The use of cipher, the rendering of addresses unintelligible
to the enemy by the use of code names (see Appendix IV),
and observance of the rules given in paragraph 3, below, will
reduce the danger of the enemy gaining information from
intercepted wireless messages.
All headquarters in the field which may require to use
cipher are provided with the means of enciphering and de-
V07794 (66) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

