pg_0169.pdf:
V07794 (168) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
140
[Chap. VII. Sec. 70.
preparations for the attack and his advance to and assembly
in forming-up positions, fire to repulse the enemy's tanks
or infantry when the actual assault is delivered and fire to
check any hostile penetration or to support counter-attack.
The first stage is mainly in the province of the artillery
(harassing fire and counter-preparation); machine guns
sited for long-range fire, and troops in outpost positions or
advanced posts, may assist to delay or prevent the assault.
In the second stage, the defender depends on the prepared
belt of co-ordinated fire in front of the foremost defended
localities to defeat the assault, the artillery being responsible
for defensive fire (Sec. 74, 5) and for counter-battery work.
Once any body of the enemy has passed this belt of fire, the
artillery can usually fire on it only by direct observation or
in support of an arranged counter-attack; to check its further
penetration is the business of the infantry weapons sited for
defence in depth and of the local reserves; the artillery
meanwhile will endeavour to prevent the advance of the
hostile reserves.
3. If portions of the attacking force succeed in penetrating
the defender's position, the nearest commander with reserves
at his disposal is faced with the problem of whether to use
those reserves defensively, to check and localize the enemy's
sies, is offensely to counterate ack the be suite
The
to rules. To counter-attack as a matter of routine (or as a
supposed matter of honour) whenever ground is lost, is simply
to court unnecessary and useless casualties; counter-attacks
should be made only with a definite and useful object, e.g.
to recover ground or to close a gap, when the system of
defence in that part of the field is in peril, or to exploit an
opportunity of dealing the attacker a blow with a good
prospect of success.
Surprise, which is the principal weapon
of the attacker, is also the chief factor in the success of the
counter-attack.
Counter-attacks are classed as immediate or deliberate,
Conding to the counterest and sta it of deliver check tho
enemy and to stabilize the situation in that particular part
of the field. If these purposes are accomplished, it is not
material whether or not the position originally held by the
defence is recaptured. It should be launched during the
period of temporary confusion and disorganization which
occurs when the attacking troops have penetrated the position
V07794 (168) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

