pg_0116.pdf:
V07794 (115) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 40 and 41.]
87
troops can be awakened in time to allow the adjust-
ment of their respirators.
VI. Animals should, as far as possible, be kept under cover
in stables or in the shelter of trees; measures must
be taken to prevent them grazing on ground con-
taminated by blister gas.
vii. Supplies of food and water for men and animals can
be contaminated by gas and may cause casualties
if consumed; they should, whenever practicable,
be protected by tarpaulin or other covers; supplies
which have become contaminated should be de-
stroyed. Food in sealed metal containers is unlikely
to be contaminated and may be eaten, unless there
are signs of gas when the container is opened.
Water from areas contaminated by blister gas must
not be used for drinking or for ablution; boiling
does not necessarily purify water so contaminated.
viii. During a gas attack, weapons, ammunition and instru-
ments should be kept covered when not in use.
6. All ranks must know the methods of using the equip-
ment provided to decontaminate weapons, instruments,
vehicles, etc., and of sealing or removing blister gas from an
area where frequent passage is necessary, e.g. a headquarters
Contaminated clothing and equipment
will be collected and removed under special arrangements,
since its cleaning is a technical process involving a consider-
able plant.
7. Since the lines of communication (including base areas)
os detence, such a:
those used in position warfare, will be possible. (See Chap-
ter IX and Appendix X.)
PROTECTION WHEN ADVANCING
41. Advanced guards-general
1. Every body of troops advancing towards the enemy
will be covered by an advanced guard, which is charged with
the duties of gaining information of the enemy, of preventing
the enemy reconnoitring troops from gaining information,
and of engaging the enemy when encountered so as to brush
aside minor resistance without delay and to give the main
SMC
V07794 (115) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

