pg_0227.pdf:
V07794 (226) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
198
[Appendix IV.
5. The four cardinal points of the compass will be
written in full, abbreviations with the letters "N," "S,"
"E" and "W" being used to denote intermediate points,
e.g. :
" South of HASELEY" not "S of HASELEY."
" SW of HASELEY " not " South-West of HASELEY."
G. Roads will be indicated by place names on them, care
being taken to name sufficient places to ensure that the road
intended is followed. The word " road" will precede, not
follow,
the place names,
e.g.
" road BAGSHOT-CAM-
BERLEY," nọt " BAGSHOT-CAMBERLEY road." Rail-
ways may be similarly described.
7. An area will be described by taking the northernmost
point first, and giving the remaining points in clockwise
order.
Positions will be described from right to left looking
towards the enemy.
8. Boundaries, if generally parallel to the line of advance
or withdrawal, will be described from rear to front in advance,
and from front to rear in defence and withdrawal. If
generally parallel to the front line, they will be described from
right to left.
In detailing boundaries between units and formations, the
words " inclusive " or " exclusive," abbreviated to " incl"
or "excl," will be used. These words should be written
before the place to which they refer. A locality will be
described as inclusive or exclusive to the unit or formation to
which the writer belongs, rather than as exclusive or inclusive
to another.
In an operation order, it is usually convenient to place all
details of boundaries, including-so far as necessary-those
aid down by a higher formation, in the " Method " para-
graphs (see Sec. 15, 4).
9. River banks may be described as "right " or " left,"
it being assumed that the writer is facing downstream.
10. The terms " right" and " left" applied to our own
forces in retirement will be taken to refer to the original right
and left flanks, as they were when facing the enemy.
" " on the
side of " are used to define a locality, it must be made clear to
what they refer.
V07794 (226) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

