pg_0058.pdf:
V07794 (57) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Secs. 14 and 15.]
29
order will inform the intermediate authorities concerned and
neighbouring formations likely to be affected. The recipient
of the order will inform his immediate superior of its receipt
and of the action which he is taking on it.
15. Issue of orders for operations
1. Orders, instructions, reports and messages must be
clear and precise. They will, whenever possible, be issued,
or confirmed, in writing (see also paragraph 3, below). If
sent by telephone, they will be written down by the recipient,
and repeated back to the sender.. If written, they must be
easily legible, must be timed, and must be signed by the
sender, who will give his rank, appointment and formation or
unit.
Paragraphs should be numbered to facilitate reference.
Detailed rules for drafting orders, instructions and messages;
the definition of " zero hour," etc., are given in Appendix IV.
2. No matter how complete, how appropriate and how
correctly drawn up an order may be, it fails of its purpose
if it does not arrive in time. The commander who issues an
order is responsible that it reaches his subordinates in time
to enable them to make all the necessary preparations, includ-
ing the framing and issue of their own orders, before troops
are committed to action in execution of the order. When
detailed operation orders cannot be issued in sufficient time
to enable the troops to make the necessary preparation, a
" warning order" should be issued; this order should give
sufficient information to enable all the necessary preparations
to be made.
3. Since the success of any operation depends largely on
the time factor, orders in the field will often be issued ver-
bally. A commander can impress his will and inspire con-
fidence in the success of an operation far more easily through
verbal orders, if well issued, than by pages of written orders:
A commander will therefore often find it desirable to assemble
his subordinate commanders before an operation, to explain
his plan and to issue his orders.
When the orders for an operation are issued verbally,
written comfirming orders will subsequently be. issued
whenever practicable. When, however, it is impossible for
orther, howeve
the complete confirming order to reach recipients in time to
affect the action ordered, such an order may be confined to
a brief message confirming essential points, such as objectives,
starting lines, boundaries, routes and times.
Whether a
V07794 (57) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

