pg_0187.pdf:
V07794 (186) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
158
[Chap. VIII. Sec. 82.
Night attacks which require a preliminary night march to
approach the enemy run a greater risk of premature dis-
covery, if the enemy is vigilant, or of some mishap or mistake.
On the other hand, if the enemy is not vigilant or can be
deceived, a complete surprise may be effected. As the risks
of such an operation are great, so must the preparation be
thorough.
3. Artillery can give no support to a night attack unless
already in action in daylight or unless the battery positions
and localities on which artillery fire is required have been
fixed with sufficient accuracy for predicted shooting.
If
artillery is used, it may carry out a short preparation just
before the assault; or may fire during or after the assault
against points on the flanks of the attacking force and
against probable assembly positions well beyond the objective,
with the idea of preventing or hampering counter-attacks.
Occasional firing by the artillery may sometimes be used to
cover the noise made by the approach of the assaulting troops.
4. The timing of night attacks requires careful considera-
tion with regard to the object of the operation.
Time will
usually be required to enable the position gained to be
consolidated before daylight; unless it is intended to con-
tinue the operation immediately after dawn, when it may be
of advantage to allow the enemy as little time as possible
to recover from his surprise. If too much time is allowed
for consolidation, the enemy may have time to organize a
counter-attack before daylight.
A lavourable state of the
moon may influence the hour chosen; for instance, the light
of the moon may be used for the approach, the actual assault
being delivered when it has gone down; or the assault may
be made just before the moon rises, so as to have the
advantage of its light for consolidation. It will assist troops
to keep direction in the dark if their objective is on a sky-line,
i.e. if they are attacking uphill.
Part of the advantages of a night attack- absence of aimed
fire and surprise-may sometimes be gained by an attack
at dusk, while there is still light enough for the attackers to
keep direction, but not enough for the defence to direct their
fire with accuracy; positions in front of which assaulting
troops have been held up during daylight may sometimes
thus be carried by a surprise attack at dusk.
5. The preparations for a night attack must be even more
detailed than those for a night march or night advance (ses
V07794 (186) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

