pg_0147.pdf:
V07794 (146) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
118
[Chap. VI. Secs. 58 and 59.
weapons; this period must be reduced to a minimum by
arrangements to pass the supporting weapons across rapidly.
In fact the whole operation, once begun, should be carried
through as swiftly as possible, so as to shorten the time during
which the force is divided by the obstacle of the river. If a
river can be reached before the enemy has had time to
organize the defence, the leading troops must make every
effort to establish themselves across it as rapidly as possible,
ustried with the force is at atsing if the bridging materia
3. A passage should be made at as many points simul-
taneously as possible, but the number will usually be limited
by the means of crossing available. A re-entrant bend of the
river offers good facilities for covering fire and is therefore
often selected as a crossing place. The enemy is, however,
likely to have made arrangements to bring fire into such
obviously likely points of passage. Against an organized
defence, the first crossing will usually be made under cover
of darkness. Arrangements to defend the crossing places
against enemy air attack should be made.
4. The successive stages in the operation of forcing a
crossing against an organized defence will usually be :—
i. Reconnaissance and the making of plans.
ii. Preparation, including the forward movement and
concealment of troops and bridging material and
arrangements to deceive the enemy as to the points
of passage.
iii. The passage of attacking infantry by assault bridges,
boats or other means, and establishment of bridge-
heads.
iv. The construction of bridges or ferries for supporting
arms (Appendix VIII).
v. The passage of the remainder of the force and the
maintenance and improvement of communications
across the river. Good traffic contiol will be of
great importance.
5. Detailed information on river crossings will be found in
Engineer Training and Infantry Training.
59. Exploitation and consolidation
1. The exploitation of a success depends mainly on the
leadership of the subordinate commanders. When a body
V07794 (146) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

