pg_0141.pdf:
V07794 (140) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
112
[Chap. VI. Sec. 55.
The position to be attacked may vary from ground hastily
occupied-for example, by the enemy's protective forces to
cover the deployment of the main body or by a force sent to
oppose an outfanking movement to a deliberately prepared
and highly organized defence with elaborate entrenchments
and obstacles.
7. Except in certain phases of position
warfare (see
Chapter IX), the enemy's dispositions- especially those of
his machine guns and anti-tank guns-are not likely to be
accurately ascertainable beforehand, however careful the
preliminary reconnaissance by ground and air. In the
the destruction or neutralization of the enemy weapons will
almost entirely depend on the information received from the
forward troops as to what is barring their progress, and on
the closeness of the touch maintained between the forward
troops and the fire power which supports them. Where
the enemy has had time to organize his defence in depth, the
attack will only succeed if also organized in depth, i.e. with
sufficient reserves to meet unexpected situations and to
confirm and exploit success.
The exercise of control and
supervision over the attack is for the commander of every
degree the most vital problem of all; it is primarily a matter
of intercommunication and of getting back information
from the forward troops.
8. The time factor always requires the most careful
consideration. On the one hand, an attack launched with-
out adequate reconnaissance and preparation is unlikely to
succeed: on the other hand, when a favourable position for
the attack has been gained, delay and hesitation are fatal,
and enable the enemy either to strengthen his defences and
complete his arrangements to meet the attack or to avoid
the blow by withdrawal. Every device therefore must be
adopted to shorten the period of reconnaissance and
preparation (see Sec. 56).
9. Such are in outline the main problems of the commander
who has to plan and execute an attack. They are applicable
to every commander acting independently, however small
his force. The junior commander will more often be given his
task and objective in a plan already worked out by the
V07794 (140) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

