pg_0175.pdf:
V07794 (174) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
146
[Chap. VII. Sec. 74.
before the attack. The artillery fire plan should not be
prematurely disclosed (see para. 5, below).
3. Survey work, the selection of observation areas and
arrangements for intercommunication all require attention in
artillery preparation for defence. The longer time usually at
their disposal for survey work will give the defence the
advantage of being better prepared than the attackers to
carry out predicted shooting (see Sec. 5, 6); the value of this
is that it gives a considerable power of surprise; no guns
need fire from their selected positions, until required for
counter-preparation or defensive fire; it is also important,
since the enemy is likely to try to blind the defenders'
observation by the use of smoke. For this latter reason
alternative areas for observation should be selected and
manned, when possible.
Good intercommunication is
essential (see Sec. 76, 1).
4. Counter-battery work will generally be carried out under
the control of corps headquarters, if the means of. inter-
communication permit. Sound-ranging and flash-spotting
groups will be installed and air photographs will be taken,
if possible before as well as after occupation by the enemy, in
order to assist in locating the hostile batteries. If the enemy
carries out artillery preparation before advancing to the
attack, his batteries should be engaged; if counter-preparation
is ordered, the proportion of artillery to be used for counter-
battery work will depend on the number of enemy batteries
located and the amount of damage which they are causing ;
when an attack actually takes place, it may be necessary
to stop counter-battery work for a time and to concentrate
the whole power of the defending artillery on the assaulting
troops.
Harassing fire (Sec. 5, 6) may be carried out by sections of
field artillery or single guns placed in temporary positions
well forward.
5. Artillery defensive fire, to repel an assault, will be con-
centrated on the assaulting troops and their reserves. When
possible, it will be controlled by observation; but arrange-
ments will always be made for predicted fire to be put down
on any part of the front if observation is impossible; at
night, guns will be laid on certain pre-arranged lines.
The
fact that the enemy is actually assaulting will be notified by
the infantry or by artillery observers, by means of light
signals, if available. It will be confirmed by all available
V07794 (174) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

