pg_0176.pdf:
V07794 (175) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Secs. 74 and 75.]
147
means of intercommunication. Care must be taken that the
scheme of fire for repelling an assault is not put into operation,
and thus disclosed to the enemy, merely on the threat of
attack; to prevent this, it may be necessary to lay down
which commander or commanders are entitled to give the
signal for defensive fire. It will also be necessary to decide
by whom counter-preparation may be orderer.
If the enemy has penetrated the foremost defences, the
artillery should fire on them if it can be seen clearly by direct
observation that the enemy has overrun some portion of the
defences and that fire must be opened at once if an oppor-
tunity is not to be lost: otherwise, fire will only be brought
back behind the original front with the consent of the com-
mander of the sector affected.
6. The support of counter-attacks, immediate or deliberate,
will be guided by the same principles as the support of the
attack.
The support of immediate counter-attacks will be
on the initiative of the subordinate artillery commander on
the spot; the support of deliberate counter-attacks will require
more organization and control; it will be the duty of artillery
commanders to point out how soon efficient artillery fire can
be organized, or, if it is desired to make the attack within a
certain time, how far the artillery support can be efficient by
that hour.
75. Engineers in the defence
1. When a defensive position is being taken up, there is
always likely to be more work on which engineers can usefully
be employed than there are engineers available to carry it out.
To ensure that the engineers are used to the best advantage,
it is necessary that the commander concerned should give his
senior engineer officer early information of the position to be
taken up and of the plan of defence, so that the necessary
reconnaissance may be carried out as soon as possible.
In the hasty occupation of a position it will usually be
advisable in the first instance to allot engineer units to definite
sectors, corresponding with those allotted to formations, such
as brigades. Until a definite programme of engineer work
can be laid down, the engineers may be required to assist the
other arms in strengthening their defences. As the defence
develops and the engineering requirements are known, the
engineers will be employed on a definite programme of
works.
V07794 (175) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

