pg_0228.pdf:
V07794 (227) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix IV.]
199
12. Bearings will be given as true bearings, except when a
gridded map is used, when grid bearings will be given.
V. Messages
1. The large volume of signal traffic, due to the size of
modern armies and the variety of arms composing them, and
the necessity of enciphering W/t messages, render brevity,
clearness and the strict observance of rules in the writing of
messages of great importance.
2. Copies of all messages will be kept by the originator.
3. A.F. C 2128, and when necessary, envelope C398, should
be used for messages.
Messages for D.R.L.S. will be placed
in envelopes, marked D.R.L.S., signed by an officer and
handed to the signal office.
To enable the signal office to
trace the receipt and acknowledgment of the message, the
originator should put a reference number on the envelope.
4. Nothing must be written above the space provided for
the address " To."
5. Address " To " and " From "-Addresses and originators
of messages will be designated by their code names (see para.
6, below) or, when these are not used, by their abbreviated
titles as indicated in the Field Service Pocket Book.
Officers, names and appointments will never appear in the
address
"To" or " From" unless it is essential for some
special reason.*
6. Formations and units are allotted code names by the
general staff.
In signal Inessages passing in front of divisional head-
quarters, the originators will use code names in the addresses
and text.
Code names will be used similarly in all telephone conversa-
tions in front of divisional headquarters and in all R/T
messages.
In messages from corps to corps, and in messages behind
corps headquarters, the originators will use the authorized
abbreviations to denote formations and units.
7. If a message is to be delivered by signals to more than
* In the Royal Navy the cali sign of a ship indicates the captain. If a
message is for any other officer, the words " For ...
" should be inserted
at the beginning of the text.
V07794 (227) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

