pg_0149.pdf:
V07794 (148) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
120
[Chap. VI. Secs. 59 and 60.
3. The conduct of the pursuit is dealt with in Field Service
Regulations, Volume III. Forward troops, when the enemy
is withdrawing, will act as in Sec. 44, I.
A pursuit, when
the enemy has been defeated and demoralized, calls for the
maximum effort on the part of all ranks, who must be
prepared to exert themselves to the point of exhaustion, in
the hope of completely destroying the enemy force.
60. Armoured units in the attack
1. The employment of tank brigades in offensive operations
is dealt with in Field Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935,
Chapter V. The present section deals with the employment
of army tank battalions in co-operation with the other arms.
2. Army tank battalions may be used in the attack, either
in the initial stages to break through the enemy's front
defence or in the later stages in order to maintain the impetus
of the attack and to confirm success. They will be especially
valuable in the early stages if the enemy has had time to
erect a wire obstacle. Concealment of the approach of the
tanks will be essential and will necessitate measures to prevent
their presence being disclosed by the noise of their movement,
as well as by observation. If tanks are used in the initial
attack, the greatest possible measure of support from artillery
and machine guns will be provided; the fire plan will, in fact,
be arranged mainly with the object of supporting the action of
the tanks; a smoke screen, stationary or moving, laid down
by the artillery, will often provide effective cover and will be
economical of ammunition. Machine-gun support to a tank
attack is valuable, since the tanks cannot be injured by it
and it can be continued after the tanks reach their objective.
If tanks are used in the later stages, supporting fire will
still be necessary but will be more difficult to arrange; on
the other hand, their mobility will enable them to act by
surprise and to take rapid advantage of opportunities for
effective action which will occur while the enemy is disorganized
after a successful attack by the other arms.
3. The frontage which an army tank battalion can cover
depends on the lie of the ground, the strength of the enemy's
position, the degree of supporting fire available and the
visibility at the time of attack. Under exceptionally
favourable conditions a company may be expected to cover
a frontage of 1,000 yards; this may be reduced to 500 yards
V07794 (148) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

