pg_0078.pdf:
V07794 (77) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Secs. 23 and 24.]
49
5. A mechanized force, such as a tank brigade, can march
50 miles a day for a limited period without undue tatigue;
and can cover 100 miles in 24 hours as a special eftort.
24. Rules for the movement of horsed and pack
transport
1. Strict march discipline is as necessary with transport
as with troops. Transport should march in small blocks,
of about six horsed vehicles or the equivalent, with a space
of ten yards between blocks; sufficient space should be left
on the outer flank for the free movement of passing traffic;
transport should be kept closed up, and any distance lost
should be regained as soon as opportunity offers.
2. When possible, only one nature of transport will be
allotted to each echelon or stage of a convoy route. When
different forms of transport have to move together (e.g.
horsed carts, camels, mules), the fastest class of transport
should start first, if the situation permits of the column
opening out. Otherwise the slowest class of transport should
lead, so that slow-moving animals (such as camels) will not
be overdriven to keep up with faster animals (such as mules).
In each class of transport, the slowest moving team or animal
will lead.
3. No men will be allowed to ride on transport vehicles or
to place their arms and equipment on them, except by the
written order of an officer.
Some empty wagons or spare animals will march in rear of
the column to replace casualties; they must not on any
account be used to carry excess baggage. Broken-down
wagons, disabled animals or thrown loads must be removed
at once from the roadway, so that the transport in rear may
not be checked.
Animals must not be allowed to drink when passing
through fords, unless special orders have been issued for
them to do so.
4. The use of pack transport, which is confined mainly to
undeveloped countries, requires special care and organization.
Unless loads are properly balanced and well tied-on, an undue
proportion of the animals will become casualties through
sore backs, and there will be constant delays on the march
through loads slipping or falling off. The loading of a large
column of pack animals requires careful organization; the
V07794 (77) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

