pg_0199.pdf:
V07794 (198) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
170
[Chap. IX. Secs. 86 and 87.
the objective immediately after the barrage has lifted trom
it and before the enemy has time to man his defences. If a
deep penetration is being effected, part of the artillery will
be required to move forward to support the later stages of
the attack.
87. Engineers in position warfare
1. The work and responsibilities of engineers in position
warfare are onerous, both in attack and defence. In addition
to the tasks which they perform in mobile warfare (Secs. 64 and
75) they may have to undertake mining and counter-mining ;
the construction of deep shelters and of defensive works in
concrete; the making of trench tramways and other improve
ments to communications; schemes for drainage and water
supply. Behind the defensive lines they will be required for
the construction of buts and other installations, the improve-
ment of communications, and so forth.
In order that the available engineer personnel and material
shall be used to the best advantage, a programme of work
should be prepared by the general staff, in consultation with
the senior engineer officers, for the approval of the commander
concerned, and should be reviewed and revised periodically.
Since the calls on the engineers will be very heavy, they
should be reduced as far as possible by the other arms carrying
out for themselves all works that involve little or no technical
skill. The work of the engineers will involve the allotment
to them of additional transport.
2. In the defence, the chief tasks of engineers will be the
construction of mined dug-outs, shell-proof cover for head-
quarters, aid posts, observation posts, etc., concrete or
tunnelled machine-gun emplacements, trench tramways and
other improvements to communications, camouflage of
important works, drainage schemes, water supply and, if
necessary, counter-mining.
3. In the attack, the duties of engineers during the period
of preparation will be skilled work to facilitate the concentra-
tion and deployment of the assaulting troops (e.g. accommo-
dation and water supply) and their forward movement (e.g.
clearance uf obstacles,
improvement of communications,
erection of signboards, bridging) ; the construction of battle
headquarters, observation posts, machine-gun and mortar
emplacements, advanced dressing stations, etc.; the forma-
tion of dumps of tools and engineer material; preparations
V07794 (198) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

