pg_0053.pdf:
V07794 (52) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
24
[Chap. II. Sec. 11.
now it went nation a sily, sevent bo
commander realize that offensive action is necessary sooner
or later for the overthrow of the enemy.
Such are some of the guiding rules or principles for tactical
success: the principles of surprise, of mobility, of concentra-
tion, of economy of force, of security, of co-operation and of
offensive action These are principles or maxims in
the same sense that " honesty is the best policy" and "Cut
your coat according to your cloth" are maxims for the
conduct of everyday life.
4. These commonsense precepts, or principles, are easy
enough to learn and grasp: but they are no more a complete
Their application to the situations and problems of the
battlefield, which are never twice the same, needs constant
practice and study. Some further explanation of them is
given in the following paragraph, but only practice in peace
or experience in war can make them, as they should be, as
instinctive to the soldier as is his art to the boxer.
5. Surprise, which should be sought equally by the army
commander and the section leader, may be obtained by
calculated deception of the enemy and distraction of a part
of his forces, by varying tactical methods, or by skilful con-
cealment of movements and intentions, in which night
operations may be a considerable factor.
To threaten two
points and to keep the enemy in doubt until the last possible
moment at which the blow is to be struck often provides a
means of surprising him. The defence, with its greater
facilities for concealment, offers as much opportunity for
surprise as the attack.
Mobility may be the result of good organization, of good
equipment or of good discipline and training; the will power
and driving force of a commander is a powerful factor. Time
is the most precious element in war, and the saving of it by
all possible means is the surest test of a good commander.
To know when and where to concentrate and when and where
to economize, in fact how to distribute the force available,
is a large part of the art of command, and cannot be learnt
by any mere rules. To balance the requirements of a reason-
V07794 (52) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

