pg_0209.pdf:
V07794 (208) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
180
[Chap. x. Secs. 95 and 96.
operations in mountain warfare (Sec. 97, 3). Topographical
reconnaissance will always be of special value, and mapping
of undeveloped country by air photography will sometimes
be required.
2. The policy regarding offensive action by the air force
(bombing and the use of machine guns) will require careful
consideration in accordance with the general plan. Thus
such action may be of great value to compensate for the lack
of artillery in difficult country and to help troops forward
or to prevent the enemy leaving some cover in which he has
been located, and thus to enable the troops to bring him to
action or surround him. On the other hand, premature
attack by the air force may cause the dispersion of bodies of
tribesmen whom the troops wish to bring to battle. There
must thus always be the closest possible touch between the
military and air force commanders concerned.
This will
often require special arrangements, both as regards signal
communication and liaison personnel, since the lack of
aerodromes may compel the separation of military and air
force headquarters. Some method of signalling between the
troops on the ground and the co-operating aircraft is most
desirable, since the assistance which aircraft can give will
often depend on the troops being able to indicate the direction
from which they are being opposed.
3. There will also be a number of ancillary uses which
aircraft may sometimes be called upon to undertake in
operations in undeveloped countries with poor communica-
tions.
Besides mapping, mentioned above, the carrying of
small bodies of troops to points of importance; the evacuation
of wounded,
when distances are large; the dropping of
supplies on isolated columns; and intercommunication
between separated forces are possible methods of promoting
the success of the operations.
Aeroplanes may also be used
to drop warnings or propaganda on neutral or hostile tribes-
men with whom it would not otherwise be possible to
communicate.
96. Armoured fighting vehicles in uncivilized warfare
1. Since the enemy will have little or no artillery, armoured
fighting vehicles can be freely employed in offensive opera-
tions whenever the ground is suitable, and will have a
great moral and material value. The nature of the country
will, however, often hamper or forbid their use: rocky
V07794 (208) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

