pg_0157.pdf:
V07794 (156) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
128
[Chap. VI. Sec. 63.
2. The artillery plan must be simple and must be governed
by the time available for preparation. Details of artillery
tasks should be arranged direct by artillery officers with the
commanders of the troops which they are supporting.
The methods by which artillery support an attack have
been outlined in Sec. 5. Whether or not artillery prepara-
tion is undertaken, and its duration and intensity, depend on
the strength of the enemy defences and the methods by
which surprise is being sought. A barrage is the simplest
method of giving support during the assault, when the enemy
positions are not accurately known, since barrage fire ensures
that all ground over which the attacking troops pass is
subjected to some measure of fire. But the ammunition
as a rough general guide, it may be taken that a field artillery
brigade will not fire an effective barrage on a front of much
more than 400 yards, while the depth to which it can be fired
will depend on the estimated rate of advance of the attackers
in accordance with the difficulties of the ground and the
opposition expected, and on the ammunition available. It
must be remembered that the greatest danger to the infantry
will often come from weapons (and especially machine guns)
situated beyond their flanks and outside the limits of a
narrow barrage.
Concentrations of fire on selected areas are more economical
in ammunition and will be effective when the enemy's
dispositions have been ascertained in some detail or can be
estimated with a good degree of probability. When the
number of guns and the ammunition available do not permit
of an effective barrage being fired on the front of attack,
and when the enemy's dispositions are not accurately known
-both of which conditions may be confidently expected in
open warfare a combination of smoke and concentrations
will usually enable the best use to be made of the artillery
fire available. To combine concentrations and smoke
screens in the most effective manner according to the cir-
cumstances of the attack will require both knowledge and
imagination.
The bulk of the medium and heavy artillery available
is likely to be employed on counter battery fire, but may also
be employed on bombardment of the enemy positions.
3. Artillery fire may be either destructive (which is only
possible when the target has been accurately located);
V07794 (156) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

