pg_0127.pdf:
V07794 (126) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
98
[Chap. V. Sec. 48.
able to withdraw without becoming seriously involved, i.e.
to compel the enemy to move as slowly as possible. The
first requirement, as in any other operation of war, is good
information, from air reports and reconnaissance by the
mobile troops; the second requirement is the development
of fire at long ranges by artillery and machine guns to com-
pel the enemy to deploy early; the third requirement is
mobility, to facilitate a rapid withdrawal. A rear guard
usually carries out its mission by taking up a succession of
defensive positions, which the enemy is compelled to make
dispositions for attacking or turning. Before the attack
can fully develop, the rear guard withdraws, to repeat the
same manœuvre on the next favourable ground.
2. In selecting and occupying rear guard positions, it is
important, firstly, to show as strong a front as possible and
secondly, to make sure of good lines of retreat (see para. 5,
below).
A rear guard position does not require such depth
as a position which is to be resolutely defended; the greater
part of the force may be deployed in the forward line from the
outset, leaving only a proportionately small part in reserve.
Mobile troops will be used to protect the flanks and to carry
out reconnaissance beyond the flanks. Artillery positions
will be selected with a view to long-range fire and also to
ease of withdrawal.
3. The commander of the force to be protected may
either order the withdrawal of the rear guard to be carried
or he may give the rear guard commander latitude as to his
main body is assured. A timed programme will usually be
necessary, if pressure by the enemy is close. When a timed
programme is laid down, the times are based on the antici-
pated rate of movement of the main body and on the nature
of the ground, since the enemy must not be permitted to
occupy positions from which he can effectively shell the main
body in column of route: any factors which may alter the
timing, e.g. a quicker or a slower rate of progress by the main
body, should be at once communicated to the rear guard
commander.
In a timed programme, the rear guard may, in order to
maintain its positions to a fixed hour, have to undertake
close fighting or to deliver a counter-attack. When a rear
V07794 (126) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

