pg_0159.pdf:
V07794 (158) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
130
[Chap. VI. Secs. 64 and 65.
64. Engineers in the attack
1. The principal duties of engineers in an attack in open
warfare may be:-
i. The improvement of communications to facilitate the
assembly and deployment of the force, especially
the provision of bridges over water obstacles or gaps
(see Appendix VIII regarding types of military
bridges).
ii. The preparation for defence of important tactical
points captured during the attack (Sec. 59, 2).
11. The collection of information regarding work likely
to be required during and after the attack, and
preparations to carry it out; this means forward
reconnaissance, but engineer
units should not be
sent forward until there is some specific work for
them, which may be the improvement or construc-
tion of communications; the repair of bridges; the
removal of obstacles or mines; the provision of
water points in the forward areas, etc.
65. Signals in the attack
1. How to maintain intercommunication is one of the
chief problems of an attacking force. One of the first
essentials is that signals should be given early information
of the intention to attack and of the general plan. The
routes to be followed by headquarters during the attack
should be settled as early as possible.
2. It may sometimes be advisable to order a period of
wireless silence before the opening of an attack in order to
conceal the concentration and preparations for the attack.
3. Wireless should be regarded as the primary means of
communication throughout the division during the attack,
particularly in the forward area, i.e. in advance of brigade
headquarters. The precautions to be observed in the use of
wireless in battle are given in Sec. 19. It will be supplemented
by despatch riders and cable. Cable communications are,
however, very difficult to maintain in the forward area,
since they are liable to be constantly cut by the enemy shell
fire or by the movement of vehicles, especially of tracked
vehicles.
V07794 (158) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

