pg_0171.pdf:
V07794 (170) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
142
[Chap. VII. Secs. 70, 71 and 72.
6 In mobile warfare, the use of gas by the enemy in the
form of cloud or projector attacks, or of shelling by artillery,
will be restricted by the time required to bring up the
belongs rather to position warfare (Sec. 91). Attacks on a
position by gas spray from the air may be expected during
the period of the enemy's advance towards the position.
Once the two forces are in close contact, the difficulty of
ensuring that his own troops are not affected may restrict
the use of gas spray by the enemy, so far as forward positions
are concerned.
7. The principles of the use of aircraft in the defence are
similar to those in the attack (see Sec. 66). Efforts will be
made to prevent the enemy obtaining air superiority and
hampering the work of the army co-operation squadrons,
while bomber squadrons may be used to attack enemy troops
and transport. Reconnaissance will be directed especially to
detect any hostile movement against the flanks and
advance of any fresh columns.
71. Armoured units in the defence
1. Tanks are essentially weapons of offence; and armoured
units will normally be held in reserve for the counter-attack
be ground which offers protection and concealment for tanks
in close proximity to the forward defences; if there is,
tanks may be used effectively in the immediate counter-
attack and may be able to inflict heavy casualties on the
enemy.
2. If tanks are to be the weapon chiefly relied on for the
counter-stroke or counter-offensive, the ground must be
chosen and the fire plan arranged to suit their characteristics
(Sec. 60).
72. Mounted troops in the defence
1. Mounted troops may usefully be employed in covering
the occupation of a defensive position, in reconnoitring the
enemy's approach, in delaying his advance and in concealing
the exact situation and strength of the position. As the
V07794 (170) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

