pg_0092.pdf:
V07794 (91) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IV. Sec. 31.]
63
to be obtained to a great depth with the least delay; it is,
however, subject to certain limitations by weather and by
the nature of the country, and cannot produce the detailed
information necessary for tactical plans. Air reconnaissance
of the forward enemy area must therefore always be supple-
mented by ground reconnaissance.
The information and identifications obtained by actual
contact are, from a tactical point of view, the most valuable
of all, and form the principal basis of any tactical plan.
Thus, while strategical information is gained principally from
the air and from reconnaissance by mobile troops, tactical
information is in the main the responsibility of the forward
troops o1 all arms. Much useful information, both topo-
graphical and of the enemy, can be gained by the questioning
of civilian inhabitants; it may sometimes be advisable to
send an interpreter with reconnoitring detachments.
Information from enemy wireless may be of the utmost
value if the messages can be deciphered in time or if the
enemy is imprudent in sending messages in clear.
The
possibilities of the enemy attempting deception by wireless
have, however, always to be borne in mind.
The information derived from the interrogation of prisoners,
from the examination of captured documents, etc. is usually
too late to affect the immediate operations, but is most
valuable in enabling the intelligence staff to obtain a general
picture of the enemy's organization, dispositions, morale, etc.
3. The value of information depends on its relevancy, i.e.
its bearing on the operation in hand, its accuracy and its
timeliness.
Whether information is relevant or not will
depend largely on the instructions given by a commander
to his reconnoitring detachments (see para. 4, below);
whether or not it is accurate on the skill of the reconnoitring
detachments; and whether it arrives in time or not on the
arrangements made for its transmission.
The transmission
of information often presents greater difficulties than its
collection. When the reporting agency cannot guarantee
the accuracy of a report from personal observation, the
source of the information must be given, and the degree of
accuracy attached to it.
Negative information, i.e. information that nothing was
seen of the enemy at a certain time in a certain place, is
often of great value: the instructions given to a recon-
noitring detachment should enable it to judge whether
and when negative information is of importance. Negative
V07794 (91) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

