pg_0085.pdf:
V07794 (84) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
56
[Chap. III. Sec. 27.
stretch of road (about 600 to 700 yards for a battalion), and
makes concealment difficult. In the second method, a shorter
length of road is used successively by a smaller number of
vehicles, in the same way that a length of platform might be
used by successive trains; the troops can be kept in conceal-
ment and moved up to the " platform" in parties, as required.
This method is slower and complicates control of the column,
unless it is moving by time intervals (Sec. 25, 1), but makes
concealment easier, and is often the more suitable one.
8. The route should be carefully selected and recon-
noitred; and should be marked or piqueted wherever there
is a possibility of mistake; a wrong turning by a lorry
column may mean very serious delay, since it is not easy to
reverse movement. Steep hills or narrow roads may also be
a cause of great delay and should be avoided, if possible. It
will often save time and spare the drivers fatigue to select a
good main route even though the distance be greater.
The rules for march discipline given in Sec. 25 apply, of
course, to the movement of troop-carrying vehicles.
9. Much the same considerations govern the choice of the
point of debussing as of the point of embussing, i.e. facilities
for concealment from the air, a suitable stretch of road and
a good position of assembly for the troops. In addition,
there should be near the point of debussing a turning circuit
for the vehicles.
The orders for a move by mechanical
transport should always contain instructions for the disposal
of the vehicles after the debussing of the troops.
10. The commander ordering a move by mechanical trans-
port will appoint an officer to command the column, who
will be the deciding authority on all questions. He will be
responsible for the protection and guiding of the column, for
any alteration in the route laid down, for the regulation of
halts, for intercommunication in the column, for the decision
whether to use headlights or not, and all similar matters.
He will give the order for embussing and debussing and the
signal for halts. If he is the senior officer of the troops being
moved, as he will usually be, he will consult the senior
R.A.S.C. officer on all matters affecting the proper working
of the transport, will avoid all interference with his technical
functions and will give effect to his technical requirements,
unless he considers that by so going he will endanger the
safety of the column. He will usually travel in a car with
the R.A.S.C. officer in command of the transport, who will
V07794 (84) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

