pg_0073.pdf:
V07794 (72) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
44
[Chap. III. Sec. 21.
local starting point and the time at which the head of his
command must pass it so as to be able to pass the starting
point laid down by the higher formation at the hour specified.
In fixing the starting point, care must be taken that each unit
reaches it by moving forward in the direction of the march.
Fighting troops with their first-line transport have precedence
on the road over all other trunsport during the movement to
the starting point. All movements to the starting point are
calculated at the rate of 100 yards a minute.
Should a march begin in the dark, special arrangements
for marking the starting point will have to be made and
notified in operation orders. Lights used for this purpose
must be effectively screened from the enemy.
6. The normal march formations on a road are :—
i. For armoured fighting vehicles, column of route, i.e.
single file.
i. For cavalry, column of sections, or of half-sections, i.e.
four horses or two horses abreast.
iii. For infantry, column of route, i.e. fours.*
iv. For artillery, column of route, i.e. guns and vehicles
in single file.
v. For cyclists, half-sections, i.e. two men abreast,
vi. For motors or other vehicles, column of route, i.e. single
file.
Unless orders to the contrary are issued, troops and trans-
port will march in normal march formation on the " rule of
the road" side of a road, sufficient space being left on the
outer flank for passage up and down the column. In hot or
dusty weather, or for the purpose of concealment from air
observation, a column may be opened out on either side of the
road, the centre being left clear. The distances laid down
in Appendix VI, para. 5, may be increased by order of the
column commander in hot or dusty weather.
On unenclosed ground, it may be advisable to broaden the
front by marching in several columns abreast. If a road is
sufficiently wide, it may be possible to march a column of
troops in threes or fours on each side and still leave the centre
open for traffic. It is not, however, worth while to change
one march formation for another, unless the latter can be
maintained for a considerable distance.
* Marching by threes instead of by fours adds to the comfort of the troops,
and may be adopted unless the increase in road space is a consideration.
On a narrow road it may be necessary in order to allow space for passing.
V07794 (72) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

