pg_0038.pdf:
V07794 (37) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Sec. 5.]
9
5. Artillery
1. Artillery in the field is classified as mountain (in India
only), horse, field, anti-aircraft, medium, heavy and super-
heavy. All these except heavy and super-heavy have the
mobility to march and manœuvre with a division. Anti-
aircraft, medium, heavy and super-heavy artillery
mechanically drawn; the remainder may be mechanically
or horse drawn. Mountain artillery is carried on pack.
Artillery is normally allotted as follows: horse artillery
accompanies cavalry brigades; a proportion of the field
artillery forms the divisional artillery; the remainder is
organized into army field brigades which are retained under
higher commanders; medium, heavy and super-heavy are
under corps or army control, but a proportion of medium
artillery is sometimes allotted to divisions; anti-aircraft
artillery is usually under army control.
2. Artillery, unlike other arms, is not fully committed once
it has become engaged with the enemy, but retains, in great
measure, its liberty of action.
Without change of position,
its fire can be concentrated or dispersed at will, at varying
degrees of intensity, on widely separated targets. Artillery
can be disengaged from the combat and brought into action
in other parts of the battlefield with greater facility than any
other arm. This flexibility of artillery fire is a factor to be
exploited in the plan made to deceive and surprise the enemy
as to the area in which it is intended to attack.
To obtain full advantage from these characteristics, the
artillery in the field should be so organized and distributed
that its main power can be rapidly applied at points where
decisive blows are to be struck; and the system of command
should be arranged to allow of centralization or decentraliza-
tion of control according to the situation.
Artillery can be used with more effect and greater economy
if kept under one command.
Thus command of any body
of artillery should be centralized under the highest com-
mander who can exercise effective control. This will vary
in different phases of the battle, according to the signal
communications available. Whenever artillery is decen-
tralized, it must be clearly stated in orders whether it is
detailed to " support" the formation or unit concerned,
command being retained by the higher formation, or is placec
" under the command of" the formation or unit to which
it is sub-allotted. In the former event, artillery provides
V07794 (37) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

