pg_0094.pdf:
V07794 (93) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IV. Secs. 31 and 32.]
65
duties. Detailed instructions for intelligence work will be
found in. the Manual of Military Intelligence in the Field.
*All ranks must, however, be taught that the collection
of information is not the business only of the special intelli-
gence personnel, nor only of reconnoitring or observing
detachments. Every individual soldier must be restlessly
inquisitive in the quest of information and must report to
higher authority anything that he observes.
Military intelli-
gence in the field is built up from many small items of informa-
tion, often apparently trivial, and requires the continual
co-operation of all ranks. If the enemy is using gas, informa-
tion of his methods, specimens of his protective equipment,
splinters, fuzes, etc., of gas shells, will be of great importance.
32. Air reconnaissance
1. Air reconnaissance is classified as strategical and
tactical. It begins before the opposing armies are in con-
tact, and, at the opening of a campaign, is directed towards
discovering the enemy's initial concentration areas, his lines
of forward movement by road and rail, the position of his
depots, camps and aerodromes, and
so forth.
This is
strategical reconnaissance, and is usually carried out by day
bomber squadrons, either by single aeroplanes flying at a
great height (up to 20,000 feet) and relying on evasion for
their security, or, if the enemy's air opposition is serious, by
a number of aeroplanes flying in formation. Aircraft
carrying out strategical reconnaissance usually work under
the orders of G.H.Q. and make use both of photography
and of direct observation. Two-way W/T. communication
can be carried for reporting urgent information.
As the opposing forces approach each other, more detailed
information is needed concerning the enemy's advance and
deployment, and of the movement of his mobile forces or
other detachments: as contact is gained and the battle
and is usually carried out by army co-operation squadrons,
working under the orders of corps or divisional commanders.
It is impossible to define where strategical reconnaissance
ends and tactical reconnaissance begins.
Tactical recon-
naissance is sub-divided by using the terms " medium" and
" close" to indicate the type of patrol requited, its duration
V07794 (93) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

