pg_0183.pdf:
V07794 (182) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
154
[Chap. VIII. Secs. 78, 79 and 80.
be unmistakable at night. It should be secured by advanced
troops in good time beforehand.
6. All ranks must be informed what their action is to be
in the event of alarm or attack, or of an aeroplane dropping a
fare. Rites will not be loaded, but magazines will be
charged: no firing will take place without orders. Absolute
silence will be maintained, and no smoking, striking of lights
or use of electric torches will be allowed, except by per-
mission of the commander of the force.
79. Night movement by mechanical vehicles
1. Armoured fighting vehicles are not suited for fighting
at night, except in specially favourable conditions (e.g. by
moonlight), since without headlights their field of vision is
very limited and the noise of their movement betrays their
approach and makes surprise unlikely. Armoured units will,
however, frequently carry out moves at night-as a pre-
liminary to an attack at dawn, to gain a position of conceal-
ment before daylight, or for any other purpose. They will
observe the rules laid down in Sec. 78, as far as applicable.
They will usually move in an area protected by other troops:
if they have to provide their own protection, they will do
so on the same general principles as other troops (Sec. 78, 4),
light tanks or armoured cars being most suitable for advanced
and fank protection. Special reconnaissance of the route
will be required to ascertain its suitability for the type of
armoured vehicle using it. Orders as to the use of lights
must be issued; the pace of armoured fighting vehicles with
and without lights is given in Appendix I.
2. Mechanical transport can move at night without
headlights, at a slow pace; but sidelights and tall lights are
almost always essential. In order to ensure a column taking
the correct route, lighted signs may be placed at certain
points or men posted. Motor cyclists are valuable for traffic
control and for intercommunication.
80. Night advances
1. A night advance, i.e. a forward move in battle formation,
is undertaken when it is desired to gain ground under cover
of darkness, and the enemy is too close for the movement to
be safely made in march formation. A night advance may
follow a night march, and may be the preliminary to a night
attack or to an attack at dawn.
V07794 (182) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

