pg_0204.pdf:
V07794 (203) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IX. Sec. 92.]
175
viii. Arrangements for intercommunication; precautions
against enemy interception of messages.
ix. Light signals for artillery defensive fire or for machine-
gun fire; the position of gas alarms and of anti-
gas defence stores.
x. The position of units on flanks and their headquarters.
xi
The position of trench and ammunition stores and
supply arrangements for water, rations and am-
munition.
xii. Sanitary arrangements.
xiii. The location of wagon or transport lines.
3. In infantry reliefs, the machine guns and mortars, the
anti-tank platoon, intelligence section and a proportion of
signallers should, whenever possible, take over 24 hours in
an over 2 nous on
advance of the remainder of the battalion and during daylight.
In artillery reliefs, similarly, observation parties and complete
reliefs of signallers should take over 24 hours in advance;
and it is desirable that one section in each battery should also
take over in advance.
4. Reliefs will, as a rule, be carried out under cover of
darkness. Guides must be provided, either by the outgoing
unit or by the incoming unit from among the men who have
been in the position since the previous day. The rules for
march discipline by night (Sec. 78, 6) will be strictly observed ;
the pace in front must be very slow when going by a com-
munication trench or over difficult ground. Every relieving
party must receive orders as to the action which it will take
in the event of an attack by the enemy while the relief is in
progress.
5. No post will be evacuated until the relieving troops
have taken over.
Patrols will be sent out by the unit being
relieved before the relief begins, and will remain out until the
relief is complete.
Immediately after the relief, all men of
the relieving unit should be told off to their battle positions
and should occupy them until their company (or battery,
etc.) commander has been round and inspected the dis-
positions.
6. Officers handing over defences are responsible that all
available information is given to the relieving troops and that
defence schemes, maps, air photographs, etc., are handed
over. Superior authority will lay down distinctly what
weapons, tools and stores are " trench stores," to be handed
over from one unit to another on relief.
V07794 (203) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

