pg_0181.pdf:
V07794 (180) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
152
[Chap. VIII. Seca. 77 and 78.
If a night attack is to follow a night advance, a forming-up
place will be chosen; where the troops detailed for the assault
will deploy from the formation in which they bave made the
advance into the formation in which they will assault.
Thus, if a night attack is to be initiated at a distance from
the enemy, the sequence may be: a night march to a position
of assembly; thence a night advance to a forming-up place,
where final deployment for the assault takes place.
5. Although night operations against savage enemies, who
are accustomed to movement in the dark, may entail some
risk and may sacrifice the advantages of a superior armament,
they have, it well planned and executed, a great moral effect
on some uncivilized enemies (Sec. 9%, 4).
78. Night marches
1. The route for a night march should, when possible, be
reconnoitred both by day and night. Branch roads or other
places where the column might go astray, and points where
checks are likely to occur, will be noted and clearly marked,
as will also the starting point for the column.
If the march
is to be made across country, the route will be fixed by
compass bearings.
Landmarks which are visible by night
will be noted and the distance between those that lie on the
line of advance will be measured, so that the progress of the
march may be checked. It is advisable to detail an officer
in the column to check the distance marched and the pro-
gress of the column with reference to the landmarks which
have been noted.
Where the country is featureless, it may be
necessary to post men at certain points along the route,
particularly at places where a change of direction has to be
made; they will be given the compass bearing and the
distance to the next post.
2. It is best to retain the regulation distances between units,
in order to prevent constant checks throughout the column ;
but they may on very dark nights be reduced or omitted
will be arranged before starting; no unit will halt until it
has regained any distance that it may have lost. During halts
men may lie down, but must not leave the ranks; mounted
men will retain hold of their horses. Every commander
V07794 (180) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

