pg_0100.pdf:
V07794 (99) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IV. Secs. 34 and 35.]
71
in a sack and given to the escort, who will, as early as possible,
hand them over, together with the prisoners, to the provost
establishment at the divisional collecting point.
2. Identification of enemy units from their dead is also
important. Identification may be obtained from their
uniforms, identity discs or other marks on their clothing
and equipment.
It is the business of the intelligence staff
to communicate to the forward troops the best means of
identifying enemy units.
Documents, letters, etc., should be collected from enemy
dead only by the intelligence staff or under their supervision.
3. Troops engaged in reconnaissance will bring in any
civilian who appears likely to be able to give useful informa-
tion; the detailed examination of civilians, as of prisoners
of war, should usually be carried out by the trained personnel
of the intelligence staff.
When a town, village or other place lately in occupation
of the enemy is entered by our own troops, all documents,
printed matter, letters, etc., likely to provide information
must be collected and examined. This is the duty of the
intelligence staff, but it is the duty of the forward troops to
occupy at once the places or buildings where such documents
are likely to be found, e.g. old enemy headquarters, signal
offices, post and telegraph offices, police stations, municipal
offices, etc. in order to safeguard documents and records and
prevent their destruction.
35. Reports and sketches in the field
1. An officer carrying out a topographical or other recon-
naissance must plan it with the same care as any other
operation of war. He should take the following successive
steps :
i. He should make certain that he understands the
object of the reconnaissance and his orders, that he
has been given all the information that he requires
and that he is quite clear what questions he has to
answer in his report; he should divide these up
under suitable headings.
ii. Before starting, he should study the map, get as much
information from it as possible, plan an itinerary
in conformity with the time available and look for
suitable view points.
V07794 (99) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

