pg_0213.pdf:
V07794 (212) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
184
[Chap. X. Sec. 98.
when a path is cut. In addition, visibility is very restricted,
varying maybe from a few yards to a few hundred yards.
The keeping of direction presents great difficulty and constant
had those to out to do a disciplind
organization, a good intelligence system and bold and deter-
mined leading are the main essentials for success. Clearings,
or areas where the bush is less thick, have considerable
tactical importance.
2. Thick forest and bush are usually found in tropical
countries; hence the additional handicaps of a tropica
one be into tacos ted sanitation is then o
the greatest importance. In some parts, owing to the lack of
roads and to the fact that animals cannot live, carrier trans-
port has to be employed, which is slow and liable to panic,
and has a very small load-carrying capacity; a column may
require more carriers than there are fighting men, and may be
forced by the narrowness of the path to move in single file.
In such conditions fighting is almost entirely done by infantry:
the country is too thick for armoured fighting vehicles, and
usually also for mounted troops, even if the animals can live ;
ditticulties of transport limit the amount of artillery and
ammunition that can accompany a column and lack of
visibility deprives it of the advantage of long range; mountain
artillery and mortars are therefore of most value. (See Sec. 95
as regards the use of the air force.)
3. If the enemy consists of trained troops led by Europeans,
they also are subject to the general limitations already set
out. If the enemy are untrained savages, whose armament
may vary from modern rides to bows and arrows, spears,
muzzle-loading guns, they will have similar advantages and
characteristics to those outlined in Sec. 94, 3—mobility,
knowledge of the country, avoidance of pitched actions and
preference for harassing tactics, nervousness as to their own
flanks and susceptibility to moral influences. Generally
speaking, however, bush men are less hardy and formidable
than bill men.
The tactics of fighting against such enemies in such con-
ditions are given in some detail in Notes of Training in Bush
Warfare, issued by the Colonial Office. Apart from the
precepts to be observed in all warfare against a savage enemy
V07794 (212) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

