pg_0108.pdf:
V07794 (107) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 38.]
79
Ground defence against air attack comprises the distribu-
tion of troops and of stores in such a way or so protected by
natural or artificial cover as to offer the least possible target
to air attack, as well as active measures of protection by anti-
aircraft artillery and small-arms fire. The special measures
of defence against gas attack from the air are dealt with in
Sec. 40.
2. Measures for concealment have to aim at defeating
both visual observation and photography.
By the use of
powerful lenses photography at 20,000 feet can give in
favourable conditions as much detail as observation from a
low altitude. Generally speaking, photography is harder to
evade and deceive than visual observation; any measures
that will defeat the camera will usually defeat the observer. •
The position of troops may be given away to an air observer
by the use of regular formations, by movement, dust, smoke
from cookers, the exhaust of mechanical vehicles, reflected
light from smooth surfaces. When under observation which
it is important to avoid, troops should halt, in shadows
it possible, refrain from looking upward, stop the engines
of mechanical vehicles to prevent exhaust smoke, try to
conceal the smoke of cookers and cover up all polished
surfaces. If troops are in the open, they can hamper the
observer by adopting irregular formations, and, if on a road
with hedges or trees, by opening out on either side of the road.
Shadows provide an effective form of concealment, and
the shadows cast by buildings, cuttings, embankments, walls,
hedges, trees, etc., may be used. The value of woods to
give cover to troops cannot be decided from a map; it
varies considerably according to the nature of the trees and
the time of year; more can be seen by an observer vertically
above a wood than would be supposed from the ground.
Field defences are easily seen from the air unless carefully
sited and executed and it will frequently be advisable,
where concealment is of great importance, to use natural
cover, such as banks, hedges and buildings, even though
some advantage of siting may be sacrificed, rather than pre-
pare new works in the open. It is often as important to
conceal a work from the air during construction as after
completion. The concealment of machine-gun emplacements
is always of especial importance. Camouflage and other
measures of deception (e.g. dummy trenches) require time
and skill if they are to deceive experts in the interpretation
of air photographs, but will be used whenever time and
V07794 (107) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

