pg_0079.pdf:
V07794 (78) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
50
[Chap. III. Secs. 24 and 25.
loads should be prepared, balanced and laid out ready for
loading before the animals are brought up; loading parties
are usually required to assist the drivers. To save the
animals, they should be loaded as shortly as possible before
the hour of starting, and loads should, if possible, be removed
at halts.
There is usually a driver to every two or three animals.
Each driver should normally lead his own animals only.
With camels, on easy tracks, however, it is sometimes found
best for one driver to lead a string of six to eight camels, with
another driver in rear; and on rough hill tracks, mules go
best if not tied together but driven in bunches.
25. Rules for the movement of mechanical transport
1. Mechanical transport may move either as a single column
(in convoy), or by small groups (or even by single vehicles) at
time intervals,
The latter method enables a given distance
to be covered in a shorter time and with less fatigue to the
drivers, but may not always be applicable owing to con-
siderations. of road space or of protection. the average speed
of lorries with pneumatic tyres on a good road by day may
be taken as 15 miles an hour if moving in convoy, and
15 to 20 miles an hour if moving in independent groups
or by single vehicles. Loaded M.T. vehicles should not
move at a slower pace than five miles an hour, except when
passing troops, which should be done at as slow a pace as
possible to avoid covering them with dust or mud, or when
moving through towns, etc.
As regards pace of movement by night, see Sec. 79.
2. A column of mechanical transport moving in convoy
will be divided into blocks, usually of five vehicles. A regular
distance must be maintained between vehicles, sufficient to
allow of sudden halts without collision and to permit over-
taking traffic to pass.
The distance which can be maintained
varies according to the type of road; on good and level roads
a distance of 20 yards between vehicles and of 40 yards between
blocks will be maintained on the move. At the halt there
will be 2 yards between vehicles and 20 yards between blocks.
Columns of lorries going up steep gradients will be allowed
to open out; as soon as the head of the column has reached
the top of the hill, it will slow down to allow the vehicles in
rear to close up to the regulation distance. A motor cyclist
should be detailed to patrol M.T. columns to ensure correct
V07794 (78) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

