pg_0103.pdf:
V07794 (102) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
74
[Chap. IV. Sec. 36.
ii. Evasion of the rules for censorship of private corre-
spondence.
iii. Carelessness in carrying into action orders or official
documents, or maps marked in such a way as to
convey information; only those absolutely indis-
pensable should be taken into action and should be
destroyed when there is a risk of capture; the same
applies to any private letters, private diaries or
other papers which may give
indications of the
position of the unit or of the state of affairs at home
or other information of value.
iv. Failure in safeguarding documents, ciphers and other
secret or confidential papers in offices, camps or
billets; omission to burn drafts of orders, spare
copies assimilar traged lite shits, wamp-
or bivouacs are left.
v. The careless use of wireless telegraphy or telephony
or of line telephony within range of enemy listening
sets. (See Sec. 19.)
2. One of the most fruitful sources of intelligence in the
field is the information which may be obtained from a
prisoner of war.
Every soldier must be instructed that,
under international law, he is bound to give only his true
name and rank or army number; to give further in-
formation may prejudice the success of operations and
endanger the lives of comrades; on no account must ne
state the unit, branch or formation to which he belongs or
to answer questions about his uniform or badges. He should
be warned that the enemy, in addition to direct questioning,
is likely to employ artifices such as listening apparatus or
bogus prisoners to overhear the conversation of prisoners
and thus to gain information.
3. It is often difficult for commanders, when making plans,
to know how much to make known to subordinates and
what to conceal. Over-concealment tends to prevent
intelligent co-operation; on the other hand, if plans and
intentions are communicated a long time in advance, the
enemy may gain information of them from prisoners or by
spies or other means. As a general rule, officers of all grades
must remember that unity of effort can only be obtained
if subordinates, who may have to act on their own judgment,
V07794 (102) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

