pg_0135.pdf:
V07794 (134) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
106
[Chap. V. Sec. 52.
protective detains the ather the misch are detailed to
2. In small forces, a commander of the whole outpost
system may be appointed; he will usually be the com-
mander of the unit or formation furnishing the outposts.
In larger forces, commanders of formations will usually be
allotted areas and given the general line of the outpost
position; they will then detail their own outpost troops and
will appoint a commander, who will be responsible for the
organization of the outpost system in the formation's area
and for co-ordinating arrangements with those of the out-
posts on the flanks.
3. An outpost commander should be appointed before the
force halts; he should be given all the relevant information
available of the enemy and of our own forces; he should
settle in outline the general dispositions of the outposts, for
day and night, and issue orders for reconnaissance.
After reconnaissance, he will issue his orders, which may
include the following :-
i. Information, so far as it affects the outposts.
ii. A general description of the outpost position, its division
into sectors, the troops allotted to each sector and
the location of the reserve.
ili. Any special instructions for defence against armoured
fighting vehicles.
iv. Dispositions to meet attack.
v. Any alterations in dispositions by night.
vi. Any arrangements for the control of the movement of
the inhabitants or refugees.
vii. Administrative arrangements, especially as regards
lighting fires, cooking and smoking; whether the
reserve is to occupy billets or to bivouac, which
units may take off equipment or off-saddle.
viii. The hour at which outposts will be relieved, if known.
ix. The place to which reports will be sent.
As soon as the outposts are in position, he will so inform
the commander who appointed him.
V07794 (134) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

