pg_0077.pdf:
V07794 (76) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
48
[Chap. III. Sec. 23.
or mechanized forces. Strict march discipline is just as
necessary as with columns marching on foot.
2. In enclosed country, a first-class road or roads should be
allotted to a mechanized force. On narrow roads with high
hedges or banks, a broken-down vehicle will cause serious
delay owing to the difficulty of passing it or of towing it out
of the way.
The peculiar marks of the tracks, which facilitate detection
by enemy aircraft, do not show on metalled roads. Vibration
on metalled roads, however, necessitates more maintenance,
especially of medium tanks, and
involves much more
mechanical trouble than does soft going; on the other hand,
the dust from unmetalled roads in dry conditions not only
affects mechanism but causes discomfort to the crews, and
imposes extra strain on the drivers.
3. When there is no possibility of contact with the enemy
and the comfort of the troops is the urst consideration, a
mechanized force may be marched in three echelons, i.e.
medium and close support tanks and mechanized artillery;
light tanks; first-line transport or lorry-borne infantry.
Each echelon can then march at the speed most suited to it.
It is preferable that tracked vehicles, such as tanks and
artillery dragons, should move across country rather than by
road where the country is suitable for movement.
The normal average pace of these three echelons moving
separately 1s: medium or close-support tanks and mechanized
artillery 7 to 8 miles an hour, including halts; light tanks
10 to 12 miles an hour; lorries 12 to 15 miles an hour.
When contact with the enemy is possible, the speed of the
medium tank will become the limiting factor, and the average
pace of a mechanized force by day will be seven to eight miles
till acto
an hour. The leading vehicle must maintain a constant
speed: a speed of 10 miles an hour on the road will result
in an average speed of 7½ miles an hour including halts.
4. There will be a halt of 15 minutes in each hour;
alternatively, a column may march for an hour and a half
and then halt for 20 minutes. In marches of more than
4 hours, there should be a long halt of at least one hour,
to allow of thorough inspection and maintenance of the
vehicles, and of rest for the drivers and crews. Previous
reconnaissance should always be made of the site for a lony
halt.
Regular inspection and maintenance of vehicles at
all halts is of great importance.
V07794 (76) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

