pg_0121.pdf:
V07794 (120) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
92
(Chap. V. Sec. 43.
this will usually mean that the advanced guard must pass
The commander of the force may, if necessary, give to
the advanced guard commander a general indication of the
distance at which the advanced guard is to precede the main
body. This distance will depend on the size of the force,
the features of the ground, the tactical situation and the
intentions of the commander of the force. In the face of
modern weapons, to overcome even slight opposition will take
time, and, if the main body follows too closely behind its
advanced guard, its march may continually be checked by
minor delays, and its power of manœuvre will be restricted.
On the other hand, if there is too great a gap between the
advanced guard and the main body, there is a danger that
the enemy may be able to interpose between the advanced
guard and the main body. If a defle has to be passed, the
advanced guard should, if possible, be far enough ahead to
secure an unmolested exit for the main body before the latter
enters the defile.
The advanced guard commander will decide, from the
map in the fist instance, on the successive tactical features
which are of importance, in order to protect the march, anc
will make his dispositions accordingly.
The times at which
an advanced guard halts are regulated by the tactical situa-
2. If the advanced guard mobile troops encounter opposi-
tion which they are unable to overcome, they will be supported
by the vanguard, which may be able to deal with the hostile
resistance without the help of the main guard. Once con--
tact with the enemy has been gained, it is advisable that
some of the supporting artillery should always be in action,
whilst the remainder moves forward to new positions; a
rapid concentration of artillery fire will often enable minor
opposition to be quickly overcome, without the need to
deploy additional troops.
3. When it becomes obvious that strong enemy forces
have been encountered, the advanced guard commander
will be guided by his instructions and his knowledge of the
intentions of the force commander; since the latter will
require both information on which to base his plan and
time and space to put it into execution, bold and vigorous
action by the advanced guard is usually essential. Deploy-
V07794 (120) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

