pg_0074.pdf:
V07794 (73) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Sec. 21.]
45
7. The average rate of march of a large body of troops
moving at foot pace may be calculated at 2 miles an hour
(although the actual rate at any given time will probably be
slightly higher (see Sec. 22, 4), and of a mounted column at
5 miles an hour. Other time and space calculations will be
found in Appendix VI.
8. When mechanized units or vehicles form part of a
column marching on foot, they should be allotted a separate
route, if one is available and the tactical situation permits
of its use. If they have to move by the same route, they
will usually move by bounds, at the head or rear of the
column or in some space in the middle of it. Mechanical
transport cannot move for long distances at foot pace without
waste of petrol and damage to the engine by overheating,
unless the vehicles are specially designed to move at foot pace
like the infantry transport vehicle.
When mechanical trans-
port does move for any long distances in an infantry column,
care must be taken that distress is not caused to the marching
men by fumes from the exhausts.
9. In marching columns, halts will be from ten minutes
before each clock hour until the clock hour, unless otherwise
ordered (see Sec. 43, 1, as regards halts by protective troops).
During long marches, of 15 miles or over, a balt of one hour
or more is advisable if the situation permits. If a long
halt is contemplated, staff officers accompanied by engineer
and medical officers, with sufficient police and orderlies, will
march with the advanced guard, or will, if the tactical
situation permits, be sent forward, to select halting grounds
near good water and to take measures for its allotment and
protection.
10. Time must be allowed for animals to be watered and
fed before starting a march. If an early start is necessary, it
is also advisable to arrange for watering after one or two
hours' marching, since animals will not usually drink in the
early morning.
Watering on the march may be from troughs,
or if they are not available, by buckets or direct from a
stream or pool. Arrangements for traffic control at a water-
ing place are essential, and time tables prepared by the staff
may be necessary:
If animals are watered direct from a
stream, steps must be taken to prevent general pollution of
the supply. Long halts should last at least an hour if animals
are to be off-saddled, watered and fed.
V07794 (73) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

