pg_0190.pdf:
V07794 (189) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IX. Sec. 83.1
161
CHAPTER IX
POSITION WARFARE
83. General characteristics
1. The following chapter deals mainly with static con-
ditions developing gradually out of operations begun in
conditions of open warfare. The tendency of some nations
on the continent of Europe to construct elaborate defences
along the whole length of a frontier in peace time may,
however, result in static conditions obtaining from the very
outset of a war. In such an event the operations will be
equivalent to siege warfare (see para. 3, below).
2. In the open field, the number and the fire power of the
machine guns and other automatic weapons of an army make
the assault of even a hastily occupied position a sufficiently
formidable undertaking, provided that the defender has some
skill in the concealment of his dispositions, especially of bis
machine guns. If he has time to entrench himself-and a
few hours only are required to dig cover giving a considerable
degree of protection against small-arms fire and against the
artillery weapons of a mobile field army-the attacker's
hazards are increased, since the targets offered to his artillery
and other weapons are much reduced, even if they are some-
times easier to locate, owing to the visibility of entrenchments
from the air.
But it is the addition to a defensive position, either before
or during a battle, of an obstacle of barbed wire against
infantry, of minefields or of specially dug works against
armoured fighting vehicles-that is most likely to bring to a
definite halt an offensive movement begun in the open field.
Only with a considerable mass of tanks or a great weight of
artillery can the attacker hope to force a position once it has
been effectively entrenched and strengthened by an obstacle ;
and while he is collecting means and resources to resume the
offensive, the defender hourly deepens his position and improves
his works. Unless the position can be turned, the attacker
may be driven to entrench himself opposite the enemy and to
V07794 (189) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

