pg_0102.pdf:
V07794 (101) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IV. Secs. 35 and 36.]
73
Reports in the field have often to be read by a tired man
in a bad light; therefore they must be easily legible; all
names of places should be printed in block capitals.
4. A guide as to the headings which may be required in
various types of report is given in Appendix IX and in the
Field Service Pocket Book. Common sense will be the best
guide as to what headings are required and what are not.
it is most useful to attach a short summary, containing the
essential information in tabloid form, at the beginning of all
except very short reports: this summary should not usually
take up more than a page of an ordinary note-book.
5. When the accuracy of a piece of information cannot be
personally verified the sources of it should always be si this
and the degree of reliability attached to it, e.g.:
distance was given by several villagers, questioned inde-
pendently, and is considered accurate.
6. A rough sketch or plan is often useful to illustrate a
report: clearness, accuracy and relevance are the essentials,
not artistic effect. Panoramas or thumbnail sketches are
also occasionally of value, but require some knowledge of
drawing; the temptation which may beset a good draughts-
man to embellish a report with neat but not specially relevant
drawings must be resisted.
36. Precautions regarding information
1. To take every precaution that may prevent the enemy
from gaining information is the responsibility of all troops
and not merely of the intelligence staff. If all ranks strictly
observe the rules for security which are outlined below, one
of the most valuable sources of information open to the
enemy will be closed. It must be the constant care of all
ranks to prevent leakage of information through carelessness
or indiscretion.
The principal sources of leakage are :-
i. Indiscreet conversation of officers or soldiers, e.g.
discussion in public places or in the presence of any
stranger of topics directly or indirectly connected
with the campaign; or the disclosure, even amongst
themselves or in the family circle while home on
leave, of impending movements of themselves,
their unit or their friends.
V07794 (101) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

