pg_0126.pdf:
V07794 (125) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 47 and 48.]
97
advanced troops and then to withdraw rapidly will impose
slowness and caution on the pursuit. They can also counter-
attack the enemy tanks, which may be used well forward.
Good information is essential for the successful conduct of a
rear guard, and aircraft, if available, will be detailed to work
directly under the rear guard commander. The engineers
of the force will usually be engaged on the preparation of
demolitions or other expedients to delay the enemy (Sec. 49,
2), but a small proportion should form part of the rear guard,
for unforeseen demolition tasks or other engineer work.
The strength of a rear guard must depend on the circum-
stances, e.g. the closeness of the pursuit and the suitability
of the ground for delaying action. If the withdrawal is the
result of an action, the freshest troops avallable should be
selected for the rear guard.
Troops forming a rear guard will be accompanied only by
such transport as is essential for fighting purposes.
2. A rear guard is divided into rear guard mobile troops,
rear party and main guard, corresponding with the mobile
troops, vanguard and main guard of an advanced guard
(Sec. 41, 2); and its disposition on the line of march, when
not pressed by the enemy, resembles that of an advanced
guard turned about.
3. The rear guard commander is appointed by the com-
mander of the force to be protected. If a force is retiring
in more than one column, separate rear guards may be
formed for each column; if so, the commander of the force
must co-ordinate the withdrawal of all the rear guards by
laying down times up to which certain lines must be denied
to the enemy.
A rear guard commander should be told the probable
rate of movement of the main body, the approximate distance
to be maintained between the rear guard and the main body,
what demolitions are being put in hand to delay the enemy's
advance and to what extent he is at liberty to carry out
demolitions with his own resources. He should be kept
informed periodically of the progress of the main body, and
must himself keep the force commander constantly informed
of the tactical situation; liaison personnel are valuable for this.
48. Action of a rear guard
1. The task of a rear guard is to keep the enemy at a
distance from the main body and at the same time to be
V07794 (125) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

