pg_0115.pdf:
V07794 (114) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
86
[Chap. V. Sec. 40.
iv. Warning signs, to mark those areas. (See Manual of
Defence against Gas.)
The efficiency of the above forms of alarms will depend
on the provision of sentries to work them and on the know-
ledge and alertness of those sentries; a sentry will be posted
with each sound alarm and with each group of detector
discs. Wherever possible, to economize personnel, the
duties of gas sentries should be performed by those posted
for tactical protection. The action to be taken on the alarm
of gas being given either by sound or by detector discs must
be laid down in standing orders and thoroughly understood
by all ranks.
5. The following measures of protection will minimize.
the risk of casualties from gas attack :—
i. Person el withere exposed to too tist of sas attac
adjusted instantly on the first indication of gas
attack; delay may be fatal.
ii. Precautions must not be relaxed after a gas attack
of any nature, as the attack may be repeated at
once in the same or in a different form.
iii. Protection against air spray attack on the march
and in the open will be provided by protective
equipment (goggles and cape), and by utilizing,
whenever the tactical situation permits, the cover
of walls, banks, hedges, etc.
Troops at rest or in
reserve, when there is a danger of air spray attack,
will be kept, as far as possible, under cover in billets
or camps,
or will bivouac in thick woods, which
give a measure of protection.
IV. Areas beavily contaminated by blister gas should
be cleared of troops as far as the tactical situation
permits; if casualties are to be reduced, arrange-
ments will be necessary to supply clean clothing
and equipment to troops who have been exposed
to air spray attack or have passed through a con-
taminated area.
v. Since air spray or other gas attacks may be made at
night, troops should sleep under cover as far as
possible; if troops bivouac in the open and air
spray is likely, the gas-proof capes will be used as a
top covering; sentries should be so posted that
V07794 (114) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

