pg_0155.pdf:
V07794 (154) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
126
[Chap. VI. Sec. 62
frequent reports, so that they may be enabled to
handle their reserves and supporting fire to the best
advantage.
ix. Finally, the leader of every body of infantry, once
committed to the attack, must be determined to get
forward until his objective is reached.
As regards consolidation on reaching the objective,
see Sec. 59.
3. The pace at which infantry may be expected to move
towards its objective must be taken into account since it
affects the rate of movement of artillery or machine-gun
barrages or the time for which concentrations of supporting
In exceptionally favourable
condition ish intained tan cept advance ta aste
of 100 yards in a minute; in difficult conditions the rate
may be as slow, as 100 yards in three or even four minutes.
The rate may vary at different stages of the attack, according
to the conditions of ground and the state of freshness or
tiredness of the troops.
It is essential that the attacking infantryman should be
as lightly equipped as possible; the more rapidly he can
move from cover to cover, the less casualties he will suffer ;
the less heavily he is burdened, the longer will he endure
without relief.
4. Supporting fire by the infantry itself is provided mainly
by
machine guns and mortars.
The principal roles of
machine guns in the attack are to support the advance by
covering fire, to protect the flanks and to assist in con-
solidation.
Their fire is of especial value to support troops
in the initial stages of the attack by means of a pre-arranged
programme: all or part or the machine guns in reserve may
be used to increase this supporting fire. During the actua
progress of the attack, when the pre-arranged fire programme
is over, machine-gun support is harder to arrange owing to
difficulties of observation and the flat trajectory of the
weapon; the infantry will depend rather on the rifle, the
light machine gun, and the mortar. A proportion of
machine guns will usually go forward to give the leading
troops close support, when possible, or to assist in consolida-
tion; the remainder will form a reserve of fire power for the
protection of the flanks, for meeting counter-attacks or for
other tasks that may arise.
The primary role of mortars is to provide quick support,
V07794 (154) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

