pg_0069.pdf:
V07794 (68) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
40
[Chap. II. Secs. 19 and 20.
of the telephone in deliberate operations or in conditions
approaching stabilization.
'6. If messages by despatch rider are liable to fall into the
enemy's hands or line communication is liable to be inter-
cepted, the general staff will give the necessary warning to
the intercommunication personnel.
20. Communication with aircraft
1. The army is responsible for the provision and mainten-
ance of ground communication (by line, wireless, or D.R.)
-between the headquarters of army formations and the head-
quarters of air force formations or units; and of ground
communication, other than by wireless, between air force
formations and their air units. All ground communication
is in fact an army responsibility, except that wireless sets
for communication between their own formations and units
are provided by the air force.
2. Communication between aircraft in the air and troops
air the ground is, generally speaking, the responsibility of th
sets for this purpose. The normal methods of communica-
tion are :-
i. For medium reconnaissance, two-way W/T efficient
up to a range of approximately 75 miles: the ground
set is usually at corps headquarters.
ii. For close reconnaissance, two-way R/T efficient up
to a range of approximately 50 miles: wireless
tenders carrying the ground sets are allotted to
formations or units as required.
ill. For artillery reconnaissance, W/I from the air. The
used, messages to the air can only be sent by ground
strips (strips of white cloth laid out to form the
letters of a pre-arranged code).
In the event of wireless communication failing or being
unsuitable, message dropping and picking up may be em-
ployed, ground strips being used to indicate to the aircraft
the place chosen: but this has many disadvantages, since
it takes the pilot away from his reconnaissance area and may
give away the position of the headquarters where the message
V07794 (68) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

