pg_0197.pdf:
V07794 (196) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
168
[Chap, IX. Secs. 85 and 86.
in the Great War) may be required; and consolidation of
successive objectives and protection of the fanks will need
specially detailed arrangements. Another special problem
of the advance in position warfare is the difficulty of estab-
lishing forward communications; the impediment of the
enemy's wire and other obstacles, and of the network of
trenches, intensified by the destruction caused by the bom-
bardment, make the movement of wheeled transport very
hazardous, especially as the enemy's artillery, unless overrun
or silenced, is likely to keep all approaches to the fighting
area under fire. It is therefore usually necessary to provide
carrying parties to take forward to the troops who made the
assault their requirements (e.g. water, rations, tools, wire,
etc.), and to use engineers to improve the communications as
rapidly as possible. The alternative, sometimes adopted in
the past, of loading the assaulting troops with everything
that they might conceivably need in the next 48 hours, is
likely to cause failure of the assault by destroying its mobility
and exhausting the men.
Some further details as to the conduct of the assault will
be found in Secs. 86 to 90.
4. Raids are attacks with a strictly limited and temporary
objective from which the attackers return to their own
defences. They should be undertaken only with a definite
object, e.g. to destroy a minehead or mortar or other weapon
which is causing trouble, or to obtain information or identifica-
tions which cannot be secured otherwise. Raids for the mere
purpose of harassing the enemy and inflicting casualties are
seldom desirable,
unless the raider has a very definite
superiority in position and in material. Otherwise they lead
to reprisals and make the task of holding the forward defences
more exhausting.
Raids must, on their scale, be prepared with the same care
and attention to detail as large attacks; and will, like them,
depend for success largely on surprise.
86. Artillery in position warfare
1. In position warfare, the proportion of the supporting
arms, and especially of artillery, tends to increase; while the
stationary conditions make the supply of ammunition easier.
Hence the intensity of artillery fire is much greater; and
pieces of a larger calibre than are normally used in mobile
warfare, including short-ranged but powerful mortars, are
V07794 (196) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

