pg_0143.pdf:
V07794 (142) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
114
[Chap. VI, Sec. 56.
preparations; the supporting fire unit commanders will
give similar instructions to their subordinates. Meantime
the remainder of the battalion under the second-in-command
will be directed to an assembly area or areas where any
necessary administrative arrangements may be made; while
the battalion signal othcer may be reconnoitring to find a
sultable headquarters and making preliminary arrangements
for establishing intercommunication.
The next stage comes when the battalion commander,
having completed his reconnaissance and formulated his plans,
meets his rifle company commanders at the rendezvous which
he has indicated and issues verbal orders (see Sec. 15, 3), while
the supporting fire unit commanders instructs subordinate
commanders on their supporting role. The rifle company and
fire unit commanders then complete their own reconnais-
sances, if they have not been able to do so in the first stage;
while the troops detailed for the attack are moved to up
areas close behind the line of deployment.
In the final stage, the same process is carried a step lower;
the company commanders issue orders and the troops take
up their starting positions, the platoon commanders in their
turn pointing out their objectives and giving their tasks to
the section commanders.
The above outline gives some indication of how by foresight
and training much time may be saved, but must not be
taken as invariably applicable. The
process
will vary
according to the time available for preparation.
3. Orders for the attack will include the allotment of
objectives to units or formations; details of the fire plar
to support the attack; the fixing of zero hour, which is
usually the hour at which the forward troops cross their
starting line (see Appendix IV, Sec. III, 2); the essential
administrative arrangements; the position of headquarters;
and the arrangements for intercommunication.
The selection and allotment of objectives is one of the
principal means by which a leader exercises control over
the attack. The extent and distance of the objectives define
the effort required of each body of troops; they will vary
according to the opportunity which the enemy has had to
prepare his defence, the features of the ground, the fire support
available, and, sometimes, the importance of the time factor.
They should be within the calculated capacity of endurance
of the troops, moral and physical, and within the power of
the weapons and ammunition available to support them.
V07794 (142) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

