pg_0086.pdf:
V07794 (85) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Secs. 27 and 28.]
57
be responsible for the march discipline of the column, for
regulating the pace, for technical control, for dealing with
break-downs, etc.
The commander of a group in a column
will travel on the driver's seat of the leading vehicle of his
group; he will distribute his officers evenly throughout the
vehicles of his group and will ensure that all officers are
acquainted with the destination and route.
28. Rules for the passage of bridges and defiles
1. A staff officer will usually be detailed to supervise the
passage by a column of an important bridge, defile or obstacle.
This officer will issue any orders necessary for change of
formation, will regulate the flow of traffic and will make
any arrangements necessary for the further action of units
on the far side of the obstacle. An officer of each unit will
remain on the near side of the bridge, defile or obstacle
to control the movement of the unit until the whole of it
no eat in hater
has passed. It is important to ensure that large numbers
of troops and transport do not assemble in an exposed
position awaiting the passage, and so provide a target for
enemy artillery or aircraft. Congestion at a bridge or defile
may be avoided by a distant traffic control post at a point
where suitable cover exists, in telephonic communication
with the bridge or defile.
Where engineer work on the passage is necessary, the staff
officer will issue his orders in co-operation with the engineer
officer in charge of the work. The responsibility of the
engineer officer for the crossing arrangements extends only
between the extreme limits of the bridge, or between the
banks of the river when the crossing is by raft or ferry.
2. The classification of military bridges is given in
Appendix VIII. Since each type of bridge is designed to
carry a specified load, careful arrangements are necessary to
prevent the passage on to the bridge of any load greater than
that which it is designed to bear.
Unit commanders are
responsible that the normal loads of vehicles are not exceeded.
The engineer unit which constructs the bridge is responsible
for the posting of notices showing the class of trathc for which
the bridge is designed and any precautions that must be ob-
served, such as the speed and spacing of heavy vehicles or the
necessity for infantry to break step. At important crossings
it will usually be necessary for formations to post a respon-
sible officer to ensure that these precautions are observed.
SMC
V07794 (85) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

