pg_0246.pdf:
V07794 (245) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix IX.]
217
Billets Capacity of town or village for men, animals, and
vehicles; alternative approaches (to avoid congestion) ;
mater supply for men, watering places for animals; positions
for headquarters; assembly places; cover from air observa-
Bones comet mood tine eat len, gellas, et hi parking
Bivouac (or camping ground)-Extent, nature of ground,
shape, facilities for drainage, approaches, defensibility, cover
from air observation, water supply, fuel, forage.
Bridge-Material (steel, stone, brick, wood), span, number
of arches or piers, dimensions, height above water, rail, or
road, load taken, nature of river or stream (width, depth),
materials available for repair, defensibility. (A figured hand-
sketch is useful.)
Camp-see Bivouac.
Canals Depth, width, nature of banks and of bottom;
locks, bridges, suitable crossing places; boats or barges.
Country-Flat, undulating, hilly, open or enclosed, culti-
vated or not; nature of soil; town, villages, farms, number
of inhabitants; water supply; communications
(railway,
road, telegraph); defiles, rivers, streams, bridges; land-
marks, observation points; supplies, forage, petrol, oil;
suitability for movement of all arms (including armoured
units).
Defensive position-Extent, depth, and nature;
best
positions for flanks; facilities for observation of enemy and
concealment of own troops (including reserves) ; field of fire ;
observation available for enemy; strong and weak points;
facilities for surprise; covered ways within the position;
advanced posts; artillery positions; ground suitable for
tanks; nature of soil for entrenchment; natural obstacles
(especially against armoured fighting vehicles) ;
wire and
other materials available locally; villages and buildings and
suitability for defence; covering or outpost position; best
line for counter-attack; suitability of ground and roads for
administrative arrangements, water supply, etc.
Defile- Nature,
whether commanded by neighbouring
ground, length, width, ground on near and far side, positions
for flanking parties, exposure to air attack.
Ford-Depth, nature of bottom, distance across, whether
straight or slanting, methods of marking or recognizing ford,
nature of banks, approaches, ground on either side, defensi-
bility.
V07794 (245) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

