pg_0110.pdf:
V07794 (109) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 38.J
81
night. But in mobile warfare, searchlights will seldom be
available in the forward areas, and anti-aircraft guns
will
therefore be unable to afford protection by night.
4. Rife fire is effective against aircraft up to 2,000 feet, the
fire of suitably mounted machine guns and light machine
guns up to 3,000 feet. Aircraft carrying out low-bombing
attacks, low-flying attacks by machine gun fire or recon-
naissance below 3,000 feet can therefore be effectively dealt
with by small-arms fire. It is the duty of every commander
of troops armed with small arms to make arrangements to
use these weapons against the above forms of air attack.
When troops are on the move, rifle fire will generally be
quicker to produce and therefore more suitable, but light
machine guns should also be brought into action if time
permits. Rifle fire to be effective must be controlled, and
as many rifles as possible should be employed, so as to
produce a sufficient volume of fire. It may sometimes be
attacks, to provide continuous protection on certain portions
of the route by piqueting it with light machine gun detach-
ments. When troops are halted, light machine guns will be
put into action; when time permits, a system of area defence
will be organized, light machine guns being sited chequer-
wise from 500 to 800 yards apart, so as to cover the whole
area.
The first essential is timely warning of the approach of
hostile aircraft; air sentries must therefore always be
detailed when air attack is possible. They should be fre-
quently relieved, since to watch for aircraft involves con-
siderable strain on the eyes.
When an attack takes place,
the opportunity for fire is fleeting and rapidity of action
essential; the initiative for opening and controlling fire
must therefore be delegated to subordinate commanders,
and the troops must be instructed beforehand on their
action.
When troops are concealed, definite orders must be
issued whether light machine guns are to be posted and fire
opened against hostile aircraft or not; the opening of fire
It must be explained to troops that, although small-arms
fire may not often bring an aeroplane to earth and may
appear ineffective, actually the damage caused to trame,
rigging and fabric by well-directed fire is very considerable
‹SMC
V07794 (109) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

