pg_0173.pdf:
V07794 (172) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
144
[Chap. VII. Sec. 73.
co-ordinated (Sec. 74, 1). Machine guns may be used for
counter-preparation or harassing fire.
3. The defended localities to be held by the riflemen will
be selected in conjunction with the machine gun tasks and
positions. They should comprise a number of section posts,
arranged so as to afford one another mutual support
and to be under easy control of the platoon commander;
they may vary in size from a platoon to a company
locality. They will protect by their dispositions the sites
chosen for the machine guns, which may be included within
the localities; the fire of the light machine guns and rifles
will be co-ordinated with the fire plan of the artillery and
machine guns, so that there is a continuous belt of fire along
the front of the position-the light machine guns and rifles
usually filling up the gaps in the machine gun belt. In
making these dispositions, it must be remembered that rifle-
men, when attacked, tend to fire straight to their front, and
cannot be relied on for enfilade fire.
4. Mortars may be used in the defence as a reserve of fire
power, especially to support counter-attacks; and may also
on occasions be included in the fire plan of the defence, to
deal with some part of the front which is not adequately
covered by the artillery or small-arms fire.
The difficulty of
ammunition supply to the mortars is less in defence than in
attack, and their capacity for rapid fire can be more fully
exploited. They will usually be dug in singly, according to
the task which they have to perform; but they may also be
used in pairs. Mortars which have been dug in and registered
can fire on
fixed targets if observation is impossible by
reason of darkness or smoke.
5. Infantry anti-tank weapons will be sited to cover the
most likely tank approaches and will be carefully concealed.
Their action will be co-ordinated with that of other weapons
(Sec. 68, 5).
6. Intantry is responsible for siting, organizing and con-
structing its own defence works, including wire entangle-
ments. Engineer advice and assistance will sometimes be
available (Sec. 75). Good preparation and organization of
work on a definite plan are essential to obtain good results.
Details will be found in the Manual of Field Engineering,
Volume I (All Arms). Obstacles should always be designed
with the object of forcing the enemy into the are of fire of
the machine guns or anti-tank guns.
VO7794 (172) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

