pg_0111.pdf:
V07794 (110) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
82
[Chap. V. Secs. 38 and 39.
and may put aircraft out of action for considerable periods.
The moral effect on pilots is also appreciable.
Further
instructions on small-arms fire against aircraft will be found
in Small Arms Training, Volume II.
39. Protection against armoured fighting vehicles
1. The means by which troops will seek to protect them-
selves, while on the move or at rest, against the menace of
attack by armoured fighting vehicles may be active or
passive or a combination of both. The active means of
defence specially designed for this purpose are anti-tank
weapons or small mines; certain types of artillery (feld gun
and anti-aircraft gun), though not, except in special cir-
cumstances, sited primarily for use against armoured fighting
vehicles, have always a secondary role of anti-tank defence;
while counter-attack by our own tanks, when available, may
be the most effective means of all. A tank counter-attack
should, whenever possible, be incorporated in any plan of
defence against tanks. Fire by rifles, light machine guns and
machine guns, though not usually effective against the
armour of tanks and armoured cars, will force them to close
obstacles (such as woods, streams, marshy ground), of the
protection afforded by buildings (or, by blockhouses specially
constructed where time is available), and the construction
of road blocks or artificial obstacles of various types.
2. The anti-tank weapons may either be shoulder con-
trolled rifles firing large calibre armour-piercing bullets or
light guns with explosive projectiles. For the protection of
vulnerable points on the lines of communication or at the
base, or of aerodromes, guns on fixed mountings may be
used
Anti-tank mines are fired by contact when a vehicle passes
over them. Those used in the forward area are rendered
active by inserting detonators; they can be easily raised and
used, which are buried and wired; they are safe until ren-
dered active by means of an electric current.
All mines laid
must be notified to the general staff, who will be responsible
V07794 (110) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

