pg_0090.pdf:
V07794 (89) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IV. Sec. 31.]
61
CHAPTER IV
INFORMATION AND RECONNAISSANCE
31. Information general
nade be information et his die set is the basim of got phas
information is usually communicated at the beginning of
the order which puts the plan into execution (Sec. 15, 4);
the more accurate and compiete the information, the more
likely is the order to be appropriate and the plan to succeed.
To make the best possible arrangements to provide himself
with information-of the position and state of his own
troops; of the numbers, moves and intentions of the enemy;
and of the conditions of topography and weather likely to
affect his plans-is therefore an essential duty of every
commander, from the highest to the lowest.
To obtain up-to-date information of one's own troops is
mainly a matter of good intercommunication.
Besides its
location, a commander should know the condition of each
body as regards fatigue and morale, so as to be able to judge
what further efforts may be expected of it.
Information about the enemy can never be complete,
nor is it likely to be entirely accurate or up-to-date, however
good and careful the arrangements to obtain it. A com-
mander must realize that he will usually have to act on
imperfect knowledge of a situation; it is his business to seek
continually by every means in his power to supplement,
confirm or correct his information; but to postpone action,
when action is required, on the plea of waiting for fuller
information, will lead to the loss of valuable time and the
risk of failure.
During the course of a battle, it is usually extremely
difficult
to ascertain the situation in the forward zone;
the front line troops are too busy fighting to be able to report
continuously, and the arrangements for intercommunication
are subject to delays and interruption; a commander in
V07794 (89) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

