pg_0087.pdf:
V07794 (86) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
58
[Chap. III. Secs. 28 and 29.
The maintenance of a bridge remains the responsibility of
the engineer unit which constructed it, until further orders
are issued.
29. Movement of troops by air
1. Small forces of infantry with light machine guns and
supporting weapons can be moved by air to a point several
hundred miles away in a few hours, if suitable aircraft are
available and secure landing grounds exist. This power may
casualties, where ground communications are long or bad,
or for the maintenance of small columns or garrisons with
ammunition or supplies, which can be dropped from aircraft
by means of parachutes.
2. The present limitations of air transport must, however,
be fully realized. The numbers of suitable aircraft (i.e.
bomber-transport squadrons of the R.A.F. or large civil
passenger aircraft) are small: their capacity is from 12 to 24
fully armed and equipped men; their effective range may
vary from 200 to 500 miles, according to the type of air-
craft, the geographical conditions (especially the altitude of
landing grounds) and the state of the weather. Troops
co state
carried by air will be without means of transport on arrival,
unless arrangements can be made to provide it at their
destination.
- the a mye bye nis deeded are, he available whil
place of emplanement and deplanement, and the total weight
in pounds avoirdupois which is available for the army in
each aeroplane. The unit concerned will then tell off the
troops into batches for each aeroplane, and will prepare a
statement showing the total weight of each party and of
everything that they are taking with them.
If the troops are likely to have to go into action imme-
diately on arrival, tactical unity must be preserved to the
greatest extent possible; complete platoons cannot usually
be kept together, but sections must be kept intact as far as
possible, and men of different companies must not be mixed.
If there is no likelihood of immediate action, the importance
of utilizing all the weight available is the ruling factor, and
the mixing of sub-units is less objectionable.
V07794 (86) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

