pg_0076.pdf:
V07794 (75) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Secs. 22 and 23.]
47
down at a time of crisis is of little value: the longer and more
trying the march and the worse the conditions, the more
strictly must it be enforced. An officer, when available
(otherwise a non-commissioned officer), will march in rear of
each squadron, battery, company or other unit, to see that
no man leaves the ranks without permission, that the sections,
vehicles and animals keep properly closed up, and that the
column does not open out.
3. Strict attention must be paid to water discipline; the
less men drink during the actual march, the better; men
should not be allowed to drink from their water bottles
without permission. They must not be permitted to fall
out for water; when necessary, halts will be made to enable
men to fill their water bottles. Every opportunity will be
taken to water animals on the march.
4. The rate of marching throughout a column should be
uniform; an irregular pace is most exhausting, especially to
the troops in rear of the column. On a good level stretch of
road a pace of one mile in eighteen minutes should be main-
tained at the head of an infantry column.
If distances are lost, stepping out, doubling or trotting to
regain them is forbidden, except by order of the unit com-
mander. Infantry will only be ordered to quicken its pace
if a defile is to be passed or some definite object is to be
gained.
5. On a halt being ordered, all troops will at once halt and
fall out on the same side of the road as that on which they
are marching, leaving the other portion of the road clear for
traffic. Dismounted troops will remove their equipment
except ant, as respirates opt i protective end foose,
girths; riding horses heads will be turned towards the space
left clear for passing traffic. Cross-roads must be left clear.
6. No compliments will be paid during a march on service,
unless specially ordered.
23. Marches by tanks and mechanized forces
1. The power of making long and rapid marches without
casualties to vehicles or undue loss of energy by tank crews
and other personnel is essential to the success of armoured
V07794 (75) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

