pg_0166.pdf:
V07794 (165) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Sec. 69.]
137
2. For purposes of control and command, a defensive
position will be divided into sectors, to each of which a
definite body of troops will be assigned. Dividing lines
between sectors will be indicated by easily recognizable
features and will be carried from the most forward point of
the defences back to the rear of the position, the body of
troops which holds each sector being distributed in depth and
providing its own local reserves; it is often desirable to
carry the dividing lines forward of the defences in order to
define responsibility for patrolling or for some other reason.
Important tactical features or likely lines of advance for the
3. A plan of defence should be made in terms of fire rather
than of men—the co-ordinated fire of all weapons, artillery,
machine guns, light machine guns, rifles and, if attack by
armoured fighting vehicles is likely, anti-tank guns.
Which
of the above weapons should receive prior consideration must
depend on the occasion.
It may sometimes be the anti-tank
gun and artillery sited for anti-tank defence.
Against
infantry, concealed machine guns are the real backbone of
the defence; they require good observation and a good field
of fire, but across the front of the position rather than directly
forward, since machine guns are most effective when using
enfilade fire.
Good observation is an important requirement
of the artillery (Sec. 68, 4). For the rifles and light machine
guns of infantry a long field of fire is of less importance; for
good infantry, if concealed from enemy ground observation
and covered by an obstacle, a field of fire of 100 to 150 yards
will suffice. The defender must always bear in mind in
making his defensive arrangements the probability that the
attacker will make considerable use of smoke to conceal his
movements and to blind the observation of the defence (Sec.
9, 1).
4. The foremost position will consist of a belt of defended
localities with intervals between them, arranged in depth
and affording each other mutual support. The size of each
defended locality, the garrison allotted to it and the intervals
between localities will depend on the lie of the ground,
especially on the facilities it offers for Banking fire by machine
guns and light machine guns; the tactical situation, e.g. the
length of time the position is likely to be beld; and, to some
extent, the training and morale of the troops.
If the position
has to be held by night, the danger of enemy penetration
V07794 (165) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

