pg_0132.pdf:
V07794 (131) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 50 and 51.]
103
2. If the head of the retiring force is liable to be attacked
by armoured cars or mobile troops, the advanced guard
should include anti-tank weapons and mobile troops for
reconnaissance. If the enemy is using gas, his mobile
troops may contaminate such areas as cross-roads or defiles ;
to deal with this, decontamination equipment and personnel
to use it should accompany the advanced guard.
PROTECTION AT REST
51. General principles
1. A force halted, whether concentrated or deployed,
protects itself on exactly the same principles as a force on
the move. That is to say, it sends out protective detach-
ments in every direction from which hostile approach is
possible. The objects of these detachments, which are
termed outposts, are to prevent the enemy's reconnoitring
detachments from obtaining information, to obtain informa-
tion of the enemy's approach and, if the force is attacked,
to gain sufficient time by resistance to enable the main body
to prepare for action.
In fact the duties of the outposts,
as of other protective detachments, are reconnaissance and
resistance; and their strength and composition must be such
as will enable them to perform these duties effectively.
2. The service of distant reconnaissance, from the air of
by mobile troops, will usually be carried out under the orders
of the higher commander, arrangements being made for the
rapid communication of the results to the commander of the
reports an adi toad is whi camay out constant
them by the higher commander; they will keep a close
watch on all bodies of the enemy within that area, will
observe all approaches by which the enemy might advance
and will examine all localities in which the enemy might
conceal his reconnoitring detachments or which he might
occupy preparatory to attack. A proportion of mobile
troops may be allotted to the outposts for this purpose. By
day, when the enemy is not in close proximity, mounted
patrols from the outposts may be sent up to a distance of
two to three miles in enclosed country and up to seven or
eight miles in very open country. Armoured cars will go
further. Standing patrols, which can conceal themselves
and see without being seen, are, as a rule, more effective than
V07794 (131) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

