pg_0107.pdf:
V07794 (106) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
78
[Chap. V. Secs. 37 and 38.
necessary for the proper performance of their task. Some
guidance towards determining their composition will be
found in later sections in this chapter.
7. In all forms of protection there is always a danger
of over-confidence producing carelessness. The same rather
fatiguing precautions are taken day after day, and nothing
is seen of the enemy; vigilance is then apt to be relaxed,
probably with disastrous results. Savage or irregular
enemies in particular are quick to note and take advantage
of the least omission or carelessness.
It is the duty of all
commanders to insist at all times and in all circumstances
on the strict observance of the service of protection. This
depends in the end on the discipline maintained and on the
example set by regimental officers.
8. When protective detachments become engaged with
the enemy, they act in accordance with the ordinary principles
of attack and defence. Since they are normally responsible
for a wide front in proportion to their strength and since they
have usually to fight for a limited time only without support,
their dispositions are not usually made in the same depth
as is required for a decisive attack or for protracted defence.
9. The special methods of protection necessary in mountain
warfare and in various forms of savage warfare are dealt
with in Chapter X.
38. Protection against air reconnaissance and
attack
1. Protection against the air comprises concealment cf
dispositions and moves from air reconnaissance, and defence
against bombing, gas-spraying or low-flying attack by
aircraft. Concealment may be effected by the use of cover
or other means to prevent observation, such as camouflage
and the adoption of inconspicuous formations. Anti-aircraft
artillery, when available, will assist by making the task of
the reconnoitring aircraft difficult and dangerous. It may
be possible by a concentration of our own aircraft to obtain
local air superiority for a limited period and over a limited
area during some particular operation; any attempt to use
fighter aircraft for prolonged periods in a defensive role will
be uneconomical and usually ineffective. A vigorous counter-
offensive normally provides the most effective answer to air
attack.
V07794 (106) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

