pg_0167.pdf:
V07794 (166) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
138
[Chap. VII. Sec. 69.
during the hours of darkness into the intervals between
localities must be taken into consideration (see Sec. 73); this
factor will influence the frontage allotted to a unit in
defence. Similar considerations apply in the event of fog or
thick mist.
5. The belt of foremost defended localities, when finally
determined, becomes the front edge of the defended system,
and the defence is built up in depth in rear of it. The depth
to which a defensive position will be organized will depend
mainly on the length of time for which it is to be held, on the
configuration of the ground and on the size of the force
available for defence. The position need not be organized
in the same depth throughout. The greater the depth, the
less will penetration on narrow frontages create serious dis-
organization and the greater will be the enemy's dificulties
in maintaining the impetus of his attack; on the other hand,
to leave the foremost defended localities weakly held simply
in order to obtain depth may result in a strong natural
position being unnecessarily lost.
The longer a position is
held and the more time the attacker takes for preparation,
the more important does depth become. It will often
advisable to form a strong forward defence at the beginning
and to reduce the garrisons of the foremost localities as the
defences are improved and the enemy preparations make
depth of more importance. Eventually, when the stage of
position warfare is reached (Chapter
IX), the foremost
defences may become a lightly held outpost line, while the
depth of the main defensive system should be such that the
enemy will
be unable to attack the rear portions of the
system without moving his guns forward.
6. Local reserves must be ready either to occupy a position
to check enemy penetration or to deliver immediate counter-
attacks (Sec. 70, 3). They should prepare, or at all events
reconnoitre, a position for the former role; whether or not
they should occupy it until required for counter-attack will
depend on the size of the reserve and on the situation :
for counter-attack. Lines for counter-attack on the more
method of retaking them planned.
7. Defended positions will always be strengthened by
entrenchments and obstacles to the fullest extent that the
V07794 (166) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

