pg_0142.pdf:
V07794 (141) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Secs. 55 and 56.]
113
higher command; and the attack, so far as his part in it is
concerned, will be a frontal one, although it may be in the
course of a successful enveloping movement. Whether his
role be one of assault on a part of the enemy's front or of
support to the troops detailed for the assault, his principal
business is likely to be to apply the fire power which he controls
towards destroying or subduing that of the enemy, and by
skilful use of ground and of weapons to close with the enemy
—or to enable the assaulting troops to do so-with as little
loss in men as may be and with no loss of spirit.
56. The preparation of an attack
1. A period of preparation for an attack is always neces-
sary to allow for reconnaissance by commanders; the
formation of their plans; the issue of orders; the deploy-
ment of the troops; the measures necessary to ensure the
effectiveness of the supporting fire; the selection and estab-
lishment of headquarters; the
arrangements for inter-
communication. To shorten this period of preparation
without omitting any essential requirement must be the
constant aim of commanders and staff.
The activities
preceding an attack should be simultaneous in all grades of
command rather than consecutive;
if subordinate com-
manders have to wait till every detail of the plan of the
commander next above them is fixed before they are given
any instructions as to their role, much valuable time will be
wasted. Foresight and quickness on the part of the higher
commanders in deciding on the general outline of their plans
and in communicating them to those below will enable
subordinate commanders to reconnoitre, to move the troops
into position and to make other preparations while the
details of the plan are being settled.
2. As an example, the period of preparation within a unit
such as an infantry battalion may take place in stages
somewhat as follows. In the first stage the battalion
commander carries out his reconnaissance, accompanied by
the commander of his supporting fire units, a staff officer
(adjutant or intelligence officer) and one or more orderlies
to carry messages.
Before starting on his reconnaissance, he
will give his subordinate commanders (rifle company com-
manders) a rendezvous where they will receive orders; he
will also issue, from a study of the map, such instructions
as will enable them to begin their own reconnaissance and
V07794 (141) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

