pg_0212.pdf:
V07794 (211) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. X. Secs. 97 and 98.1
183
essential; the tribesman is especially sensitive to a threat
to his flanks or rear. The enemy seeks his chief opportunity
against a retiring foe, and will often attack a rear guard with
great persistence and vigour; in contrast to civilized warfare,
it is sometimes necessary to regulate the pace of the main
body by the progress of the rear guard; it is essential that
the withdrawal should be completed in daylight.
The protection of a column while at rest is on a rather
different system to civilized warfare, since a night attack on
the camp or bivouac from any direction is always a possi-
bility. The camp or bivouac-which must be selected in
time to allow all defensive preparations to be completed
before dark- is enclosed by a perimeter prepared for defence
and held usually by the infantry, with the other arms, trans-
port, etc., within the perimeter.
Outside the perimeter are
posted the camp piquets, self-contained and prepared for all-
round defence, so as to watch dangerous approaches, and to
deny to the enemy commanding ground from which he could
bring effective fire to bear on the camp by day or night.
Patrolling at night is usually impracticable, except by
specially trained men, but opportunities may sometimes be
taken to prepare ambushes.
Posts and convoys on the lines of communication are often
targets of attack by the ubiquitous enemy; routes regularly
used by convoys are therefore usually protected by permanent
piquets in sangars. In addition, mobile bodies of troops
should be located at suitable places along the route to carry
out offensive patrolling in the vicinity of the route. It is
also usually necessary for some form of escort to accompany
the convoy itself.
It is likely that in future expeditions into hill country held
by uncivilized tribes road making will play a more important
part. As the result of recent inventions, roads are likely in
the future to be made with much greater ease and rapidity
than in the past, and their construction will enable the
superior armament and resources of regular armies to be more
fully exploited.
98. Bush and forest warfare
1. Fighting in thick forest or bush is subject to the same,
or even greater, limitations to free movement as is fighting
in mountains: tracks only a few feet wide may be the best
routes available, and movement off them impossible except
V07794 (211) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

