pg_0061.pdf:
V07794 (60) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
32
[Chap. II. Sec. 15.
DISTRIBUTION.
The list of addresses to whom copies of the order are issued
will be included in all copies. The number of copies should
be kept as low as possible, both in the interests of secrecy
and because of the difficulties of reproduction in the field.
The distribution list should be in suitable order, e.g. :-
Own subordinate formations or units.
Attached troops.
Formations and units co-operating.
Own commander.
Own staff.
Own services.
File and war diary.
Operation orders, operation instructions and administrative
orders must be immediately acknowledged by all recipients
as a matter of routine.
5. In principle, a commander's orders are issued only to
those under his immediate command who are required to
take action on them. Copies to flank formations or units
may, however, be issued for information, if effective co-
operation cannot otherwise be secured.
A copy will not be
sent to the next higher formation, unless ordered or as the
most convenient means of keeping a superior in touch with
the situation.
The issue of a sufficient number of copies of a commander's
operation orders to his immediately subordinate commanders
for distribution to the formations or units under their com-
mand should be very exceptional : but it may on occasion be
convenient to distribute appendices (see para. 6, below)
containing long or complicated arrangements which would
otherwise have to be repeated in the orders of lower forma-
tions.
A subordinate commander who issues copies of his superior's
orders without receiving permission to do so will be responsible
for having made known any information contained in them.
6. In order to avoid long and complicated orders, it will
often be advisable to place in appendices such matter as details
of the fire plan or of the order of march. Repetition between
the main order and appendices must be avoided. Some-
times the order may be simplified by the issue of a sketcb
V07794 (60) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

