pg_0165.pdf:
V07794 (164) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
136
[Chap. VII. Secs. 68 and 69.
exposed to concentrated fire and heavy attack. Advanced
posts should not usually be held unless they can be well
supported by fire from the main position.
8. Woods and villages will often prove important factors
in a defensive position. They provide valuable natural
cover, give protection against tanks, and form obstacles
which break up the attack. On the other hand, they are
sure to be targets for the hostile artillery fire; small woods
and small poorly built villages may attract heavier fire than
is compensated for by the cover which they provide; and it
may sometimes be better to leave them unoccupied, covering
their approaches and exits by fire and bombarding them
with artillery if the enemy occupies them.
Large woods and strongly built villages may be system-
atically organized for defence. The forward edge, towards the
enemy, is likely to be subjected to heavy bombardment, and
it is often better to hold a position either in advance of the
wood or village, or well inside. Within the interior the
defence should be organized to command the principal rides
and clearings, or streets and squares. Defence may also be
prepared in rear, to command the exits.
Further details on fighting in woods and villages will be
found in Infantry Training.
69. Organization of a defensive position
1. When a superior commander has chosen a defensive
position in accordance with the principles given in Sec. 68, he
will make his decision clear to his subordinate commanders
by defining the ground-giving a general line or naming
particular tactical features which is essential to his plan of
defence; that is, the ground which his subordinate com-
manders must fully secure by their dispositions and must
be prepared to recapture if lost: they will then make their
dispositions accordingly.
The superior commander must also
define the front for which each of his subordinates is re-
sponsible and the area allotted to him, giving boundaries as
laid down in para. 2, below. He will also usually find
it advisable to indicate generally the foremost localities to be
held by the defence; or at least the points of junction of
adjacent units or formations in the forward line, so as to
ensure proper co-ordination between the various sectors of
the defence.
V07794 (164) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

