pg_0211.pdf:
V07794 (210) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
182
[Chap. X. Sec. 97.
armoured fighting vehicles and mounted troops- though of
the greatest value where the ground permits their use are
often handicapped, and may even be prevented from operating
at all, by the steepness and broken nature of the ground. The
amount of artillery that can be taken is dependent on the
communications; howitzers are more useful than guns.
Engineers will be required for improvement of the roads and
development of the water supply. The transport may have
in difficult hills to consist entirely of pack animals, so that
the supply and baggage columns will be unwieldy and
vulnerable.
Other consequences of this type of country are: that,
while strategical movement is usually confined to the
valleys, tactical movement either in attack or retirement
should always be along spurs or ridges rather than in the
depressions between them; that the facilities for infantry
covering fire, either overhead or between adjacent parallel
spurs, are frequent and should be utilized to the full; that
owing to the impossibility of digging in rocky ground defences
usually consist of stone breastworks (termed " sangars" on
the N.W. frontier of India); and that proficiency in visual
signalling has considerable value. A high degree of training
and physical fitness is required for success in hill fighting.
3. The above considerations are applicable to all warfare
in mountains; if the opponent is an uncivilized tribesman of
the type of the Pathan on the N.W. frontier of India, certain
additional difficulties have to be taken into account by
regular troops, ie. the great mobility of their enemy,
his skill in concealment, his markmanship, his preference
for harassing tactics rather than
organized resistance,
especially for attacks on the rear and flanks of a colurn, on
convoys or small posts and detachments. The features and
tactics of fighting against such opponents are dealt with in
detail in the Manual of Operations on the N.W. frontier
of India. The problems of protection need especial care,
since the enemy is quick to take advantage of any mistake
or carelessness. Flank protection of a column on the
march is normally carried out by a system of stationary
piquets holding high ground on either side of the route, and
so preventing the enemy firing on or attacking the column
below; these piquets are put out from the advanced guard
and withdrawn by the rear guard; their posting and with-
drawal require considerable skill and experience on the part
both of commander and troops. In attack, boldness is
V07794 (210) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

