pg_0210.pdf:
V07794 (209) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. X. Secs. 96 and 97.]
181
mountains, thick bush, sandy desert or ground cut up by
many streams or irrigation ditches limit their employment.
On the other hand, there will in mountain warfare be many
areas where broad valleys or low foothills will allow tanks or
armoured cars to operate; there may be large clearings or
open spaces in a bush country; and many deserts are hard
enough for armoured cars or tanks to manœuvre freely and
at speed.
The length and limited capacity of communications
may restrict the supply of petrol, and thus the number of
vehicles that can be maintained; but so great is their offensive
power and moral effect that armoured fighting vehicles should
always be used against uncivilized enemies where conditions
permit.
2. Tanks or armoured cars will be equally valuable in an
attack on the enemy in position, in cutting off his retreat, or
in pursuit, or in rearguard action. Armoured cars will also
be useful for the protection of convoys. In perimeter camps,
armoured fighting vehicles should not be given any portion
of the perimeter to hold, but should be kept as a mobile
reserve.
97. Mountain warfare
1. The chief military feature of mountains, whether the
foe be civilized or uncivilized, is that the principal routes for
movement usually few and difficult the principal centres
of life and cultivation and the principal supplies of water lie
in the valleys; whereas the high ground bas the advantage
over the valley in observation and command, and therefore
in facilities for attack and defence. In other words, strategic-
ally the valleys are more important, tactically the heights and
the passes or defiles between one valley and another, as these
are likely scenes of combat. Extremes of climate are likely
to be experienced in most mountainous areas; if operations
are to take piace at high altitudes, troops and animals will
require acclimatization. If mountains are covered with thick
forest or bush, the conditions of bush warfare (Sec. 98) may
apply.
2. The effect of the limited means of communication and
of the impossibility in a confined valley of deploying rapidly
on to a broad front is that columns must be small and may be
widely separated; that they must be lightly equipped; and
that transport must be cut down to a minimum. Operations
in hill country require a high proportion of infantry, since
7— {1811)
V07794 (209) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

