pg_0098.pdf:
V07794 (97) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IV. Sec. 33.]
69
charged with a mission of special reconnaissance and one of
protectign at the same time.
3. A detachment sent out to gain information should avoid
fighting as far as possible; it should fight only to the extent
to which fighting is necessary in order to ensure getting and
transmitting the information required. Reconnaissance
means dispersion, in order to search widely, while fighting
means concentration, in order to gain superiority over the
enemy. Thus the formation adopted by a reconnoitring
detachment is usually that of a number of small patrols
pushed forward over a wide front with a larger formed body
in rear ready to support the patrols and to collect the in-
formation they obtain. The formation is like a hand with
fingers outstretched, the finger-tips representing the advanced
patrols and the hand the supporting body; the clenched
fist may be taken to represent the detachment when fighting
becomes necessary.
As one force approaches another, the reconnoitring troops
which both have probably pushed forward are likely to come
into collision, each striving to defeat the other and so to
obtain in the area between the two forces a control that will
facilitate the quest for further information.
There may
still, however, be opportunities during this period for recon-
noitring patrols, pushed wide round the flanks,
to gain
information of
the enemy main columns behind. No
reconnoitring body, large or small, should ever forget that
its main object is information.
4. The strength and composition of a reconnoitring detach-
ment requires careful consideration and calculation. It
should be as small as possible; its actual size will depend
on the number of patrols to be furnished, the probable
number of messages to be sent, the likelihood of having to
overcome resistance, and the duration of its mission. The
use of wireless telegraphy will often enable personnel for
carrying messages to be reduced.
5. A reconnoitring detachment which obtains news of an
important or unexpected development should, besides
reporting it to the commander who ordered the reconnais-
sance, communicate it also to any other commanders who are
nearer to the enemy and may be more immediately affected
by it; this may be done by ordering the bearer of the report
to show it, on his way to his destination, to commanders
other than the one to whom the report is addressed, or by
V07794 (97) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

