pg_0032.pdf:
V07794 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Sec. 20]
3
movement. These characteristics make armoured units
formidable in attack and give them an important moral
effect against unarmoured troops. They are also less vul-
nerable to air and gas attack than other troops. On the other
hand, tanks are vulnerable to the fire of artillery and special
cutting, a thick wood, swampy ground, a rocky hill, and
trenches of more than a certain width, or specially dug
obstacles, will stop them.
Their distinctive appearance
renders them easily recognizable both to ground and air
observers, their tracks are visible from the air in most types
of country, and the characteristic noise made by the larger
types gives warning of their approach. When they are
closed down for action, the field of vision of the crews is
limited, and the strain on them caused by the uneven move-
ment and by the noise is severe.
3. Tanks are designed either to take part in mobile opera-
tions, for which speed and a wide circuit of action are essential
at some sacrifice of armoured protection; or for close co-
operation with infantry in the attack, for which armour is
of more importance than speed or a wide circuit.
Tanks of the former type are classified either as light or
medium, are equipped with wireless for purposes of control
and communication, and are organized into mixed and light
tank battalions; those of the latter are called infantry tanks,
and are organized into army tank battalions.
Mixed tank battalions are organized into companies con-
taining medium, light and close-support tanks. The medium
tank is the principal assault weapon. The light tanks protect
the medium tanks by reconnaissance and by the neutraliza-
tion of anti-tank weapons. Close-support tanks differ from
medium tanks only in having, instead of a 3-pr. gun, a howitzer,
which throws a smoke or H.E. shell: their normal role is
the protection of the medium and light tanks by placing a
smoke screen between them and any anti-tank weapons
which open fire unexpectedly during the course of an action :
they carry also a small proportion of H.E. shell for their
mortars for use in an attack on buildings, or on other special
occasions.
Light tank battalions consist entirely of light tanks; they
V07794 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

