pg_0082.pdf:
V07794 (81) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Secs. 26 and 27.]
53
movement section of the Q.M.G.'s branch of the staff, and are
the intermediaries between the troops using the railway and
the technical authorities responsible for the working of the
railway.
6. If there is no movement control officer at a station
where troops are to entrain or detrain, it is the duty of the
2. M.G.'s branch to appoint an officer to carry out the duties
of movement control officer and to provide him with the
necessary instructions.
7. The responsibility for entraining and detraining a unit
lies with its commander, but he will be guided as to local
requirements by the movement control officer. The rules
for entrainment and detrainment given in King's Regulations
will be followed except where they are clearly inapplicable
to war conditions.
A table suitable for the entrainment of an infantry brigade
is given in Appendix VII.
8. The senior combatant officer in a troop train is in
command of the train and is responsible for all measures of
protection. If air attack is possible, anti-aircraft light
machine guns will be mounted in open trucks for defence
against low-flying aircraft.
27. Movement of troops by mechanical transport
1. A distinction must be drawn between the use of
mechanical transport for the movement of troops on the
lines of communication or behind the fighting line, when the
area in which the move is to take place is already protected
by the disposition of our own forces; and its use in the
forward zone to give additional tactical mobility to dis-
mounted troops, either as part of a mechanized force or for
some particular operation.
2. In the former category may be placed the use of
mechanical transport for troop movements on the lines of
communication in areas ill-provided with railways, or, in
position warfare, for the withdrawal of exhausted units from
the battle line, for the transfer of reserves or for the carriage
of troops, such as labour units, whose marching powers are
limited.
In such moves mechanical transport is used simply
as a substitute for a railway train, and is subject to the same
limitation as tactical trains (Sec. 26, 1) in that, as the troops
3- (1311)
V07794 (81) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

