pg_0139.pdf:
V07794 (138) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
110
[Chap. VI. Sec. 55.
CHAPTER VI
THE ATTACK
55. General considerations
1. The considerations which should guide the higher com-
mander in his decision to assume the offensive; in his
choice of envelopment or penetration as the most effective
method of attacking the enemy's position; and in his
selection of the arm, or combination of arms, on which he
intends principally to rely for the gaining of his object are
dealt with in Field Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935,
Chapters III and V.
2. Whatever the size and composition of the forces engaged,
the planning and conduct of an attack are governed by
certain general principles which it is essential that every
commander should thoroughly understand, in order either
to plan an attack himself or to play his part effectively in an
attack staged by a superior commander.
3. The chief assets of the attacker are: firstly, the feeling
of moral superiority which an offensive attitude gives, similar
to that of the boxer who carries the fight to his opponent;
and secondly, the power to choose at what place, by what
method and at what time the main action will be fought.
To maintain this moral superiority, a commander must be
perfectly clear as to the objective he seeks to attain, must
be determined to succeed and must impress this determina-
tion on his subordinate leaders by resolute action and by clear
and definite orders.
The power to choose place, method and
time must be exploited to the full so as to obtain superiority,
especially of fire, at the chosen point, and so as to secure the
vital advantage of surprise. Surprise is a most powerful
weapon in the attack, and the commander who fails to
surprise his enemy loses the main advantage which the
offensive confers.
Some of the means by which surprise
may be sought have been outlined in Sec. 11, 5; to attack
at an unexpected place, by an unexpected method or at an
V07794 (138) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

