pg_0133.pdf:
V07794 (132) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
104
[Chap. V. Sec. 51.
moving patrols; but a combination of both may be required.
By night, the duty of patrolling will fall chiefly on the infantry.
3. The strength of troops employed on outpost duty and
held in immediate readiness to meet attack must be kept
to the minimum consistent with reasonable safety; otherwise
the efficiency of the force will suffer from lack of rest. When
the main enemy forees are not within striking distance, the
outposts need be sufficiently strong only to prevent the enemy
from obtaining inforination and to protect the main body
from disturbance by hostile patrols of mobile troops. When
the enemy possesses mobile troops with a long range of
action, the force halted may be liable to attack from other
directions as well as from the front. To meet this danger,
areas, within which they will be responsible for the pro-
tection of all troops, fighting or administrative, will be
allotted to the various formations.
The commander of each
formation will put out detachments to block roads or other
avenues of approach leading into his area, on similar principles
to those outlined in Sec. 39 for troops on the march. This
protection against raids by mobile troops must be main-
tained also under the conditions dealt with in the succeeding
paragraph.
4. If the main enemy forces are within striking distance,
the commander of the force must decide on his dispositions
tos troops accordi syd must extent the que force al
be deployed and the degree of readiness in which the various
bodies of troops will be held will depend on the proximity
and character of the enemy and on the
general tactical
situation. The force commander will then lay down. the
general line which his protective detachments will take up in
order to cover the main body. This line will form the outpost
position, and the troops allotted to its defence will form the
outposts. The distance of the outpost position in front of
the area which the main body is to defend in case of attack
will depend mainly on the existence of suitable ground for
defence; it must be sufficiently far in advance to give the
main body time to prepare for action, but not so far in
advance as to be dangerously isolated. If the enemy is
strong in armoured fighting vehicles, the existence of a tank
obstacle may influence the choice of the position.
The
occupation of the position, which may often have to be done
burricly, and co-ordination between the various sectors
V07794 (132) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association
www.vickersmg.org

