pg_0096.pdf:
V07794 (95) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IV. Sec. 32.]
67
definite information about definite points (e.g. cross-roads)
at definite times. Reconnaissance by night may have
considerable moral effect on the enemy, as he will be un-
certain whether movements on the secrecy of which his
plans may depend have been discovered or not. Night
reconnaissance will of course reduce the amount of work
which squadrons can perform by day.
3. Air photography is a most important part of air recon
naissance, since it forms an accurate record of a certain area
at a certain time, and will under expert examination reveal
details not apparent to an air observer. Its effectiveness is,
however, dependent on favourable conditions of light and
weather. An aeroplane engaged in photography of an
area ollers a good target to anti-airerait artillery This fact
may have to fly in straight lines at a fixed height.
may limit photographic work of large areas, when enemy
anti-circraft guns are active.
Air photographs are of two types, vertical and oblique.
The former, which show the ground as seen from directly
above, are most generally useful; but obliques, which are
panoramic views taken usually from low heights, are much
easier to read and are of great value to the forward troops
in supplementing their maps and giving them an idea of the
ground over which they have to operate.
The time taken to
develop, print and annotate photographs is a limiting factor
in the use of air photography for tactical information during
actual contact.
(See Employment of Air Forces with the
Army in the Field, 1932, Sec. 32.)
The air force is responsible for taking, developing and
printing the photographs,
the army for their plotting,
interpretation and distribution.
4. The results obtained by air reconnaissance will largely
depend, as in all other forms of reconnaissance, on the clear-
ness and suitability of the orders issued by the commander
who details the reconnaissance; also on close liaison between
the air force and the intelligence staff of the formation con-
cerned. Two army officers, air liaison officers (A.L.Os.),
are attached to the headquarters of each army co-operation
squadron, with the duties of supplying to the squadron officers
the detailed information which they require in order to carry
out their task; of interrogating the pilots on their return and
investigating their reports; and of ensuring that the infor-
mation obtained is communicated rapidly to the formations
V07794 (95) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

