pg_0046.pdf:
V07794 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Secs. 8 and 9.]
17
units, but are allotted to formations by army headquarters as
required.
A squadron consists of three flights each of four aircraft.
The work it is capable of doing is measured by the number
of flights of about two hours duration, known as " sorties,
which it can perform on any given day. As a general guide,
it may be considered capable of maintaining two aircraft
in the air during the hours of daylight and also of carrying
out an occasional additional flight. The squadron is the
smallest self-contained air force unit, and is not usually
sub-divided, since maintenance, photography, signals, etc.,
are organized on a squadron basis and cannot conveniently
be split up. Only as a special measure may one or more
flights be temporarily detached to a force carrying out a
special mission.
3. The kite balloon unit is the section of two balloons, only
one of which can, however, be flown at a time. Kite balloons
carry two observers; they are held captive by a winch and
cable which will allow them to rise to a height of 5,000 feet.
They are used mainly for artillery observation. They are
extremely vulnerable to shell fire, and also to the attack of
hostile aircraft.
They are therefore, as far as possible, kept
out of artillery range and protected by anti-aircraft guns.
4. Intercommunication aircraft are able to fly safely at
lower speeds and to land and take off from more confined
spaces than operational types. They are required to enable
commanders and staff officers to visit or observe their troops.
They are not normally armed for defensive purposes and have
a relatively low performance, so that they should not be used
over enemy troops or under conditions in which they are
subject to serious risk of attack by hostile aircraft.
5. Successful co-operation with air force units depends on
a correct appreciation and allotment of tasks, on the issue of
clear and adequate orders, on good liaison and on good
intercommunication.
Intercommunication between air and ground is dealt with
in Sec. 20. Reconnaissance by aircraft is dealt with in
Sec. 32.
9. Smoke
1. Smoke used to blind enemy observation (especially of
machine guns, automatic weapons and anti-tank guns) and
to conceal the intentions and movements of one's own
V07794 (45) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

