pg_0036.pdf:
V07794 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Sec. 4.]
7
4. Infantry
1. Practically all success in war, which is won by the
proper co-operation of all arms, must in the end be confirmed
by infantry, which, by closing with the enemy, compels his
withdrawal or surrender, and holds the objectives which have
been secured or the points of importance which have to 'be
protected, as a base for further action. It is the most
adaptable and the most generally useful of all arms, since it is
capable of operating over almost any ground either by day or
by night and can find or make cover for itself more readily
than the other arms.
2. The movement of bodies of infantry on foot is slow and
their range limited. Infantry which can be carried to the
battlefield in mechanical transport will obviously secure a
great advantage in freshness and vigour besides an increase
in range. The mobility of infantry in battle can be increased
by arrangements for lightening its load.
Small bodies of
infantry may be transported by aircraft, but will have little
mobility on arrival at the scene of action unless first-line
transport for them can be improvised locally. Movements of
infantry by mechanical transport or by air are further dis-
cussed in Chapter III.
In a well-roaded country, cycles are sometimes
useful
for giving mobility to small bodies of infantry. Cyclists can
keep up with cavalry units or formations if the roads are
good, and may sometimes be used in the support of cavalry
or to replace them, if mounted men are not available.
They
can develop their full fire power when dismounted, since no
cycle holders are required: they must, however, return to
their cycles after an action, unless these can be brought up
by a lorry. Machine guns for the support of cyclists may be
carried in mechanical transport.
3. Infantry units or formations are organized in two
echelons, an echelon of riflemen and an echelon of supporting
fire for these riflemen.
The principal weapons of the echelon
of riflemen are the light machine gun, rifle and bayonet.
Infantry units also carry a supply of smoke and H.E. grenades,
to be fired from the rifle or thrown by hand, which are issued
to the riflemen when likely to be required. In defence or
in consolidation, the use of the spade and pick is a most
important factor in enhancing the power of the individual
infantryman. The supporting echelon is equipped with
V07794 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

