pg_0188.pdf:
V07794 (187) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VIII. Sec. 82.]
159
paragraph 7, below, for the points which require considera-.
tion). The forming-up place, where the final deployment for
the assault takes place, should be as near to the position
to be assaulted as is consistent with avoiding detection by
the enemy; if possible, it should be within 500 to 600 yards
of the objective, since it is difficult to maintain direction and
formation in the dark for long once the force is fully deployed ;
the actual distance depends on the ground, the vigilance of
the enemy and the darkness of the night.
The forming-up
place must be easily recognizable and, if no natural landmarks
exist, it may have to be marked by tapes or other means.
The formation adopted at the forming-up place will be
similar to that for a night advance (Sec. 80, 4) except that
the forward troops will now be deployed; careful organiza-
tion and good discipline are required to ensure that the deploy-
ment is carried out noiselessly and without confusion.
6. All ranks must understand that, once the forming-up
place has been left, the assault must be carried through to
the objective, whatever happens; hesitation is fatal; if
the enemy opens fire before the objective is reached, the
force will continue to press forward and will carry through
the attack. The assault will be made in silence with the
bayonet.
Consolidation will be carried out on the general principles
laid down in Sec. 59; it will be a great protection against
infantry counter-attack if a wire obstacle can be put out
early; if the enemy has armoured fighting vehicles, the
organization of anti-tank defence is important.
7. Orders for night operations will often contain consider-
able detail. The following are some of the chief points with
which they may have to deal :—
i. Timing of the operation; times of arrival and departure
at the assembly position and forming-up place:
time and place of halts; synchronization of watches.
ii. Description of the assembly position and forming-up
place; their distance from objectives; compass
bearings.
iii. Formations to be adopted at the assembly position and
forming-up place.
iv. Action of artillery and engineers.
v. Equipment to be worn or carried by the troops;
arrangements for entrenching tools.
V07794 (187) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

