pg_0075.pdf:
V07794 (74) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
46
[Chap. III. Secs. 21 and 22.
11. No trumpet or bugle calls are allowed on the line of
march. Intercommunication throughout a column will
normally be by mounted or cycle orderlies. Mounted officers,
motor cars and motor cycles will avoid passing up and down
a marching column more than is absolutely necessary; they
can often avoid causing discomfort to the troops by taking
advantage of a halt to pass.
Traffic control must be arranged at points where congestion
is likely to occur.
Where roads cross one another or bifurcate,
arrangements must be made to place sign-posts or orderlies
to guide the troops in the required direction; or the road not
to be used may be blocked by some pre-arranged sign, such
branchelaties cia lian testspost may require specia
measures, particularly if large numbers of refugees are on the
move, as may happen in the event of a retreat.
12. Staft officers must have, ready for reference,
state-
ments, based on the actual strength of units, showing the
length in column of route of the unit or formation with which
they deal, the time it takes to pass a given point, the billeting
accommodation or camping space it requires, etc.
A form of march table suitable for use with operation
orders is given in Appendix VII.
22. Rules for march discipline
(See also Manual of Elementary Drill (All Arms))
1. Good marching depends largely on the efforts of regi-
mental officers, who must see that a strict march discipline
is observed.
March discipline includes everything that
affects the efficiency of man, horse or machine during the
march, e.g. the arrangements for food and forage, the filling
of water bottles, attention to harness and saddlery, constant
inspection of the working parts of mechanical vehicles, the
proper loading of transport (see Sec. 28, 2), the strict obser-
vance of the correct formations and distances, and many
similar details.
2. Slackness in march discipline not only causes dis-
comfort in the unit itself, but may lead to disaster through
troops arriving late or too exhausted to take an effective
part in battle, or through roads becoming congested or
blocked. The
importance of march discipline and the
necessity of maintaining a high standard in all conditions
must be realized by all ranks. March discipline which breaks
V07794 (74) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

