pg_0124.pdf:
V07794 (123) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 46.J
95
The role of a flank guard is to prevent the enemy from
interfering with the march of the main body; this will
usually mean that it must endeavour to deny to the enemy
ground observation of the route along which the main body is
moving.
2. A flank guard, like an advanced guard, has to recon-
noitre and to fight in order to protect the main body, and its
strength and composition are therefore governed by similar
considerations (Sec. 41, l). There are, however, certain
differences in the functions of a flank guard.
Whereas the
role of an advanced guard is usually offensive (Sec. 43, 3),
that of a flank guard is defensive. Since a flank guard has
to work on a wide front to cover the whole length of the
column which it is protecting, mobility is of special value to it,
and it should, whenever possible, be strong in mobile troops.
It is most important that a flank guard should keep close
touch with the main body, on the progress of which its
position and action depend. It should be provided with
wireless sets and with liaison personnel for this purpose.
a close reconnaissance aeroplane is working over the area
through which the column is marching, arrangements should
be made that the flank guard commander may receive,
with as little delay as possible, the information obtained by
the aeroplane.
3. A flank guard throws out smaller detachments for its
own protection, as described in Sec. 37, 3, and thus may
have its own advanced guard, flank guard and rear guard.
Since a flank guard has such a wide front to cover, early
warning of the enemy's approach is essential, and the mobile
troops of the flank guard should be pushed as far out to the
flank as the mobile troops of the advanced guard are to the
front (Sec. z2, 4), le. up to four or five miles in open country.
4. A flank guard may be moving or stationary. With small
forces, it may move parallel to the force which it is pro-
tecting, by road if suitable routes exist or across country if
the ground is unenclosed. With larger forces, it can usually
best perform its role by occupying some
commanding
feature on the flank or by holding the crossings of some
natural obstacle, such as a river, until the main body has
passed. It may occupy a succession of such features, by a
process of gradual side-slipping as the column it is protecting
advances. If a flank guard is delayed or becomes engaged
with the enemy, it may, unless composed of mobile troops,
V07794 (123) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

