pg_0200.pdf:
V07794 (199) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IX. Secs. 87, 88 and 89.]
171
for forward extension of trench tramways and other com-
munications; special camouflage work.
During the attack, their principal task is likely to be the
opening up of communications, including the bridging of
trenches and other obstacles, to permit of the forward move-
ment of armoured fighting vehicles (Sec. 88, 1), guns, ammuni-
tion, supplies, etc. They may also be required to put
captured localities into a state of defence; to open up water
supply; to remove mines; or to extend or make
trench
tramways. As in mobile warfare, engineer reconnaissance
parties should be pushed well forward, but the engineer units
themselves should be held back until the tasks on which they
are to be employed have been carefully reconnoitred and
planned.
88. Tanks in position warfare
1. Tanks will be of especial value to the attacker in position
warfare, since they can crush wire obstacles and thus enable
a surprise to be more easily effected. If sufficient tanks can
be collected in the early stages, they may be able to break
rapidly through the enemy's
defensive organization and
prevent the operations ever reaching a really static phase..
The defender is likely, however, if he is given time, to cover
his front with a continuous tank obstacle (trenches or minefields
or other obstructions) as well as with a barbed wire obstacle
against infantry. The attacker must then either devise
some expedient that will enable his tanks to cross the obstacle
intended to stop them, or must make the first assaults with
infantry, reserving his tanks for the exploitation of success
when the tank obstacles have been passed.
2. Tanks, when used in the attack, will be handled on the
principles laid down in Sec. 60. In the defence, tanks may
be used for counter-attack, especially of hostile tanks
(Sec. 71).
89. Infantry in position warfare
1. The prolonged spells of holding trenches which fall to
the lot of infantry in position warfare demand more than
anything else good discipline and a good system, since the
work is exacting and monotonous. A strict performance of
the routine duties (such as posting and relief of sentries,
manning of observation posts, standing to alarm posts at
certain hours, and so forth) must always be required. The
V07794 (199) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

