pg_0150.pdf:
V07794 (149) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Sec. 60.J
121
when conditions are difficult. A battalion with all three
companies deployed may thus be expected to cover from
1,500 to 0,000 yards of trontage, but it must be remembered
that tanks like other arms require a reserve and can seldom
be fully deployed (see also para. 6, below).
4. Since tanks are liable to suffer casualties from the enemy's
artillery fire if they remain long on a position which they
have taken, it is necessary that their action should be followed
up as rapidly as possible by infantry or mounted troops
(usually the former, as mounted troops are so vulnerable on
the battlefield). The objective of the tanks will therefore
be a limited one, and they will return to a rallying point in
rear as soon as relieved by other troops. It is not, however,
necessary that tanks should rally right back out of the
battle once their immediate task is accomplished. Cover
from direct view and the opportunity for reorganization
are the main requirements. Cover can usually be found
well forward and, once the reorganization, which takes but
little time, is effected, the unit or sub-unit is again ready
for action.
5. Tanks attacking as the main assaulting arm in direct
co-operation with infantry may use the same lines of advance
as the infantry or may attack from a flank (i.e. at right angles
or obliquely to the lines of advance of the infantry) according
to the existence of wire, to the suitability of the ground for
movement and supporting fire, and the opportunities for
surprise. In order to ensure co-operation between the artil-
lery, infantry and tanks taking part
in the attack, the
following must be settled: the starting line of the infantry,
the starting line of the tanks, the times at which each wil
cross their starting lines and the pace at which each will
move to their objective. Tanks should seldom be required
to halt on a starting line.
They should be brought, if
possible, direct into the attack from an assembly position
under cover, crossing a starting or check line at a given hour,
but without a halt.
The closer the infantry can follow the
tanks on to the objective, the better; it can then take full
advantage of the confusion created by the tank attack, and
can take over the ground gained by the tanks without delay.
It may sometimes be advisable for the infantry advance to
start before the tank attack is actually launched, so that the
infantry can work forward to suitable positions within
striking distance of the objective. Such action may also
V07794 (149) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

