pg_0093.pdf:
V07794 (92) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
64
[Chap. IV. Sec. 31.
inton ottion roma the air, however. often requires confirmation
4. A commander will usually obtain from a reconnaissance
the results which the clearness and appropriateness of his
orders for it deserve.
The information required should be
put in the form of definite questions to be answered, in order
of priority; the time by which each answer is required
should be given when practicable. The commander of the
reconnaissance, or of the air unit concerned, should be given
all available information of the enemy and such information
of the intentions and movements of our own troops as may
be necessary for the appreciation and performance of his
task. He will then be able to judge the relative value of the
information which he obtains and to report immediately news
which he will realize is of vital importance for the plans and
dispositions of the higher commander.
It is desirable that
the commander sending out a reconnoitring detachment, or
his staff officer, should, whenever practicable, give instruc-
tions personally to the actual commander of the detachment,
and should examine him on the results of his reconnaissance
on his return; in air reconnaissance this is normally done
by means of air liaison officers with the air force (see
Sec. 32, 4).
Detailed instructions for the conduct of reconnoitring
detachments and patrols will be found in the manuals of
the various arms.
5. It is the duty of a commander to co-ordinate all the
means of obtaining information at his disposal in a well-
thought-out reconnaissance plan, without which there will
be much waste of time and effort. The plan should be
directed towards the economical use of all methods available
by a careful allotment of tasks. A process of eliminatior
will sometimes be necessary; for example, aircraft may
indicate the most likely areas where enemy forces may be
lying up in concealment; these areas can then be searched
by armoured cars, cavalry or infantry, according to distance.
6. In all units and formations certain personnel are
charged with the duty of collecting and sifting all informa-
tion gained; of distributing it as required, both upward and
downward and to units and formations on the flanks; and of
presenting to the commander a clear picture of the situation
which will assist him to frame his plans. In a battalion, for
example, the battalion intelligence section performs these
V07794 (92) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

