pg_0146.pdf:
V07794 (145) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Secs. 57 and 58.J
117
and may be compared with the moral influence in fighting by
night. For these reasons it will often be advisable to avoid
direct attack of a wood or village on the front of attack, to
outflank it by advancing past it on either side and thus to
surround it, leaving its garrison to be dealt with at leisure.
If this method is adopted, it will be necessary to keep under
fire the edges of the wood or village from which the enemy
If a large wood, village or town has to be attacked directly,
operations must
be methodical and carefully prepared, if
they are to succeed; it will usually be advisable to divide the
objective into areas, each of which will be captured in turn.
Further guidance for the attack on woods and villages will
be found in Infantry Training.
6. If the enemy is using gas, he is most likely to con-
taminate observation areas, and probable avenues of approach
and forming-up places; special precautions will be necessary to
ascertain whether such areas are clear or not. He may also
attack troops concentrating for the offensive with gas spray
from low-flying aeroplanes. If he has had time to collect
gas shells in large quantities, he may use them in harassing
fire, counter-preparation and defensive fire.
58. Opposed river crossings
1. The development of armoured fighting vehicles has
enhanced the importance of a river (or canal) as a defensive
obstacle. At the same time the weight of fighting and of
transport vehicles has increased the technical difficulties of
passing a force over a river in the face of opposition (see
Appendix VIII). Since technical considerations will have a
most important and possibly decisive influence on the
commander's plan, the engineer officer concerned must be
taken into consultation at the earliest possible stage.
fullest and earliest information about the river line is needed
(Appendix IX); air photographs will be of value in framing
the general plan, but personal reconnaissance by engineers
is essential.
2. A river line of which the enemy has had time to organize
the defence should be turned rather than attacked, if the
situation permits. If, however, a passage has to be forced,
the elements of success are careful preparation, surprise and
speed. One of the chief dangers to the attack arises when the
leading troops have crossed, but are without their supporting
5- (1311)
V07794 (145) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

