pg_0195.pdf:
V07794 (194) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
166
[Chap. IX. Secs. 84 and 85.
work is affected by the growth or decay of vegetation or other
causes. Concealment by camouflage, of other means, of
machine-gun positions and anti-tank weapons is of special
importance.
Obstacles-wire or anti-tank obstacles-must be con-
structed in depth in accordance with a definite tactical plan,
and are of little value unless covered by fire.
It will be
necessary to arrange that the movement of reinforcements
or counter-attacking troops is not hampered by obstacles.
The provision of light railways or tramlines will greatly
reduce the work required for bringing up ammunition and
stores and will facilitate the evacuation of the wounded.
6. No more men than is absolutely necessary should be
employed in holding the forward defences, as the duty is
most harass.ng. Units should be relieved and rested at
frequent intervals, but the infantry and artillery in the same
sectors should not both be relieved at the same time. Details
regarding reliefs will be found in Sec. 92.
7. The general conduct of the defence and the delivery of
counter-attacks will be on the same principles as in Sec. 70.
Defence schemes can be drawn up in some detail; and the
action of all units in the event of enemy attack will be closely
studied and should be practised, if possible.
Raids (Sec. 85, 4) may occasionally be necessary to discover
the intentions of the enemy, e.g. whether he is preparing to
attack or for some other definite purpose, for much the same
reasons, in fact, as sorties are made by a besieged garrison.
85. The attack in position warfare
1. The principles already laid down in Chapter VI apply
equally to attacks in position warfare. The special character-
istics of such an attack are that the enemy defences are more
elaborate, are likely to extend to a great depth and are
covered by obstacles which must be pierced or hroken before
the infantry can advance; on the other hand, the information
at the disposal of the attacker as regards the location of the
enemy defences will be far more detailed and accurate than
in open warfare. The attacker will usually himself be
entrenched close up to the hostile position.
Great resources in material will be required to deal with
the strength of the enemy defences, the preparations will
require considerable time and orders for the attack will be
very detailed. The depth of the enemy defences may
V07794 (194) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

