pg_0113.pdf:
V07794 (112) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
84
[Chap. V. Secs. 39 and 40.
line of march. They should make the fullest use of obstacles,
the protection of buildings, and anti-tank mines, to economize
the limited number of
anti-tank weapons available, the
mobility of which should be exploited to meet the attack
where it actually develops. Piquets will normally be put
into position by the advanced guard and withdrawn by the
rearguard, in much the same way as piquets in mountain
warfare (see Chapter X). It is sometimes possible to select
on the flanks of the line of advance certain road centres or
passages over obstacles, the blocking of which will greatly
restrict
the enemy's movements and enable piquets to be
economized. This form of piqueting cannot be expected
to hold off a serious attack, though it should give warning
and cause delay. The main column must therefore be
prepared to assist the piquets, more particularly with gun fire,
and with this object it may be desirable to make a special
distribution of artillery in the order of march. Air recon-
naissance, to notify the approach of enemy mobile troops,
and some pre-arranged signals by aircraft to indicate the
position of the armoured fighting vehicles and the direction
in which they are moving, are also important.
The protection of rearward areas (i.e. divisional, corps,
etc.) against enemy mobile troops may require special measures.
Headquarters, administrative units and installations should,
where possible, keep in the neighbourhood of reserves of
fighting troops and, when halted, make the fullest use of
ground and buildings to provide defence against enemy
raids. It may be necessary to detail detachments of fighting
troops for the protection of divisional and corps areas;
such detachments will normally consist of infantry with their
proportion of anti-tank weapons and possibly of engineers.
5. If stationary tanks are located, they may often be
effectively bombed by aircraft; and tanks at rest, unpro-
no, art to ated,
sected by than troops, disy sate mes be attacked with
night.
40. Protection against gas
1. An outline of the potentialities of gas as a weapon and
of the probable methods which an enemy may employ to
make use of them has been given in Sec. 10. Further details
of these probable methods will be found in the chapter
dealing with position warfare (Chapter IX).
V07794 (112) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

