pg_0128.pdf:
V07794 (127) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 48.]
99
guard becomes closely engaged late in the day and its lines
of withdrawal are under enemy observation, it may prove
advisable to maintain the position, until the approach of
dusk prevents or hampers enemy observation and facilitates
concealment of the withdrawal.
4. Successive main positions should be far enough apart to
force the enemy, after deploying for attack on one, to move
his artillery before attacking the next; this will usually
mean with forces of all arms that they should not be less
than about two miles apart. Whenever possible, a part
of the rear guard should be sent back in time to occupy the
next main position in rear before the withdrawal from the
previous one is complete; this will enable a well-organized
defence to be established in good time on the new position,
under cover of which the remaining troops can reform on
withdrawal.
This may not always be possible when the
rear guard is responsible for a wide front; but officers will
in any event always be sent to reconnoitre the lines of with-
It is always desirable that, once rear guard troops have
disengaged from the enemy and left a position, they should
be able to go straight back through a position already held.
It may, therefore, be necessary, when the rear guard is being
closely pressed, to occupy intermediate positions between
the successive main positions; such intermediate positions
are only intended to be held for a sufficiently long time to
cover the retirement of the rearward troops, to allow them,
if necessary, to reform and thus to maintain an orderly
withdrawal.
5. The method of withdrawal of a rear guard engaged
with the enemy is as follows. A part of the rear guard is,
whenever possible, sent back to occupy the next main position
in rear, to which reconnoitring parties should already have
preceded it; while the remainder of the rear guard (including
usually the whole of the mobile troops and artillery available)
continue to hold the original position. These are then
withdrawn gradually, until only small rear parties are left;
the artillery retire by successive portions, so that support
is afforded up to the latest possible moment. A portion of
the rear guard will usually take up an intermediate position
to cover the final withdrawal and to take advantage of the
targets which will often be offered by the enemy as he arrives
on the vacated position; but this intermediate position will
MC
V07794 (127) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

