pg_0131.pdf:
V07794 (130) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
102
[Chap. V. Secs. 49 and 50.
3. As few demolitions as possible should be left to the last
minute. The procedure for ordering the firing of the charges
for such as have necessarily to be so left will be as follows.
The rear guard commander will be responsible for deciding
the time of, and for giving the order for, demolitions. He may
actually give the order himself for the destruction of an
important bridge; more often he will delegate the responsi-
bility to some other officer, who may be the commander
of the rear party, the engineer officer in charge of the demo-
lition or some other specially detailed officer. The engineer
officer, or N.C.O., in charge of the demolition will be given
in writing the title of the officer to whom has been entrusted
the duty of ordering the demolition, and any other special
instructions as to the time or circumstances of the demolition.
Should the intended procedure miscarry (through the officer
detailed to order the demolition becoming a casualty, or for
any other reason) and it becomes evident to the commander
of the demolition party that further delay will, on account
of the closeness of the enemy, prevent the demolition being
carried out, he will on his own responsibility order the
charges to be fired, unless he has written instructions specifi-
cally forbidding such action.
4. It will usually be necessary to provide a special covering
party for the engineers detailed to execute last-minute
demolitions. If a covering party has not been provided, the
engineer officer or N.C.O. in charge of the demolition should
apply for the necessary protection to the commander of the
unit or formation in whose sector his demolition lies.
5. As soon as a bridge has been destroyed, the engineer
officer or N.C.O. in charge will report to the headquarters
which ordered it the time of demolition and the extent of
damage effected.
50. Advanced guard to a force retiring
1. The commander of a retreating force will detail an
advanced guard. Its duties will normally be to clear away
any obstacles which would delay the march (this may include
the regulation of civilian traffic and of refugees) and to
improve and mark, where necessary, the route to be used by
the main body. It should therefore include a detachment
of the provost corps and may include engineers.
V07794 (130) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

