pg_0151.pdf:
V07794 (150) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
122
[Chap. Vi. Sec. 60.
serve to cover the advance of the tanks. If this method is
adopted, sufficient covering fire for the infantry must be
provided to make its advance feasible.
When infantry is the main assaulting arm, tanks may be
allotted so that they can be made available at short notice to
deal with any opposition that is preventing the infantry from
establishing itself on the objective. Or infantry may be
used to capture the initial objectives, the tanks being reserved
to provide the necessary impetus and support for a further
advance. It may sometimes be advisable in the later stages
of an attack, when the fighting is very open and when few
tanks are available, for the infantry to lead the advance, with
the tanks following as a reserve to deal quickly with any
opposition that checks the infantry.
6. The circumstances and methods of every attack in
which tanks and infantry co-operate will vary according to
the ground— to which tanks are very susceptible (see Sec. 2, 2)
-the supporting fire available and the time which the enemy
has had to organize his position. There can be no set form of
attack which will meet all occasions: success will depend
on the following factors :—
i. All available information, from aeroplane photographs
and other means, regarding enemy gun and anti-
tank gun positions should be given to the tank
commander;
and all possible opportunity of
personal reconnaissance, from the ground or the air,
should be afforded to him and to his officers.
ii. The tank and infantry units concerned should have a
good understanding of each other's limitations, they
should establish personal contact before the action
as far as possible, and close liaison during it; it is
the business of each to kill the other's foe, the tanks
to dispose of the enemy machine guns, the infantry
to look out for and silence the hostile anti-tank
weapons.
iii. While the battle should be planned beforehand between
the infantry and tanks in as great detail as possible,
a margin must be allowed for the unforeseen and
incalculable; hence there should always, if possible,
be a reserve of tanks, to deal with the machine gun
which opens from a flank after the forward tanks have
passed or with a counter-attack by enemy tanks.
V07794 (150) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

