pg_0172.pdf:
V07794 (171) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Secs. 72 and 73.]
143
in the counter-offensive and will act as laid down in Sec. 61.
The concealment of mounted troops, especially from the air,
is of importance.
2. As regards mounted troops in a withdrawal, see Field
Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935, Chapter VII.
73. Infantry in the defence
1. The fire power of infantry is the real backbone of the
defence ;
its effectiveness depends largely on concealment
and surprise. In taking up a defensive position with infantry,
the siting of the machine guns, of the mortars, of the anti-
tank guns and of the defended localities held by the riflemen
will all require consideration.
2. The machine guns, the most powerful weapon of the
defence, should, whenever time permits, be considered first.
They should be organized in depth, the proportion used for
forward defence and the proportion kept for rear defence
being determined by the considerations given in Sec. 69, 5.
They should be sited so as to sweep with enfilade or oblique
fire the probable lines of enemy approach and so as to pro-
vide as nearly as possible a continuous belt of fire across the
front of the position. Concealment is of the utmost im-
portance; they should usually be placed behind some feature
giving concealment from the front.. Thus they will not
necessarily be sited in the area of the unit whose front they
are covering; nor will they usually cover by fire the ground
immediately in front of them, so that they must be protected
by the dispositions of the riflemen in the defended localities.
Attacks are likely to be made under cover of darkness or
the concealment of smoke, when observation of enemy move-
ment is impossible. Machine guns can still maintain accurate
fire on fixed lines in these conditions, provided that pre-
parations have been made in daylight.
When a position is to
be taken up by machine guns, arrangements must always be
made to allow sufficient daylight for these preparations, which
require a minimum of about one hour.
The plan of artillery fire and machine-gun fire should be
RSMC
V07794 (171) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

