tments (Sec. 38), and
ad his representatives.
ny, war duties will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
+ i guest not date wither e not a ya diary should hy if by i
War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secrel.
ond to tion de data mist which.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
lich to base future improvements in army training, equipment.
neir formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factua
PILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
perations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops al
ly of mobilisation or
an portant phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
uporcinate command.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
incers and the
listen of ter ranks or tearder and i a tie a she and be not al.
kowes and or animale.
in addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.- Events should be entered up, not in the ever as i and bine, it abe addin they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(* the order or ast retion fate is the prod overed ay til cut openine of
the war diary.
1) Copies
of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or reference
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
A C. diary. "it is entered ed taiy, he etray in and eth the offer detailed to keep it,
that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
rom a war diary is an offence under the Othcial Secrets Acts.
OTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commande
other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical worl
PARA. 3—Omntted
PARA, 4. - In so far as they are applicable, the following points shoald be recorded when
preparing a diary:
6) Important order, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and isued,
(li) Important matters relating to the duties of each brans
( Papa man eating a luring the at (yenty-four hour and present dispostions.
(iv) Copies or important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations
cluding any which n
hey should be includedy have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
(See F.S.R., Voll dianes will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, ete.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
re attached
a on the finition to the War oftie, care being take a that alis appetice.
1) The deplane copy dead to no mat, a bient or it anties it o
Place
Donnington.
the Cover
Month and Year March 1944•
WAR DIARY
POPPERKICENCSUMMARX
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Intormaton
Army Form C. 27
Unit L/ Port. Ordnance Detachment, R.A
Commanding Officer W/S Lieut. B. Reynolds
References to Appendices
1o00.
Ordered under Authority H.f. Estern Command T.P.M. 03462 dated 1 Mar 1944 to
move to 111 Crouwell Road, Peterborough at 1200hrs. MA.
1245..
1 Officer and 16 0.R.'s entrained for Peterborough. 15 cwt. Truck 1/c Cpl.
with 2 relief drivers and carrying M/Cycle and Office equipment proceeded by
2090 9..
1900..
Arrived at 111 Cromwell Road, and found premises consisted of empty shop and
rooms above. Place locked and no one available. O.C. reported to 0. 02 No.1
Sub-Depot, Walton and meal for men at hutted camp occupied by detachment of
76 Ploneer Coy, who provided blankets and key of Crowell Road. M
2100
Took over billet with no lighting or accormodation stores and got detachment
bedded down for night. (th
Contacted 0. 1/o Barracks, A.D.M.S., Laundry Technical Officer and made
arrangements for all fact lities for unit. #
By this date adntnistration of unit completely organised.
The move of the unit and the work involved in organising services for the
VI.HUe8 1626 800,000 11/6
W.H. as.
locuments in your Bulk Or
te you have requested,
nts.
more of your doc
ments - Enquire at
ore
documents
are in use
Desk for full details
