F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
ParA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particula
command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
ind area or sub-area of the L. of C.
ii) Unit commanders.
ii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(v) Offer i/c 2nd Echelon, ficers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and personal
(x) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
The Nor in No que i am it whatre a me diay shed l best to at:
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
to provide data upon which to. Ise object is to furnish a historical record of operations
improvements in army training, equipment,
Tganisation and administration.
1.F. C. i be ente to bedtily, each en ty action a d reen if of appall to, rep it, on,
irom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
ction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(*) Importist os tars, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
ii) Daily locations
locations the cements during the at trenty-four hours and resent dispositions
ji) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
NSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
mportant phases.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
nd the number of other ranks or follot
As regards casualties the names and ranks o
ers and of animals
in certion the needed titson the foll here it of ares, trasport, be.
hould be notec
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viji) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
1, Or Even notice be entered up each day, evenes as aven i weight be the time they
ch day, events (vi)
and (vii) might be added
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation o
outine order or instru
tion issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(* Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(Se F... Vol diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
BETT
Month and Year. February '44.
our
the Spe No. The the time entered should o the time the information or order em
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form G. 21
Unit. 44 Port Ordnance Detachment, R.A.
Commanding Officer.
W/Ideut. E. Reynolds.
Donmineron.
1-29
29.
Iving at "P" Camp, Donnington carrying on Training in Field Works, Fiela
Cooking, Route Marching and Weapon Training. Ll
Received 1 Ford (BR) 15 cwt. 4 x 2 G.S. Truck.
Unit ordered, under authority of H.Q. Western Cormand Teleprint 03445 and
03446, and H.Q. North Wales District Teleprint 13796/Q dated 26 Feb. '44 to
move to 1 Ora-Sub Depot, Sages Lane, Walton, Peterborough, Ah.
1000 Advised 1 Ord-Sub Depot by telegram of time and dete of arrival, it
1730 Teleptone liessage from 0.0. Walton that unit could not be accormodated as
Depot is purely Civilian and has no facilities for Miditary.
Communicated
with R.A.O.C. Mob. Centre and told to await further orders.
2100
Advised by Duty Offloer R.A.0.C. Mob. Centre nove cancelled for 24 hours k.
ocuments in your Bulk Or
ite you have requested
SIU:
more of your doc
ments - Enquire at
ore documents are in use
n Desk for full details
