INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. —1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
VOTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
ept from the first day of embodiment
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
mportant phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
vi) Changes in establishment or strength
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
fficers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C, changes in stores, transport, etc.
v11 Meteorolorical notes..
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they.
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.— Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
route order or mstruction issued curme une period covered Dy the current volume of.
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or reierence.
111) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
r unit. including anv sketches or mans relaune thereto. to sunniement the acconnt.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
nerations furnished in the text of the diary nara. 4 1y above).
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
o appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
based on factual experience
iv) Copies or important and relevant aemi-official letters by commanders of formations,
cluding any which may have been marked "personal (provided the writer consider
hey should be included)
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
mA. is. i is entered up taly, he etraton tale by the oap detaile a keep it,
From E. a diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts
VoTE.— It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commande:
other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
PARA. 3.—Omitted.
PARA. 4. -In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
reparing a clary
Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issuec
• decisions take
rch tables in the case of large units or o
Movements during ther of twenty four hour sa present dispositions.
ot assistance.
li) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
PARA@7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
1) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy old war didiy for the preceding month will
rded on the first day of the
succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H.Q.
nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
1) The duple we copy, plead of to a ta i the vacate The and on ron To
nits will be sent within a period of three months to the officer i/c G.H.Q.
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to records offices at home for safe custody.
the unit concerned.
PEONE NOTE Tie it ence secold be she time the afven in the eat, er reaches
ieu af C. 2118A - indented
or but not received to date.
Instructions rogardian tear Dinies a neWel
My War Diaries mol he
the core, wit toe
Month and Year.July 1944•
Place
Date
Hour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCEXSUMMARX.
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
p'bor..
1-31..
Unit employed in No. 1 Ord. Sub-Depot (Chil) Walton, in general Oranance
work and despatching B.M.P. by road to dispersal points.
Army Form C. 21
Unit 44, Part Cord. DetO.c.
Commanding Officer Lieut. B. Reynolas. B.A.0.0.
References to Appendices
AR DIARIES SECT
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelen
cuments in your Bulk O
e you have requested
more of your doc
lents - Enquire at
re documents
are in us
Desk for full details
