INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.—1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
i) Each branch of the stall in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
11) Unt commanders.
iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NotE A. -In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
7 NoT her queti, hop die wither are, a the diady should by rege by hi.
he War Office, London, S. W.I.
and to provide
data ion wiSh to base
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
organisation and administ
improvements in army training, equipment,
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
petitions Cops per ind at eat indian oint post, fast of top ne
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
vil) Meteoroloccal notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.-
occur, or come to notice.
- Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
1 cody of each held return 1 * 200% and A 71 20u
route of tech felt rection se duins the period overed ay the carte a voltime of
the war carv.
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
(il) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
r unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the
perations furnished in the text of the diary (para, 4, iv above).
A war diary wil be entered ted dat each eration and retention offappendices, ma ps, eti.
is to be noted that the extraction and retention oi appendices. maps. etc
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
VoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
er person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
(i) In deat os tars, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
i May location i the can ontarin the as tent on hour and present dispositions.
i) Important matters relating to the
iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations
ncluding any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer consider
hey should be included).
See PS. Volumein
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
ine chelon, for transmisson to the War conte, are end eat a the fetic...
to the Under Ser
the diaries of unite will be sent "
the Spect NoTE The recrea
Month and Year April 1944.
Date
Mour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Peterborough 1-30
0001
Unit employed in Nol 1 Ordnance Sub-Depot, re-packing major assemblies,
except for 1 day weekly when Regimental Training is carried out.
rit.
Colonel Arnola-Edwards, Inspector Army Ordnance Services inspected the unit
to test efficiency in Military knowledge. After the inspection the detach-
ment was exercised, including Route march, Mela Cooking and minor tactios. A
Unit mobilized for Overseas Service. hA
Received from 38 V.R.D. Norton m/c Solo 500 c.c. W.D. No. 4603991 to
replace Royal Enfield m/c Solo. 350 c.c. withdraw.
14 Port Ord. Det. under command of 21 Aruy Group as and from this date. 'X.
Sheet 1 and LastArmy Form C.
Unit. 4 Port. Ord. Det. R.A.0.C.
Commanding Officer Lieut. E. Reynolds. R.A.0.0.
References to Appendices
WAR DIARIES SECTION
3 - thA: 1944
G. HQ. 2nd Echelon
ocuments in your Bulk O
te you have requested,
nts.
more of your doc
ments - Enquire at
ore documents
are in us
n Desk for full details
