F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.-
-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(ii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.- In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
cept from the first day of embo
NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NoTE C.-Any question of doubt whether annis, to the
it will be referred,
ough the usual channels, to ti
tary should be kept by a uni
inder-Secretary of State (S.D.1)
ind to provide data
PARA. 2.- A war diary which to base future improvements
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
in army trainine, equipuchy
organisation and administration.
To eat it crany to a rade de cucued to made in the eat direct
not ed on ta go an an in the tany a wal a materia a a be rans
ater for the History of the War.
in A C. is Vil is entered up day each entry in tale by the offeretaile, to sep it,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets
and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
reparing a clary
Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issuer
decisions takeu
Movements during the at trenty fourte or and present dispositions.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
cal and climatic.
Clear sketches showilk positious ot troops at
moorant pidses.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
Is regards casualties the names and re not cal
theore and the number of other tauns U
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.— Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA, 5.- Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or reference
iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formatior
or unit, including any sketches or maps!
elating thereto, to supplement the acc
numbered, and each will have a
vating the afor. Referen be
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
iv) Cocidiot in which may rele bed marked ip letter provided the wit to contides
which may have been marked "personal"
provided the writer considers.
hey should be included)
(See F-.SR., Volumenes will conform to the regulations for draing orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
Peterborough 1-31.
Month and Year. Mey., 1944-
LOUI
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Unit employed in No.1 Ordnance Sub-Depot, assisting generally in Ordnance duties
except for 1 day weekly when Unit is Exercised Regimentally including
Range practices with Rifle, LullaG, and Sten Sub-achine Carbine, I.
Shoot y tom 0. 2
Unit 44, Port Ordnance Detachment, R.
Commanding Officer Ideut. E. Reynolds, R,A, 0,C.
References to Appendices
WAR DIARIES SECTION
1 4 JUN 1944.
G. H Q. 2nd Echelon
locuments in your Bulk Or
te you have requested,
STu
more of your doc
nents - Enquire at
ore documents are in use
Desk for full details
