GUNFIRE
final vears of the war when the risks for enemy
air attacks and counter-bombardment had been
drastically reduced it could be acceptable to
deploy the guns very close to each other and
without any camouflage, almost wheel to wheel.
Now, how could the guns be deploved
where they should? Once a deployment had
been advised by a superior commander it was
important to dispatch a reconnaissance team at
once to that area for a detalled reconnaissance
Normal practice in a regiment was allocation
of responsibility for the overall reconnaissance
and coordination of that to be undertaken
for the three batteries to the Second-in-
Command. If a battery was to act independ-
ently it was of course the Commanding Officer
of the battery who had to undertake the recon-
naissance himself
When larger operations were planned with
numerous regiments involved it was important
to provide clear orders to the regiments where
they were expected to deploy and thus where
to reconnoitre. Such initial overall planning
could take place at Corps level but also
divisional level.
A battery reconnaissance was made under
the command of the 'Battery Command Post
Officer' (CPO). He decided where the troops
were to be deployed and where the Battery
Command Post' (BCP) should be located. He
also had to organise the initial local defence. At
the troop position the 'Gun Position Officer' had
to decide the exact position for every gun and
his own "Troop Command Post'
The 'Wagon Lines' was reconnoitred by the
'Battery
Captain
Battery
Commander's
deputy)
and the
'Battery Quarter
Master
Sergeant
What factors had to be taken into account
when reconnoitring a new deployment? Some of
them were these:
The tactical task assigned to the
regiment/battery
The area to be covered by artillery fire.
sometimes maximum and minimum range
Ordered zero line
Crect
Communication opportunities
Prevention of enemy observation of the
deploved guns
Protection against enemy air attacks
Ground digging conditions
• Protection against enemy infantry and
lanks
Iransport roads for supply of ammunition
and other necessities
Availability of space for 'Wagon Lines and
alternative gun positions and suitable road
for their access
Under ideal
conditions reconnaissance and
survey took place in daytime. Sometimes there
was time for other necessary activities such a
digging shelters and gun pits, the laying of
telephone lines etc. March to and deploymen
normally, however, took place when it was dark
The unit could be taken to a nearby hiding place
during the day or direct to the new posinor
during the night. The vehicles of a troop were led
by one of the younger subalterns, the Iroop
Leader
Naturally, the situation was often far from
the ideal. The 2nd-in-command of 112 (Wessex
Field Regiment RA. Major Gilbert Heathcot
(later Brigadier). tells us about the critica.
situation when the 1st Airborne Division should
be relieved at Arnhem in September 1944:
We went into action as far forward as possible
south of the Waal but the Airborne perimeter at
Vosterbeek was well out of ranan 129 Bricade
became involved in fierce battle at Elst on the
main road to Arnhem. 130 Brigade were ther
ordered to advance via the lanes west of this axis
to secure the village of Driel. They set out at first
light on 23 September but even more urgent hac
been the need to get field guns within range of the
Airborne perimeter. My guess is that it was in the
late afternoon of 22 September that Bill Heath
[divisional artillery commander] called me to the
set. I was to set off at once tore a un position
within range of Oosterbeek and Arnhem. 'Bu
Sir, it will be dark within an hour or so?. (In our
formative years, IGs Instructor Gunnery] had
stressed: 'Never recce a gun position in the dark
always disaster next dar') Bill's answer was not
unexpected, it was crisis time. Don't argue, Ge
on with it'. Perhaps been the abrupt
exchange, I failed to ask hand one before up
this route. I collected elements of my Recce Party
and discovered that I would be accompanied by
the CRE [Commandoma be accomers), lin
Evill. Dark was with us very quickly as the narrow
lanes with dykes on story quicky ase progres
slow. To our right the father side made providing
118
PREPARATIONS FOR OPENING OF GUNFIRE
a major and noisy fire-work display with tracer
making its seemingly lazy arcs in the sky [...]
Rain added to the darkness of the night. The site
in this polder country was flat, soggy but
looming, everywhere there seemed to be good
concealment from high hedges and trees. "Got to
start somewhere', I thought: here was a small
farm, with a cellar, do for RHQ; work outwards
from there, on foot, pacing each field, sudden
freeze, who was pacing with me? Into the hedge,
ship a round into the breech of my airborne
carbine... There was at dawn, just time to
correct my most awful errors before the guns
arrived. The hedges and trees were now far less
protective; we could clearly see Arnhem which
made it as clear that once guns were in action, we
would become an attractive target. Rarely, had
gunpits been dug deeper or more quickly. 134
Once the guns had arrived at the new
battery deployment area a hectic work followed
to get the unit ready for firing. The guns were to
be oriented with parallel barrels along the zero
line and 'aiming posts', or 'aiming parallelo-
scopes, were to be placed in the vicinity of the
gun to get it ready. Careful control of this was
made to avoid erroneous shooting. A first-hand
stock of ammunition was placed close to the gun
At the 'troop command posts' and the
battery command post' the artillery board was
prepared for firing within the ordered area
Range tables, various forms, logarithm tables,
slide rules etcetera were brought out for use
Correction of the Moment was to be calculated
when 'meteor data had been provided as were
other corrections to be used for the coming gun
laying
Communication between the command
posts and the guns had to be prepared as well.
This could be done with the establishment of a
simple 'tannoy' system, which can be seen on
Fig. 4-3 (the 25-pounder with muzzle brake).
When the war commenced such systems
were not available in large numbers. The alter-
native was to give the guns the laying data by
loud voice and a megaphone. As regards more
comprehensive data for the guns, such as those
required for the execution of extensive fire plans.
the data could be given in writing by means
of a Gun Programme. This was particularly
necessary when large barrages were to be fired
over manv hours
Much of the preparations followed strict
procedures and had been rehearsed many times.
It was therefore not amazing that a troop could
report ready for fire within five minutes after the
arrival of the first vehicle
As soon as the guns had reported ready for
fire other activities followed. At first the local
defence must be prepared to protect the guns
and command posts against enemv attacks. This
could include readiness to use the hand-held
PIAT (Fig. 11-2). Of high priority was the
personal protection. All the staff should have
Fig. 11-2 Local defence had to be orcanised around the deployment. It could include barbed wire fence, alarm
systems, slit trenches, fox holes etcetera but also positions for anti-aircraft and anti-tank weapons, here the light
PIAT (RAHT)
11 O1
