TWILIGHT - WAR AND MOBILISATION
GUNFIRE
pracuce, 1.e. a whole year after mobilisation.49
The Territorial Army grew from 54 Field
Regiments in May 1938 to more than 100 in
September 1939, a unique rearmament process,
albeit it would take much time until all units were
ready for war. There were also nine Medium
Kegiments and fourteen Heavy Regiments. 50
Here, it should be observed that the Territorial
Army also mobilised a large number of Anti-
Aircraft Regiments as well as some Anti-Tank
Regiments, all of which belonged to the Royal
Arullery 51
lo war with obsolete guns
The organisational structure of the Royal Artillery
at that time was a legacy from the Great War:
• Army artillery
• Corps artillery
• Division artillery
There were a number of Mountain units as well,
particularly in India. No artillery units were per-
manently attached to formations below the level
of division. At the lower levels only mortars were
permanently included.
The first two levels included mostly all
Medium and Heavy Regiments, the use of which
was for counter-battery fire and fire against
other types of target in depth, but also for rein-
forcement of divisional artillery. At these highest
levels, regiments called Army Field Regiments
(AFR) could also exist to some extent. Divi-
sional artillery had as their main task to support
its own division, but could also be used for con-
centrations of fire across the boundaries of their
division. The grouping of batteries and troops
will be discussed later. First, let us have a look at
the guns available when the Second World War
commenced in 1939
It may be recalled that the development of
new field
guns went on during the period
between the wars, but they were not ready when
the war commenced. The formations had to use
the vintage guns from the Great War, albeit mod-
ernised. With the motorisation in 1938-1939, the
old wooden, iron-clad wheels had been replaced
by pneumatic tyres that had increased mobility
Some guns of the stock of modernised old guns
are seen in Fig. 3-1
The much-awaited standardisation of field
guns for the divisional artillery was not vet in
place. Older guns and howitzers were to be
Fig. 3-1 The gun legacy - The British artillery went
to war with a set of obsolete guns. Here are the
most commonly used light guns. Many 18-
pounder Mark IVP guns were modernised before
the war with a new barrel to be called 18/25
pounders or 25-pdr Mark I.
QF 18-pdr Gun Mark IIP (RAHT)
QF 18-pdr Gun Mark IVP (RAHT)
3.7-inch Howitzer (RAHT)
QF 4.5-inch Howitzer (RAHT)
replaced by the new 25-pounder gun, but these
were not yet in production. Only prototypes had
been manufactured. A large number of a mod-
ernised 18-pounder in versions Mark IV and
Mark V had been manufactured before the war
This gun had also been modernised with a new
barrel lined for 25-pound ammunition besides
pneumatic tyres. The piece was, as mentioned,
called 'QF 25-pounder Mark I' or for short the
'18/25-pounder'
Territorial regiments had still to stick to the
18-pounder. In these regiments the old 4.5-inch
howitzers were also still in use, cf. Fig. 3-1.
Mountain Regiments were equipped with
the old 3.7-inch pack howitzer, which could be
dismantled for transport by means of mules in
mountainous terrain without roads. Modernised
version with pneumatic rubber tyres were later
supplied; with or without a gun shield for
protection
It should be observed that guns and how-
itzers were manufactured in many versions
Guns with different barrels were called Mark I,
Mark II, etc. The same for different carriages
e.g. Mark I, Mark II. As an example it can be
mentioned that the 18-pounders still in use when
the war commenced had different modernised
carriages given the designations Mark II, Mark
III, Mark IV and Mark V. When reequipped with
pneumatic wheels a 'P' was added, i.e. Mark IVP.
This reflects the new requirements as regards
mobility, but also regarding firing range and thus
elevation
The plethora of gun versions makes it
difficult to summarise technical data for a par-
ticular type of gun. The weight differs between
versions, as does firing range. Performance data
are valid only under nominal weather conditions,
for a specified ammunition type, etc. In the
tables that follow, data can be interpreted as a
correct in order of magnitude, but not necessar-
lly being exact 52 First we have in Table 3-1 data
for light field guns
Before leaving the light guns we will forestall
the coming presentation of the Battle of France
in 1940 (Chapter 16). When the British Expedi-
tionary Force was evacuated from Dunkirk late
in May 1940 and during the first days in June
60-70 per cent of the entire stock of guns of the
Royal Artillery was lost. Facing the threat of an
imminent German invasion of the British Isles
Britain made the extraordinary decision to lease
from United States some 900 guns of the famous
Table 3-1. Gun data - light guns
Calibre
Weiaht
Shell weight
1,400
18-pounder gun
18/25-pounder qun
(QF 25-pdr Mark I1
4.5-inch howitzer
3.7-inch pack howitzer
Max. range
9.000
10.800
6.001
4. UUn-s san
French design, the 'soixante-quinze'. 53 This
75-mm gun was designed already in 1896 and
was considered to be one of the best in the Great
War. Thanks to this, the Americans had bought
a large number at the end of the war. There was
no use of them after the war, so they were placed
in warehouses and well greased for protection
against rust. Although they were absolutely
obsolete, they filled well a need in Britain in 1940
for a temporary substitute for the lost guns.
when the defence against invasion was to be
organised after Dunkirk. They were good for
basic training of all the new gunners. But the
reception of the guns differed. Johnny Walker
tells us of his experiences:
I was at first placed at a provisional mortuary
where we had to take care of the victims from
Dunkirk. It was the first time I came in touch with
killed soldiers [... it was to become many more
occasions later on in the war. But it was here that
I for the first time came across the light French
gun. After extensive cleaning we were to make
test firing out into the Channel. Excitement was
great to all, but it did not result in a real bang. But
more like a weak crack. The projectile landed in
the middle of Dover! A bit embarrassing, but
such things can happen in war. It was decided
that we should fire another round. The sam
result! After that 'cease fire' and we never were to
fire the gun again."4
Other gunners however found the gun much
more useful. 136 Field Regiment RA received
the gun in August 1940:
A gunner without a gun is like a dog without a
tail: with eleven months of the war already
