GUNFIRE
Fig. 11-8 A Forward Observation Officer always tried to find a place with best possible view over the target
terrain he had to fire at, here the attic of a house. As he was a valuable target for snipers he and his party had to
act very carefully and not exposing themselves carelessly towards the enemy lines. It was also important for him
to secure good communication by means of radio or telephone line with the infantry or armoured unit that he
was to support with artillery fire (Drawing by J.T. Kenney/RAHT)
Once the observation party had established
itself at the selected position, fire preparations
Anyway, it was a well-honoured tradition in
followed. First the exact coordinates of the
the Royal Artillery to prepare informative
positions had to be determined. The OPO was to
panorama sketches and instructions were quite
'visualise' the firing zero line/direction of his guns
elaborated, 138 Major General Jack Parham was
and to 'fix' it against some easily visible terrain
very talented in making sketches and used
objects. Then he
was
expected to
draw
panorama sketches throughout his career, not
panorama sketch over the area to be observed.
only such drawn at observation posts.
Again, this had been included in his basic training
As the OPO must be piron posts direct fire
and he knew that the best start was to draw the
not only from his own gunprepared to dimertis
horizon and then continue with terrain forma-
others as well, he had to determine the coordinates
tions and typical objects between his position and
of potential targets, this in addition to the primary
the horizon. He made notes of firing bearings to
task, which was indicating the firing line of his own
potential targets, the coordinates of which he also
guns. This was called Silent Registration.
determined and inserted. In order to further
An example of a panorama sketch made at an
enhance the panorama he could mark deviations
observation post in Burma is seen in Fig. 11-9. It
of, say, 2°, 4° or 8º from the zero line and also try
is drawn on the backside of a paper form.
to identify them in the terrain ahead.
If time was available, preparations for target
Although it was pretty well prescribed in
engagement could be done by fire ranging
training manuals how to make such a panorama,
various potential targets or suitable terram
it was stated that no 'artistic excesses' should be
objecte
Such ranging was completed by
done. There are, however, many panorama
recording them with a number and - at the
sketches done with much talent and that have a
clear artistic value. Even nice water-coloured
command posts - recording date with or without
the 'Correction of Moment'.
sketches can sometimes be found. Obviously the
All preparations done would facilitate quick
OPO had had plenty of time to make it, instead
of being engaged by fire observation duties.
action when fire was reque selled face supported
unit, either this was requested by the suping ed
fire for effect could id need further a wie goi
PREPARATIONS FOR OPENING OF GUNFIRE
return to this subject later.
The OPOs and their assistants had a
dangerous job and it was important to be
extremely careful as to not expose oneself to
enemy fire. An experienced officer shared his ex-
perience from Italy in this respect:139
Do not wear a tie at the OP, or walk about with
binoculars round your neck. Snipers are on look-
out for such people - and they seldom miss if you
are careless.
Another piece of advice was:
Be very careful of ALL wireless aerials at the OP
- whether a vehicle set or a No. 18 or No. 38 set.
Aerials are picked out quite easily. On vehicles -
bend them back and tie them with string.
A regimental commander in Italy found good
reasons for writing down a number of 'DOs and
DONTs for Op Officers', the introduction was:
Undue exposure and carelessness do not show
bravery - they show that you are a bloody fool.
You may get away with it for days and then find
that just when observation is vital the Boche will
neutralise your OP.140
I have now discussed which preparations for
firing that were made in more stationary situa-
tions. In mobile operations there would not be
ume for achieving evervthing. Improvisations
were needed and it
was important that
the artillery officer, now often called Forward
Observation Officer
(FOO), followed
commander of the supported unit close to him
in order to meet his requests for fire without
undue delay. His ability in map reading was then
critical as was the ability of accompanying sig-
nallers to keep radio communication open. The
observation party's duties were particularly chal-
lenging when an advancing armour unit needed
support from the gunners.
This required
transport in a tank or a half-track so as to keep
up during the fast advance.
Other preparations before opening fire
We have already discussed the importance of
efficient survey as a necessary basis for concen-
tration of accurate artillery fire from many guns.
This should, however, not prevent an earlier en-
gagement based on
as good
data as then
PALIPANKe
Fig. 11-9 A Forward Observation Officer always tried
to find a place with best possible view over the targe
terrain he had to fire at, here the attic of a house. As
he was a valuable target for snipers he and his partv
had to act very carefully and not exposing themselves
carelessly towards the enemy lines. It was also
important for him to secure good communication by
means of radio or telephone line with the infantry or
armoured unit that he was to support with artillery fire
(Drawing by J.T. Kenney/RAHT)
available. An exception might be a situation
where a huge concentration was to be fired with
surprise without previous ranging. This should
not be done without appropriate survey data.
As already discussed, establishing telephone
and radio communication for the whole regi-
mental and divisional areas was always given
high priority as well.
Normally the batteries brought a sufficient
first-hand stock of ammunition loaded on their
own vehicles. But when large operations required
intensive firing, maybe over several days, this
stock had to be complemented with extra am-
munition. As we will see in Part 3 of the book, it
could be required to store some 500-600 shells
at each gun position. The RASC might take a
whole week to deliver the stockpile of ammuni-
ton because most driving would be done at
night with minimal convoy lights.
We have now looked at the 'system indirect
fire' and how its different sub-functions were
designed and were supposed to be established
before firing for effect commenced. Next, we
will review the different tactical procedures and
techniques that were applied. in particular
during the second half of the war. Ranging is the
first procedure to have a look at, this in the next
Chapter.
