GUNFIRE
14th Army with Slim as its commander. 468 The
army was to comprise two British-Indian Corps
to which two British infantry divisions from West
Africa and East Africa were allotted. Strong air
forces were to be made available for cooperation
with the ground forces. The plans also called for
air supply, not least of artillery ammunition, to
large independent units.
The Japanese had in 1943 systematically
increased their forces in Burma. These were not
intended for an invasion of India, but to defend
Burma when the expected allied offensive came.
One part of their plan was, however, to attack
northwards into Assam and capture Imphal.
Kohima and end of the railway from central
India, Daipur. Large British stores were there
tempting objectives. If they were to succeed, the
allied lines of supply would be much hampered,
as would the supply lines to Chiang-Kai-Shek's
armies. The Japanese offensive was planned to
start in February 1944, which was the same time
as the allied planned to launch their offensive.
None of the parties knew about this coincidence,
however
A much discussed operational concept,
being part of the allied strategy, was air-landings
of large units behind the Japanese lines, this in
accordance with ideas pursued by the eccentric
Major General Orde Wingate who had gained
the attention of Churchill when bypassing his
superior commanders,
Slim amongst them
Churchill was attracted by the ideas presented
by the young general, whom he saw as a new
"Lawrence of Arabia'.
Wingate had in 1943 commanded a large
force that moved on the ground behind the
Japanese lines. His Chindits ambushed the
Japanese
and carried
other
lnee
operation. After heavy losses, they returned the
same way they had come. Now, in 1944, Wingate
planned to land several special brigades
by
aircraft and gliders, organised as Columns. He
planned to establish a number of strong points
with these units, which were to be supplied from
the air. From these positions, he planned to
undertake
major
attacks on
the apanese
positions and rear supply lines. Four artillery
troops, each with four guns, were allotted for the
protection of the strong points
It is not possible within the scope of this
book to make detailed presentations of the hard
and large-scale battles, which both parties
commenced in February 1944.
The Allies
obtained the upper hand gradually and would
re-capture Burma a bit more than a year later.
Slim's analysis of what was required and his
masterly conducting of the operations are worth
a separate study. It was Generalship of the
highest class. Worthwhile studying are also the
huge logistic challenges facing Slim's army and
how the supply of it could be secured.
Nowhere in this war were the Engineers/
Sappers exposed to such difficult tasks as here in
Burma. It was a matter of road construction in
the most difficult terrain and construction of
numerous bridges. They had to arrange crossings
of the large, wide rivers for the huge forces
engaged as well. Lack of material from home did
not make it easier and local solutions had to be
devised. As an example, Fig. 23-2 illustrates how
a mass of rafts was arranged for transporting
guns and vehicles across one of the large rivers.
How the Engineers/Sappers solved all their
problems with technical skill, creativity and, not
the least, ability to adapt to the adverse climate
and terrain conditions
prevailing in Burma
cannot but be admired, and would of course
deserve a closer study.
The offensive from the north towards
Rangoon followed about the same routes as had
been used in the retreat 1942. The capture of the
Fig. 23-2 Crossing the major rivers in Burma required
large stocks of material and equipment, which if not
supplied from outside, had to be manufactured dose
to the battlefield. The sappers of 14 Army became
experts on improvisations. Besides building roads and
bridges they also manufactured numerous rafts such
as this one loaded with a 25-pounder and a Jeep
which is to cross River Chindwin (RAHT)
FROM DEFEAT TO SUCCESS - BURMA
city Mandalay and the junction Meiktila, so
important for the Japanese supply lines, were
spectacular achievements of the operation. At
the beginning of May 1945, Rangoon was re-
captured by forces that were landed from the sea
and reinforced by the airlanding of a Gurkha
parachute battalion near the city. The forces
advancing from the north were not far away.
We will now close this superficial visit to this
special theatre of war by having a brief look at
the special conditions facing the artillery in
Burma and how the gunners met the challenges
and how the resources were used. 469
The many artillery problems in Burma
Divisional artillery
After completion of the overall rearmament in
Britain, the availability of guns for divisional
artillery was generally good. The firepower of the
25-pounder shell and the gun's fairly long range
were much needed. A problem in Burma was the
hilly terrain and the lack of roads. The 25-
pounder with its towing 'Quad' was often too
wide for the narrow pathways and the engine of
the Quad too weak
An innovative gun mechanic faced the
problem and equipped the gun with a shorter
wheel axle with attached Jeep wheels. The pivot
plate was removed, and sometimes also the
shield. By this arrangement the gun became
lighter and easier to manhandle.
Another
advantage was that it could be towed by lighter
vehicles, for instance one or two jeeps. The
modified version was called 25-pounder Jury
Axle'. Later the arrangement
was further
improved and officially approved (Fig. 4-3) 470
A useful complement was the good old 3.7-
inch mountain howitzer. There were plenty of
them available in India. It had been modernised
with pneumatic wheels and was easy to tow after
a jeep and could in road-less terrain be carried
by mules. The relatively high trajectory was an
advantage in the hilly jungle terrain in Burma,
where indirect fire with flat trajectory guns was
not possible (Fig. 23-3)
The good accuracy of the
gun wasan
advantage also when fire very close to own
troops, say 10-50m. was required. The skill on
the part of the Japanese to infiltrate and silently
advance through the junele to surprise their
opponents made the need for this type of fire
quite common.
The 3-inch mortar had similar characteris-
tics. It was primarily an infantry support
weapon, but in Burma it was used also as a
weapon to complement the artillery. The very
limited threat for tank attacks made it possible to
use gunners of anti-tank regiments to man
mortar units.
Reinforcing artillery
This was the great deficiency area. The 14th
Army had never more than three medium
regiments in Burma. They were armed with 5.5-
inch guns. Just a few old 6-inch howitzers were
also avallable. The latter had a good steep trajec-
tory and proved more technically reliable than
the new gun. The former got a bad reputation
due to its technical deficiencies and poor ammu-
nition. Maybe the gun was not adapted particu-
larly well to the wet and hot climate of Burma.
Heavy regiments were completely missing.
Only a few old 7.2-inch howitzers had been
provided. But they were used more on a single
basis and were manned by surplus gunners from
anti-aircraft regiments.
Organisational adaptations
Just before the final great offensive in 1944, the
artillery organisation was changed in order to get
it better prepared for the tactical requirements
and terrain conditions. This was a matter only
for the divisional artillery. As a complement to
the usual allotment of three field regiments per
Fig. 23-3 In the Burma campaign the old 3.7-inch
mountain howitzer proved to be an efficient weapon
in the hilly jungle terrain. Here the firing of a battery is
watched by the American General Dan Sultan on visit
to 36 British Infantry Division (RAHT)
349
