GUNFIRE
Before leaving the nineteenth century, we
will notice a special formal legacy which
survived the Second World War and still is in use
and much respected
king; when a queen the design is as it is today. It
may be added also that the Royal Horse Artillery
within the Royal Artillery has its own cap badge.
Furthermore, the fact that the guns always are
the Regiment's Colour should be observed.
Ubique - Quo Fas Et Gloria Ducunt
Certainly the Regiment has been standing up
The British Army had, as was the case in most
to its first motto during the past three hundred
armies, honoured important battle victories on
or more years, and the Second World War was
banners and standards. The problem arose when
definitely no exception.
formations like the RA were continually fighting
wars, albeit these were small-scale wars. Many of
these gave reasons for proud remembrance.
How to pay tribute to all these victories and
proof of extraordinary gallantry? After all, there
was not much room on flags and standards for
this. This Gordian knot was resolved by royal
initiative in 1833, when William IV decided to
grant the Royal Artillery the right to bear the
motto Ubique, which means 'Everywhere' in
Latin, as replacement for all previous Battle
honours. A second motto, Ouo Fas Et Gloria
Ducunt, which means 'Whither right and honour
lead' was granted too by the king. The two
combined over and below a gun constitutes the
regiment's Coat of Arms, which is much used,
e.g. as a cap badge. The present design is from
1902 (the gun is a 9-pounder from 1871). Fig.
1-5 illustrates the badge with its proud mottos.
It should be observed that the royal crown is as
shown in the illustration when the monarch 1s a
Fig. 1-5 The Coat of Arms of Royal Regiment of
Artillery was granted by HM King William IV in 1833.
It was intended to replace victory names on standards
and flags. It is used in many contexts including as a
cap badge. Its motto 'Ubique - Quo Fas Et Gloria
Ducunt' means 'Everywhere - Whither Right and
Glory Lead'. The guns are the Colours of the
regiment (RAHT)
2. The Period up to the Second World War
The great wars and the next paradigm shift
The introduction of gunpowder as propellant can
be regarded as a paradigm shift. The first years of
the twentieth century would see changes emerge.
For Britain the Boer War 1899-1902 became
the first modern' large-scale war. Here the British
had to face a strong, well-equipped and mobile
enemy, who had access to more long-range firing
artillery than they possessed themselves. The
Boers had acquired such modern guns, which
also had higher fire intensity, based on German
technology. The British came to the battlefield
with guns, although rifled and breech-loaded, that
could not match those of their opponent in terms
of range and fire intensity. The traditional doctrine
calling for deployment of the guns close behind
the infantry, and sometimes in front of those to
be supported, did not work. Direct fire at the
enemy's artillery
and infantry implied an
unacceptable exposure, which caused great losses.
To this can be added that the Boers had more
modern infantry weapons, which they could use
from hidden positions, at longer ranges.
The situation forced the British to withdraw
their guns to
positions
where they were
sheltered, and from which a kind of simplified
indirect fire was applied. As the technical means
for indirect fire had not been introduced, they
had to improvise. A fire observer could, for
instance, be placed not far from the guns at the
crest of a ridge or a hill, where he could see the
target. He directed the fire by shouting changes
regarding the gun laying to the gun detachments.
A provisional use of aiming markers was used to
refer to the direction of the target.
Indirect fire had been discussed among gun
manufacturers and military users for quite some
time. Germany had already come far on this when
the new century came and had in use new sights
for indirect fire already in 1892. In Britain, however,
it was difficult to get acceptance for the new
technology. Captain C.D. Guinness analysed in an
article 1897 the advantages and disadvantages of
indirect fire and concluded that the British artillery
Should continue with direct fire. He accepted,
however, that one should try to avoid too exposed
deployments. He concluded: [...] Indirect fire was
contrary to the spirit of the Royal Artillery's sense
of sportsmanship. 27
The Boer War initiated, however, a quick
development of new guns to meet the new
challenges. The need for this had also become
obvious during the war between Russia and
Japan 1904-1905. Just in time for the First
World War a new modern 13-pounder gun had
been introduced for Royal Horse Artillery, and
an 18-pounder for Royal Field Artillery. A new
4.5-inch howitzer was also developed, as was a
new medium gun, the 60-pounder. Incidentally,
we may here notice that the British used different
systems for denomination of their artillery
pieces. Sometimes the denomination was based
on the weight of the projectile to be fired by the
gun, sometimes on the calibre in inches, the
latter for howitzers predominantly.
The first gun sight for indirect fire came in
1913, 1.e. more than 20 vears later than the first
German sight had emerged.
The Mountain Artillery formations that
existed, in particular in India, had towards the end
of the nineteenth century been equipped with the
lamous L.J-inch (63.s-mm) gun. the screw oun
well known from a famous poem by Rudyard
Kipling. This was later replaced at the beginning
of the twentieth century by modernised 2.75-inch
(70-mm) mountain guns and eventually with the
3.7-inch howitzer (94-mm)
With the change to 'indirect fire' as the
Drimary
task of the artillerv. onbortuniues
emerged for an earlier unknown concentration
of firepower across large areas
and at long
distances. Almost all 'corners' of the battlefield
could now be reached, not only the nearest
enemy infantry lines and the artillery deployed
just behind. This meant a real paradigm shift.
Bailey (2004) writes:28
Indirect fire had been used in siege warfare for
centuries, but its use on the battlefield was the most
imnortant concentual and technical innovation in
over five hundred years of artillery practice.
The new technolooy required a change of organ-
