GUNFIRE
support of the attacking units (Close Air
Support). Extensive preparations with special
liaison detachments, radio equipment etc., had
been planned in order to faciltate quick and
efficient support. 429
We must note finally that a huge operation
like Operation Plunder could not be executed
unless much of training had been included in all
the preparations. Training of the drivers of am-
phibious vehicles
was
important, as
were
exercises on loading and unloading of the
vehicles. Construction of ferries and training of
loading and unloading of vehicles on board these
are other examples of what was needed.
The attacking units had also to rehearse in
full strength including attached resources
Special
weeklong
brigade
exercises
were
organised for all participating brigades. These
took place as crossings of river Meuse, one
exercise in daytime and one similar during the
night. 430
As regards the units of XII Corps, there was
no problem finding time for exercises, but for
those of XXX Corps, preparations were much
more hectic. By taking advantage of the plans of
the other Corps, it was possible, however, to get
ready in time. And the fact that it was important
with all the exercises and other training efforts is
shown by a statement made by the commander
of one of the units once it had crossed river
Rhine: 'During the exercises everything went
wrong, when the real crossing was made every-
thing was perfectly done.
All marching to the final deployment areas
Fig. 22-6 Many searchlight detachments deployed in
several lines parallel with the river were used to
create artificial light over the battlefield. Rocket
beams and tracer fire from anti-aircraft guns also gave
quidance as regards correct direction of attacks
were made in the dark as was planned for the
initial crossings. Artificial moonlight had to be
arranged along the river and further backwards
to make it easier for the attackers, 'movement
light'.
This was a task given to searchlight
batteries of the Royal Artillery (Fig. 22-6).
Within the XII Corps section a line of
searchlights was established around 3km west of
the river and another one around 7km west from
it. Searchlight batteries were used in a similar
way in support of XXX Corps. Even further to
the north, searchlights were used for purposes of
deception.
Artillery planning initially concentrated
at Corps headquarters
In the early planning stages, the need for artillery
was analysed at the headquarters of the 21st
Army Group and the 2nd Army, in particular in
relation to the planned role of XII Corps and the
XVIII US Airborne Corps. It was obvious, that
a massive backing of both Corps was essential.
A painful lesson from Operation Market Garden
was that air-landing troops must have access to
much more artillery than the limited own
resources, which were an organisational part of
such formations. In the 6th Airborne Division
only one light regiment with twenty-four 75-mm
air-landing howitzers was available, as we know
(an American airborne division could at best
bring four battalions each with twelve guns to the
battlefield).
This might be compared with the armament
of an ordinary infantry division, which was three
regiments, i.e. in total 72 guns. This artillery
force was often reinforced in battle by one or
several field regiments as well as by medium and
heavy regiments from army artillery groups
(AGRAs).
Many changes of artillery grouping were
made in February and March 1945. This was a
consequence of Operation Veritable, which was
not completed until 10 March. The uncertainty
as to whether one or two British Corps were to
be engaged simultaneously of course had an
impact on the planning. To this must be added
uncertainty
regarding the
number of
airborne divisions to be engaged; would it be
one, two or three?
At the beginning of March, the artillery
Order of Battle for XII Corps was eventually
fixed. 431
soon also the one for XXX Corps.
At the disposal of the artillery commander
322
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
of XII Corps, Brigadier William Heath, a massive
artillery force was allotted. This was about the
double size of the normal artillery strength of a
British Corps. The Order of Battle is presented
in detail in Appendix 6. In this neither the anti-
tank nor anti-aircraft resources not used for
ground roles have been included, irrespective of
the fact that these also were under his command.
We can summarise the artillery strength as
follows.
• 15 field regiments (25-pounders)
1 mountain regiment (3.7-inch mountain
howitzers)
• 10 medium regiments (4.5-inch guns and
5-5-inch gun-howitzers)
• 2 heavy regiments (7.2-inch howitzers and
155-mm guns,
3 American artillery battalions (155-mm
pieces)
1 Super Heavy Regiment (8-inch and
240-mm howitzers)
2 heavy anti-aircraft regiments in ground
role (3.7-inch guns)
It should be noted that out of all medium
regiments only one still had 4.5-inch guns
Standardisation to 5.5-inch guns (gun-howitzers)
for medium regiments was now almost completed.
These formations, with a total of 640 guns,
came from the regiments of participating
divisions and from three army artillery groups,
3 AGRA, 8 AGRA and 9 AGRA. The latter
groups had medium, heavy and super heavy for-
mations but also a few army field regiments.
From one of the independent
armoured
brigades, 4 Armoured Brigade, came 4 Field
Regiment RHA which was armed with SP guns.
This regiment was planned to be the first to be
fried acros the river. It had been assigned the
tole to provide support for the as Airborne
Division. The regiment was specially trained for
this role and was given a forward deployment
area close to the river.
In support of XXX Corps and the Canadian
origade attached to it, a large artillery force was
also allotted. This force was planned to be large
enough to support the enlargement of the initial
bridgehead to accommodate one, later
divisions beside each other; eventually large
enough for three divisions. From this enlarged
bridgchead, the eventual breakout was to take
In this case, the artillery came from
participating divisions and two army artillery
groups, 4 AGRA and 5 AGRA. Significant
resources from the Il Canadian Corps in the
north were also needed in addition to these. The
Order of Battle for XXX Corps is presented in
Appendix 7. From this we can summarise the
resources made available for the Corps artillery
commander, Brigadier S.B. Rawlins: 432
16 field regiments, of which 3 were
Canadian
1 mountain battery
11 medium regiments, of which 2 were
Canadian
4 heavy regiments, of which 2 were
Canadian
3 heavy anti-aircraft regiments (only a few
batteries for a ground role)
In the background, a Super Heavy Regiment
was deployed as an additional resource, if
required.
This meant that this Corps was to be
supported by 676 guns, hence somewhat more
than those of XII Corps.
By these allotments, the 21st Army Group
had assembled more than 1,300 guns to support
the attacks by the two Corps across river Rhine,
1.e.
more
artillery than the allotment for
Operation Veritable. A huge artillery resource
was furthermore available for reinforcement
from other Corps further back should it be
required.
The deployment areas adopted immediately
before the attacks, and which had been prepared
during the nights of the previous week, are
schematically illustrated on Map 22-4. We can
see that this large artillery force was squeezed
into an area 6-10km deep and 30km wide. A
large stock of ammunition was dumped at each
gun position
After deployment of the guns, their vehicles
were taken to 'Wagon Lines' a few kilometres
backwards, most of them south of Kevelaer.
For survey, establishment of sound range
bases and observation bases, the resources of the
survey
regiment of XII Corps, 7 Survey
Regiment RA, were reinforced by a battery from
10 Survey Regiment RA, which normally
supported VIII Corps. The resources of XXX
Corps, 4 Survey Regiment RA, were reinforced
in the same way by a battery from the same
323
