GUNFIRE
took part in the battle against Napoleon; The
Swedish Army was member of the Northern
Allance of four armies under command of the
Swedish Crown Prince Karl Johan (former
French Marshal Bernadotte)'
From other sources we know that the unit
was 2 Rocket Troop Royal Horse Artillery and
not a complete brigade. The Troop was the only
British unit taking part in the Battle of Leipzig.
The fact that it actually was there may seem a bit
strange, as the British Army under the Duke of
Wellington fought against the French on the
Iberian Peninsula. The explanation is said to be
that the Duke did not like rockets: I do not want
to bring cities into flames. I cannot see any other
use of rockets'. Also later in 1815 at Waterloo he
demonstrated his sceptical view on the use of
rocket artillerv.
Rockets had been used before 1800, e.g. in
India, but the one who developed the technology
and organised field units in England around the
period of the Napoleon wars was Sir William
Congreve. He developed a set of rockets with
different weights for firing at ranges of 2-3km,
ie. much longer than the range of the guns of
that time. Congreve organised the rocket artillery
into brigades, which in their turn comprised a
number of Troops, all eager to get involved in
the war against Napoleon
Upon the Duke's
dismissal, 2 Rocket Troop was sent to Northern
Germany and became attached to the Swedish
Army. The unit went into action after necessary
adaptations and training, foremost at the Battle
at Leipzig. It is said that the painting reproduced
in Fig. 1-1 illustrates the Troop in action there.
During the battle the Troop
Commander
Captain Bogue was killed and his grave is at
Paunsdorf just outside Leipzig. The memory of
his and the Troop's magnificent participation in
the battle is held in highest esteem in Britain.
A fact less observed is that the British rocket
artillery accompanied the Swedish Army after
the battle of Leipzig and took part also in the
Swedish siege of the Danes at Glücksberg in
December 1813 before returning to Britain in
January 1814. The Crown Prince appreciated
the contribution of the British gunners in the
battles and awarded Lieutenant Strangways, who
nominated
commander
after Captain
Bougue had been killed, a golden medal for
gallantry in the field and also silver medals to a
few other British gunners. After Strangways
Lieutenant Wright took command of the Rocket
Troop and he too was awarded a gold medal
before the Swedish-British cooperation ceased.?
After having heard the answer given by
Churchill, Montgomery turned to his artillery
chief and asked him to check as to whether any
artillery formation in 21st Army Group was
holding an honour title in commemoration of the
battle of Leipzig and the role of the Rocket
Troop in it. It was later found that the bearer of
the tradition in this case was 'O' Battery The
Rocket Troop) Royal Horse Artillery. However,
this battery was not in the vicinity at the time. It
was part of a Field Regiment fighting in Italy.
The discussion is a good illustration of the
importance of traditions in the British Army, not
least in the Royal Artillery.
The memory of the rocket gunners today is
the responsibility of 'O'/Headquarters Battery
(The Rocket Troop) 1st Regiment Royal Horse
Artillery. A photograph of the painting here
reproduced, as Fig. 1-1 was kindly put at my
disposal in 2005 by the then Battery Commander
Major Jon W. McCleery. The painting is placed
at the Officers' Mess, where a dinner is organised
every year in October in commemoration of the
Rocket Troop and its participation a the batte
at Leipzig in October 1813.4
In order to get a broader perspective on the
history of British Artillery and its development
as regards organisation, equipment, tactics, etc,
we will take a historical journey, through the
centuries up to 1939; and we start long before
the nineteenth century.
The Black Prince takes to the guns
Different types of weapon had been used in
battles through the centuries, among them bows
and arrows and heavier equipment based on
mechanical energy to throw stones and other
types
of projectile.
hese
could include
incendiary projectiles. Amongst battles much
written about where such equipment was used
is the Battle at Hastings in 1066 when William
the Conqueror defeated the Anglo-Saxons under
Harold
Godwinson.
•ne
tamous
Bayeux
tapestry shows how this was done.
It would take a long time until chemical
energy had replaced mechanical energy as the
driving force for throwing proictiles against the
enemy. Exactly when gunpowder came to use is
uncertain, and it is still in debate. It is, however,
confirmed through literature and paintings that
a kind of gun was used during the first decades
THE PERIOD BEFORE THE FIRST WORLD WAR
of the fourteenth century. The Navy's battle
against the French Navy in 1340 1s mentioned
in British military literature as one of the earliest
battles where guns were used. There are also
painuings of guns in England dated as early as
1326.5
As to field artillery, there is a place and a year
that most often references are made to in the
literature and this is Crécy 1346. One can state
that it was here that the British artillery emerged
as a lasting force of power to determine the
outcome of battles. The son of Edward III, the
Black Prince, won a decisive victory over a
superior French force. He managed to accomplish
this thanks to a skilful use of archers and artillery.
Maybe it can be stated that the paradigm shift
from mechanical to chemical propellant, then
gunpowder, was completed in Europe.
A permanent artillery organisation
Although guns were taken into operation during
the fourteenth century, it would take a long time
before artillery received a more permanent
organisation in Britain. This happened first in
1486, when Henry
VII created a special
authority, Master of the Ordnance, appointed
artillery commander and employed twelve paid
gunners. They were located at the Tower of
London. Later the organisation was extended
With a number of Master Gunners positioned at
various castles and citadels. They were to take
care of the equipment when no war was taking
place. Furthermore, they
were also made
responsible for the training of gunners and
recurrent exercises. The gunners were civilians
who against payment were called in to serve the
guns. This artillery was organised in Traynes, an
organisational form that would last for another
150 years.6
A minor
exception from this
structure was the establishment by Henry VIII in
1537 of the Guild of St. George, which oversaw
what later
became
Honourabl.
Artillery
Company (HAC), the duty of which was to be
overseers of the science of artillery ...] for the
better increase of the defence of our realm'?? At
its establishment, it was given the magnificent
name Fraternity of Guild of Artillery
Longbows, Crossbows and Handguns; hence it
did not have much in common with 'artillery' of
later years.® Artillery pieces were not provided
until the late eighteenth century. The HAC has
always had a close relation to the city of London
and from time to time reinforced the local police.
When the Territorial Army was established (see
below) the HAC was attached to the artillery as
well as infantry units. Four Field Regiments were
mobilised by HAC in the Second World War.
Amongst ceremonial duties it fires salutes from
the lower of London, a responsibility given in
1924. The HAC is considered to be amongst the
oldest regiments of the British Army
We are returning
now to the sixteenth
century and the establishment of the British
Empire, which had commenced with Queen
Elizabeth I as one of the key persons behind it.
The interest on the part of the Queen was aimed
primarily to establish trade links and to take
advantage of colonisation.' Of particular interest
was India, which brought about the establishment
in 1600 of the East India Company, a company
that later gradually established a strong Indian
artillery force.
The building and defence of the Empire
caused a number of wars with other colonial
powers, in particular France, the Netherlands
and Spain. The British participation in the North
American War of Independence was also an
important struggle. Defending the Empire
would cause numerous engagements of British
artillery through various local wars up to the
present time. The need for 'policing' was always
there. Here is one of the most important legacies
that have influenced the development of
organisation, equipment, and tactics etc.. from
long ago and into the twentieth century.
Arullery was not very mobile un to the
seventeenth century: it was therefore foremost
used at sieges and defence in static situations.
Improved mobility, and with this adaptation of
tactics, was to characterise the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. The reforms during the
former century by the Swedish King Gustav II
Adolf [Gustavus Adolohus also had some
influences on the British artillery.
The establishment of the Royal Regiment
of Artillery
With the frequent wars within the country and
on the world arena, it finally became impossible
to base the engagement of British artillery on the
system with
Master Gunners and civilian
soldiers and civilian resources for transportation.
When artillery support could be delivered, it was
often too late. The battle was already over; and
this usually had negative consequences for the
British Army. Such experience led to a historical
