GUNFIRE
Group, to which the BEF was attached, was
seriously injured in a car accident on 21 May
and eventually died a short while later.
The foremost units of Guderian's panzer
Corps had already reached the Channel on 20
May; thereby cutting the British supply lines.
The confused situation on the French side
made the British to launch a counter-attack on
their own on 21 May at Arras. This became
something more than an attack by two divisions.
It was decided to have two temporary battle
groups attacking in two independent columns.
Each one was to comprise one infantry battalion
from 151 Infantry Brigade of the 50th Infantry
Division. Attached to them each were one tank
battalion and one artillery battery and one anti-
tank battery. A few French units were also to take
part in the attack
At the beginning everything went well and
the attackers soon reached the area west and
south of Arras and turned eastwards. But resist-
ance stiffened more and more and finally the
advance came to a halt at Wancourt through
overwhelming artillery fire from Rommel's
panzer division and the SS Totenkopf division.
After bitter fighting, Lord Gort decided to cancel
the attack and ordered the survivors to withdraw.
The Germans, however, misjudged the
strength of the British attack and became very
concerned. It was a reminder that armoured
units at the head of advance could be cut off, a
risk that should not be neglected. But soon the
Germans regained confidence and pursued their
advance in force
Lord Gort was after this phase of the battle
convinced that the BEF had to retreat towards
Dunkirk and be evacuated. But as yet, it was not
finally clear as to whether another attempt to
break the German lines by attacking together
with the French would be made. Hence, the 5th
and 50th Infantry Divisions remained in the area
north and west of Arras for a few more days.
Some reconnaissance was ordered as late as on
25 May, but it had hardly begun when the order
was received in the evening that day that the
whole operation had been cancelled. Instead, a
new order
Was!
given at midnight to
both
divisions. They were immediately to re-deploy
northwestwards to the vicinity of Ypres, where
the tactical situation now had deteriorated
seriously.
The British were soon forced to abandon
the Escaut-position and continue the delaving
fighting northwestwards. This was done in fairly
good order albeit that the BEF units were under
pressure from all directions.
On the southern
side, the 1st and 2nd
Infantry Division made a stand just east and
north of Lille. Other divisions also resisted the
German attacks fiercely, amongst them the 3rd
and 4th Infantry Divisions farthest to the north
and the 42nd and 46th Infantry Divisions
southwest of Lille near the French 1st Army. The
British III Corps was now made responsible for
the defence along the Aire-canal with the 44th,
46th and 48th Infantry Divisions. Some help
was expected from the less trained 12th and
23rd Infantry Divisions, although they had no
artillery.
In the northwestern sector, where the BEF
had the Belgian Army as flank protection, the
situation became, as
mentioned, extremely
serious on 26 May and the subsequent days. The
Belgian Army began to dissolve and retreated
southwestwards.
organised resistance
seemed possible any longer. Fruitless attempts
were made to get the Belgian king to order his
army to establish strong defence along the river
Yser from the coast to Ypres.
Should a Belgian collapse take place, a very
serious situation would emerge for the British
divisions located far to the south in the Lille are.
The German divisions could quickly advance
towards Dunkirk and completely cut off the BEF
from the coast.
When this situation became obvious, the 5th
and 50th Infantry Divisions were ordered to re-
deploy as quickly as possible to the area around
Ypres. This was for the survival of the BEF a
decisive and critical decision was taken by Lord
Gort on 25 May. The two divisions came
gradually in place and were already engaged on
26 May in heavy fighting which increased and
culminated on 27-28 May.
The imminent
Belgian collapse came on 28 May when the king
capitulated which necessitated direct action on
the British side.
The first step was to withdraw Mont-
gomery's division and re-deploy it to the north-
ernmost sector, moving behind the two afore
mentioned divisions, which now were involved
in most heavy fighting against the Germans
without any help from Belgian forces. The
intention was to extend the British front from
Ypres to river Yser. This
redeplovment was
carried out over the night of 27 and 28 May. This
178
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
was a hard task, but successfully achieved by the
3rd Division.
Obviously
Montgomery
was
proud of this operation, which he
as a
quality mark for his division. But he wrote in his
memoirs: 'If this move had been suggested by a
student at the Staff College in a scheme, he
would have been considered mad. But curious
things have to be done in a crisis in war? 203
The situation on 26 May is summarised in
Map 16-4. I will discuss the fighting at Ypres a
bit further on when the role of the British
artillery is being analysed. The fighting here
turned out to be of utmost importance for the
chances of the BEF to avoid annihilation
When this battle was
raging,
Operation
Dynamo, the
evacuation of BEF from
the
beaches at Dunkirk had been organised and
commenced. In order to make it work, all units
had to withdraw to a final beachhead, some 35-
40km wide and 5-7km deep. A firm organisation
was also necessary for controlling the process. In
addition the beachhead had to be firmly defended
to the last, a task first given to III Corps.
In the final phase, the beachhead was
divided into three sectors and the defence to the
southwest was assigned to a French division, and
east of this to I Corps and then in the northeast-
ern sector to II Corps. French units employed in
the beachhead were also incorporated in the
defence as well where it was possible.
The evacuation started with shipping of
non-combat personnel.
Before the final consolidation had been
organised in the beachhead, the French 1st Army
was encircled and forced to surrender. The two
British divisions without artillery, the 12th and
23* Infantry Division, had also been encircled
and ceased to operate as coherent units. But they
were not completely without artillery. Not least
through individual initiatives.
Batteries were
organised with a few 18-pounders, which were
in store as reserve guns. They were brought
forward but lacked dial sights and spare parts.
Yet it was possible to improvise and use them for
direct fire to the end.
The third division without artillery, the 46th
Infantry Division, played an important role in
the defence along the canal in the west and was
'up-graded'.
The commander of 16 Field
Regiment RA was nominated divisional artillery
commander and his regiment was subordinated
the division together with remnants of a few
other units.
Another event, most likely of immense im-
portance, when it came to getting the beachhead
stabilised and making it possible to pursue the
evacuation successfully, was Hitler's decision on
24 May to halt the advancing panzer divisions;
that was his Haltbefehl. The destruction of the
beachhead, it was thought, should be a matter
for the infantry divisions and - foremost - the
Luftwaffe. Hitler's decision, which gave the
British and the French a few days well-needed
respite, may have decided the outcome of the
campaign in France. This is still a subject for
many discussions and controversies
Thanks to the successful delaying during the
critical days 26-28 May of the attacks made by
German forces, both along the canal defence line
in the west and along the Ypres-canal in the east
down towards Comines, all British divisions
further
south were able to withdraw back
towards the beachhead. A 'half-halt' was made
along the river Yser, by which divisions there
could help
others to withdraw into the
beachhead. So, for instance, the 4th Infantry
Division held the Yser line in the east while the
Sth and 50th Infantry divisions withdrew during
the night between 28 and 29 May.
The whole retreat from river Dyle had been
undertaken under appalling conditions. The
BEF units were all the time exposed to enemy
air attacks from bombers, dive-bombers and
fighters all of which could benefit from excellent
weather conditions.
Initially the Germans
enjoyed almost complete air superiority. This
changed somewhat, however, towards the end of
the campaign. The air battle over the beachhead
then included much more RAF engagement
Hard fighting day and night and constant
fire from German artillery and mortars and
constant movements and redeployment gave few
chances for rest and sleep. Shortage of food and
water further reduced strength too. The speed of
the battle activities also opened up for enemy in-
filtration and attacks from unexpected direc
tions. All this put the soldiers' nerves to a real
test.
If this had not been enough, there was
another troublesome problem - fifth columnists.
This problem had in particular been experi-
enced during the fighting in Belgium. It was
found that enemy agents made markings on the
grass in fields to show German aircraft where
headquarters, guns and various units were
deployed. Even snipers were found. But when
