GUNFIRE
regiment. The entire front of both Corps could
thus be covered with resources for location of
enemy artillery and mortars. I am indicating
their deployment on Map 22-5.433 We can see
that two supporting sound ranging bases were
established within each Corps sector and in
addition to these, three 'light' sound ranging
bases, 4-pen recorders, in the XII Corps sector
and two in the XXX Corps sector. The 'heavy'
bases had two advance posts each. These are not
showed on the map
In addition to the observation bases, i.e.
long bases', numerous ordinary fire observation
posts were deployed along the river as well.
Those coming from the various army artillery
groups (AGRAs) were netted to the counter-
battery officer of each Corps (CBO) on the
special radio net established for observations on
enemy artillery and mortars, the Shell Rep Net.
Those belonging to the divisional artillery were
netted on the normal regimental net to their reg-
imental headquarters from which their observa-
tions were passed on to CBOs and regiments
Each Corps had for the first time been
allotted three radar stations too. These were to
be used for locating mortar positions
As we have seen from Appendix 6 and
Appendix 7, several AOP Squadrons
were
allotted as well. These were grouped to give all
infantry and armoured divisions one Flight each
(4 aircraft). Every AGRA got at least one Flight
too. For reconnaissance and fire control deeper
into the
enemy
area,
Army
Cooperation
Squadrons of RAF were available (using Arty/R
procedures). They were to be
continuously
flying in the area on D-Day. Certain medium
regiments had been dedicated for cooperation
with RAF. But firing should not be done only by
a medium regiment acting as radio counter-part,
but by all regiments of the Corps not engaged in
other tasks. Hence, targets were to be engaged as
Victor Targets.
The intelligence resources of the artillery
were engaged one week before the attacks. They
were the prime resource for collection of data on
enemy
artillery and mortar locations
collected
also
general tactical
They
information
regarding enemy deployment of infantry, assault
guns, vehicles etc., up to around 2km from the
river.
In order to get a quick and efficient planning
process regarding the employment of the large
artillery resources, planning was initially concen-
trated to the Corps level. Planning was here par-
ticularly concentrated on the large preparatory
fire programmes that were to precede the attacks.
In this operation, extensive counter-battery pro-
grammes were to be prepared as well as were
strong preparatory
bombardment of enemy
positions aiming at reducing the enemy's will to
resist the attacks, i.e. Softening Bombardment.
Not until a week or two before D-Day, the divi-
sional headquarters took over detailed planning,
The staffs had to prepare in detail fire support of
the crossings as such and the fighting thereafter.
The headquarters of XII Corps and its
divisions had another task to deal with. The
landings of airborne forces were to be facilitated
by a preparatory fire programme, which was to
be ended by a short anti-aircraft bombardment
near the dropping and landing zones. Another
fire program to be prepared in detail was the
artillery support for 1 Commando Brigade's
initial attack on D-1.
The concerned regimental headquarters did
not get more than a week for their preparations,
sometimes only a few days. Information had to
be distributed to subordinate commanders piece
by piece. The gunners who were to undertake all
firing missions were informed about the coming
attack on D-2, in some cases as late as D-1.
Hard, exhausting staff work
So, numerous fire tasks had to be prepared down
to the single gun within XII Corps area:
Counter Bombardment (against enemy
artillery and mortars)
Preparatory bombardment of enemy
positions east of river Rhine
Support of the attack against Wesel by 1
•
Commando Britack against Wisely 1)
Support of the river crossing by 15
(Scottish) Division (Crossing by oschleht)
Preparatory bombardment of enemy
Positions preceding the arrival of airborne
forces (Operation Varsity)
Counter bombardment of enemy anti-
aircraft positions just before the air-
landings
Support of air-landed forces
Direct support of formations that had
crossed river Rhine
Governing the planning was the time schedule
for the various attacks, which was:
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
• Operation Widgeon
23 March 1945
(D-1) 22.00 hours
• Operation Torchlight
24 March (D)
02.00 hours
• Operation Varsity
24 March (D)
10.00 hours
Much artillery
ammunition
was
needed,
although no exact figures on consumption could
be given. During the nights DD-7 to D-1, the
following volumes were stockpiled at gun
positions or more centrally: 434
25-pounder HE Shells
25-pounder Smoke Shells
600/gun
5,000 - 6,000/
divisional
25-pounder Flare Shells
artillery group
100/colour (three
available),
supplied to
divisional
artillery of 7
Armoured
25-pound Flare Shells
Division
900/colour (three
available),
supplied to
alvisional
artillery of 15
(Scottish)
Division
Super Charge (25-pounder) 250/gun
5.5-inch gun-howitzers
500/gun out of
which 30-50%
4.S-inch guns
were 80-lb shells
Heary guns/howitzers
500/gun
Super Heavy howitzers
Heary anti-aircraft guns
300/gun
100/gun
400/gun
Mountain Howitzers
(ground roles)
350/gun
Sufficient stocks of rockets had to be arranged
For all units that were engaged to comple-
ment the artillery by participating in Pepperpot
programmes huge volumes of ammunition had
also to be stocked beforehand. Such pro-
gammes included 17-pounder anti-tank guns,
Bolors (40-mm) anti-aircraft guns, tanks, 4.2-
inch mortars and heavy machine guns which all
Were to fire series of timed concentrations
against carefully selected targets. With the
exception of the machine guns, they were all to
be engaged in indirect fire, indeed an unusual
undertaking on their part.
Transporting all ammunition to the gun
positions
was a real logistic
challenge. One
hundred and twenty-four 3-ton lorries were
required to bring forward in the dark the ammu-
nition for one medium regiment only. 435
Extensive
firing without
prior ranging
required accurate survey of all firing units into
the same grid. A Corps grid with fixed 'trig
points' should be established at 16.00 hours on
D-6, it was decided. Best possible and accurate
weather data was another pre-requisite. Such
data were to be distributed from the Corps head-
quarters to all regiments. Normally such distri-
bution was to take place every four hours. The
ambition was raised just before D-Day. It would
take place every three hours, which required a
tighter schedule for remote collection of wind,
temperature and air pressure data.
Further measures taken in order to secure
best possible accuracy were extensive gun cal-
ibration firing before the attacks. This was par-
ticularly a responsibility for medium and
heavy regiments. The muzzle velocity of their
guns had to be carefully calibrated after all the
extensive firing they had been through during
Operation Veritable. The units were in turn
sent to the Lommel range in Belgium for such
calibration.
As in Operation Veritable, an extensive
counter-bombardment
programme
artillery and mortars would, as mentioned, be
fired in Operation Plunder too. A 'softening
bombardment over several hours was another
fire programme
similar to what had been
executed in the former operation.
The major difference between the artillery
programmes of the two operations was the
design of the covering fire plans. In Operation
Plunder the task was to protect the crossings of
numerous amphibious vehicles and assault boats
loaded with infantry, who were not to commence
fighting until disembarking on the eastern shore
had taken place. Hence, there was no need for
large area-covering creeping or rolling barrages.
Instead it was a matter of neutralising or destroy-
ing selected targets either by means of heavy
concentrations or by 'Stonks', i.e. fire against line
targets in the latter case. Several hundred targets
were registered beforehand and detailed prepa-
rations were made for their bombardment.
