GUNFIRE
single bomb was dropped - a suitable reminder
this was not a practice run!
As the column advanced we passed battery
after battery - guns dug in, piles of ammunition
- the gunners resting waiting for Zero hour, many
gave us cheery greetings - as we reached the start
point it was Zero hour - the moon now high, vis-
ibility surprisingly good - the distant blackness
erupted in a vast curtain of fire from right to left
as far as the eye could see, a thunderous explosion
of noise as some 800 guns along the front opened
up - the fire plan had started. The middle
distance was filled with flickering flashing of the
guns, the horizon aglow with small bursts, the
glare of searchlights reaching up in cross lines
forming 'trig' points for directional aids, Bofors
firing on fixed lines streams of tracer marking
boundary lines - Brocks famous fireworks were
not in it! A halt to top up diesel and petrol, and
take off gun covers - so far not a single shell had
come from the Boche - the barrage had lifted and
it was now bitterly cold as the column started
forward again - as a 9th Lancers said '2.0 am is
not a time to feel particularly brave!'
As we moved on we could hear the crackle
of small arms as the infantry and R.E. Minefield
clearing taskforce fought their way through the
Boche lines. We passed through our own
minefield directed by the Military Police until
across the 'neutral' ground we reached the first
Boche minefield - the entrance marked with
shaded red and green lights and white tapes. Our
eves tired and strained by the dust despite
goggles, made out dim shapes of smashed gun
pits, tangled wire and minefield Crossbone signs,
then a few bedraggled and dazed prisoners -
almost no shelling, our counterbattery work had
been good
A detachment. which had experienced hectic
work, was the Counter-Battery Officer and his
staff. This is how he experienced the start of the
offensive:
The whole C.B. Staff take up position on high
ground in front of the C.B. Office to watch the
labours of the past week put into effect. There was
a tenseness and expectancy over the desert but
almost instantaneously this was replaced by a
shattering roar as the horizon was lit from end to
end by the flashes of 372 Field and 48 medium
guns all firing C.B. Tasks lin XXX CorDs
sectorl 326
In the sector where the main attack was launched
some 400 guns now opened fire against enemy
batteries located earlier. The fire was concen-
trated in time over these in such a way that a su-
periority of 20:1 was accomplished if possible,
but it should never be less than 10:1.327
In the southern sector, the counter-battery
fire was commenced ten minutes earlier, i.e. at
10.30 hours, here too by several hundred guns.
No medium guns were available there apart
from the four French guns.
Ranging was as mentioned not to take place
for security reasons. It was still important to do
as much as possible to ensure accuracy of the
fire. Correct fixation of gun positions and targets
was of course important and the required survey
must have been performed properly. Availability
of good weather data was equally important.
This was accomplished by having a medium
regiment to fire airbursts one and a half hour
before the main opening of fire; the bursts being
measured by the surveyors from their observa-
tion posts. This gave sufficiently good data to
remain valid for a few hours ahead, it was hoped.
Met telegrams were then distributed every
second hour, sometimes in shorter intervals.
This was very important. Wind condition:
on the actual day were such that the fire impact
would deviate from the correct position by some
700 yards had not the correct postection of the
Moment been applied
All fire plans across the two Corps areas
were, as we have seen. carefully coordinated in
terms of fire intensity and timings. This was new
in the Desert War and aimed of course at accom-
plishing best possible concentration of firepower
as Montgomery
Work at
haal
requestea.
command posts was very demanding.
The initial attack - success and setbacks
The four divisions in the Mouth started their
offensive at 22.00 hours with arent self-confi-
dence. Not least, this was the case at the 5lst
Highland
division
unden
charismatic
commander, Major General Wimberley. He led
his division with seven hotel whee groups in
parallel. In accordance with their tradition, bag-
pipers were leading at the front.
Extensive mine-dearing operations had to
be undertaken the first night. A large number of
passages through own and enemy minefields had
to be cleared and marked. White tape and red re-
spective green lights were used as guidance
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
along the boundaries of the cleared lanes (Fig.
19-6).
Resistance was of varying strength initially,
lightest against the Australians in the North and
toughest, probably,
against
the Highland
Division. The plan to have all four divisions on
their final objectives after five hours did not work
completely. Tough fighting through the night and
following day was required until all brigades had
captured their objectives.
The subsequent armoured attacks caused
trouble for Montgomery. The units had difficul-
Fig. 19-6 The El Alamein offensive required extensive
mine clearing programs resulting in lanes that were
well marked day and night on which the attacking
nantry and armoured units could pass when attacking
enemy positions (Imperial War Museum E 18617)
ties in getting through the minefields, passing the
infantry and preparing for the final break-out.
Enormous traffic jams and intensive enemy fire
were the reasons. Montgomery had to 'push on'
the armoured commanders several times during
the first night and day and threatened to replace
them if they did not follow the initial plan.
During the evening 24 October everything
was close to a collapse in the North, which
caused Montgomery's Chief of Staff, Brigadier
de Guingand, to call the two Corps Command-
ers, Leese (XXX Corps) and Lumsden (X
Corps) to a meeting with Montgomery at 02.30
hours 25 October. This was one of the very few
occasions during the war when Montgomery
allowed being wakened up from his sleep. He
had the habit of going to bed early every day,
around 21.30 hours, and normally did not allow
