5. Artillery Grouping, Organisation and Equipment
'Indirect fire system'
Yes, indeed, the guns are the main equipment of
artillery and the projectiles delivered can thus be
regarded as the principal weapon. Furthermore,
they can be delivered by means of both direct
and indirect fire
In the former case, guns acted independ-
ently as the target can be seen by the detach-
ment, and aiming can be done even if the target
is moving. In the latter case, indirect fire, the
target cannot be seen from the guns. Hence these
must be complemented with other devices and
functions into a complete system. Without this
working as it should, no fire can be brought onto
the target. The indirect fire method meant a
paradigm shift for the artillery in early twentieth
century
Before proceeding and discussing the organ-
isation and equipment of British artillery in the
Second World War, a few words about the
'indirect fire system' and its components. In its
simplest form the following main components
can be identified, all of which were found in
every regiment and battery
Intelligence function - for target
acquisition and sometimes fire control
Fire observation and control function
- for target acquisition and fire control
Communication function - for
transmission of information and orders
Calculation function - for calculation of
gun aiming data and various corrections of
shell trajector
Fire unit - one or numerous guns for
execution of fire orders
Administrative, supply function - for
supply of ammunition, fuel, food etc.
order to
improve
strengthen
the
effectiveness of the 'system' resources could be
provided from
outside
the
regiments,
particular the following:
Survey resources
Special intelligence resources such as
sound ranging troops, flash spotters, radar
(in the latter years of the war) for location
of enemy artillery and mortars
Air Observation Squadrons for target ac-
quisition and fire control
Army Cooperation Squadrons RAF for
target acquisition in depth and sometimes
fire control
As is the case for all systems, the 'indirect fire
system' also had a command and control
function, which included tactical coordination
with commanders of infantry and armoured
units to be supported and overall control of fire.
We will now have a closer look into the
various functions and will start with the Intelli-
gence function
Intelligence function
Indirect fire with artillery guns requires detailed
identification, classification and location of
potential targets. The character of these can vary
substantially. It can be attacking infantry or
armoured
units
lacking protection
from
fortifications or terrain features. Or, on the
contrary, it could be just that! Artillery might be
required to fire against an enemy well dug in and
who maybe has had the time for construction of
fortifications and shelters as protection for
machine guns, anti-tank guns etc. Enemy units
might have
deployed behind mountainous
slopes, or
in close woods, or in more or less
impenetrable jungle. In such situations it might
be a matter of concealed mortars or infantry
reserves
The target can also be the enemy's
artillery, headquarters or supply bases i.e. targets
in depth far from the front lines. It might also be
a matter of disrupting his transport and supply
or troop concentrations with artillery fire.
The intelligence resources available were in
the first place the batteries' own observation
Parties
that accompanied forward infantry
companies in defence or offence, but they could
be assisted by such units that could look' far
beyond the front line, i.e. by support resources
as those mentioned above.
ARTILLERY GROUPING, ORGANISATION AND EQUIPMENT
Fire control function
This function with its observation parties was
the primary function for intelligence and fire
control at the front line with the infantry and
armoured units that were to be supported. Troop
Commanders and, less frequently, Battery Com-
manders served as Fire Observation Officers;
this as the first alternative. When losses struck
the units, subalterns could be called forward
from gun positions as replacements.
Besides acquisition of targets and determin-
ing their characters and location, the primary
task was to order and control the artillery fire.
All officers were trained for this, and they could
therefore replace each other. Another important
task was to send tactical reports about the
general battle situation, a very important source
of information for commanders and headquar-
ters at higher levels.
Each battery had two observation parties
and as a regiment normally comprised three
batteries there were six observation parties per
regiment
No other rank suffered as high losses as the
observation officers. They were always at the
front line, not far back as most of the other
gunners were.
The observer had to be supported by assis-
tants for various duties at the observation post in
the front line; one could be to measure distances
to targets or terrain features important as
reference objects. The signallers, one or two per
observation party, were another very important
group of assistants. And this will carry us on to
next function in the system for indirect fire.
Telephone lines were often cut by enemy
artillery fire, tracked vehicles, etc. Of course.
resources must also be available for retrieval of
the cables in connection with redeployment.
More about communication later in the book.
The terminal function at the firing unit was
also to be seen as part of the 'indirect fire system'.
All received information should be taken care of
by those who were to undertake calculations of
gun data. This leads us to the Calculation function.
Calculation function
The information regarding target classification
and location, purpose of fire etc was to be trans-
formed into aiming data for the guns, and for
making ammunition of the right type ready for
fire including setting of fuzes when so required.
Time schedules for firing should also be given to
the guns in an appropriate way depending on the
tactical situation. Hence, a calculation function
was a must, and normally one was available at
each troop, Troop Command Post, but also
another for the whole battery, Battery Command
Post, which acted as coordinator and controller
of the calculations made by the former.
Fire unit
The fire unit, which was ordered to deliver fire of
some kind and intensity, could be a single gur
(rarely), a section of guns (two), a troop (four
guns normally) or more often a battery (eight
guns, four if a heavy battery). But a whole
regiment (24 field guns. 16 if a medium or heavy
regiment) or numerous regiments could also con-
stitute a 'fire unit', which required an extensive
radio or telephone communication svstem
Communication function
Information
anal
orders from
observation
officers should be transmitted to the guns, and
often also to various headquarters. This was
accomplished by means of telephone lines or
radio communication. In mobile battles the latter
was the only option
Signallers were detached to take care of this
at the observation posts and the firing units, the
guns, under overall command of signal officers.
Wavs of oral
communication was strictly
regulated and signal discipline was always
enforced in the Roval Artillery. Resources must
be available not only for radio communication
but also for laying telephone lines and for
repairing them when required, which could be
quite frequent during the course of a battle.
Administrative, supply function
Without ammunition, no artillery fire! Obviously.
but how was ammunition supplied to the guns?
A first-hand stock was brought by the guns them-
selves, or more specifically by gun trailers and
tractors. The Battery Ammunition Detachment
could provide more and also fetch more at am-
munition depots organised by the Royal Army
Service Corps (RASC). Companies of the latter
were a joint resource at the division level and they
could fetch ammunition at railway stations or
harbours. When larger operations were planned,
these companies could transport large amounts
of ammunition and stockpile it just where the
guns were deployed, up to 600 shells per field
gun was not an unusual requirement.
