GUNFIRE
with known coordinates and surveyed-in
bearings to certain beacons or visible terran
objects. The angle between the known bearing
and the ordered 'zero line' was then calculated
and used when the director was oriented against
the beacon. Then the director head was turned
towards the dial sight of each gun and the
bearing read. After correction with 180° this
bearing was given to the laver, who had to set it
on the dial sight by means of the line micrometer
screw. After this, he turned the barrel with the
traversing hand wheel to the zero line position,
which was reached when he had oriented the
cross lines of the dial sight exactly towards the
director. The relations between the various
bearings and angles in this process, and how the
a • Battery Aiming
Fig. 11-5 After deployment the guns of a troop were
to be aligned with the zero line with parallel barrels.
This was accomplished with the help of a Director
placed at the
ontrol point that had been fixed by the
surveyors and where a correct reference bearing was
given by a BP Card, here denominated BG. By using
this bearing and the zero line bearing an angle was
calculated for each gun, which was to set at the dial
sight, here denominated VG1 for gun No. 1, VG2 for
gun No. 2 etc. When the angle was set on the dial
sight the layer should turn the traversing hand wheel
such, that he was aiming the sight exactly on the
Director. With the barrel now in correct position he
could release the sight head and turn it towards the
gun's aiming point and then to fix it again to the sight
carrier. Other methods for getting the guns parallel
existed (Author)
Fig. 11-6 When bringing the gun barrels in parallel
positions the bearing to be set on each gun sight was
given by means of a loudspeaker system or a
megaphone. Once set, the layer at each gun was to
aim exactly at the Director by traversing the barrel
[this seems to be a No. 7 Director] (Olmperial War
Museum SE 3365)
bearing was ordered to each gun, are illustrated
in Fig. 11-5 and Fig. 11-6.
Without moving the barrel the layer then
had to turn the head of his dial sight towards the
GAPs selected. The bearings to these were read
and normally recorded by chalk on the shield.
The lower micrometer screw, the Slip Scale,
could then be released and be fixed in the
position 0° when the barrel was directed along
the zero line. Looking at various photographs of
deployed guns we can see that the head of the
dial sight sometimes is directed to the left,
sometimes to the right or almost straightforward
depending on the place of the GAPs.
When the fire direction to an identified
target was ordered, this was done relative to the
zero line, as an example Zero 16°, for which the
slip scale was used when laying the gun. But the
bearing to the target could also be given as this
could be set on the fixed line scale by means of
the micrometer screw for this scale.
In order to facilitate orientating the guns the
director used had two scales, one a clock-wise
scale and the other anti-clockwise.
ployment
Amongst necessary pockwistions after de-
ammunition
supply
must
mentioned. Prior to large operations this could
imply stockpiling of 500-600 shells at each gun,
PREPARATIONS FOR OPENING OF GUNFIRE
Fig. 11-7 Once the guns had been deployed ammu-
nition must be stockpiled to meet the requirements of
coming fire plans. Ammunition supply was a logistic
challenge that must be met day and night (RAHT)
often done during nights. Fig. 11-7 is an indi-
cation of the important logistic function, which
also is a component of the 'system indirect fire'.
Fire observation and control
As mentioned troop commanders normally were
'Observation Post Officers'. Once they had got
their orders whom to support and preliminary
orders where to establish their observations posts
and which area to observe, they went forward for
establishing contact with the infantry or armour
commander and for detailed reconnaissance of
observation possibilities. The need for good ob-
servation often made it impossible to establish
the observation
post exactly
where
commander to be supported had his headquar-
ters or was on the march. This could be compen-
sated by means of radio communication. For this
the FOP was equipped with the WS No. 18 set
(or a similar set) and tuned in on the frequency
used by the commander to be supported.
Sometimes a telephone line could be used.
Besides the requirement for good observa-
tion possibilities over the
area ordered. the
OPO FOO had to take into account the need for
protection and opportunities for good camou-
flage. In this context it was also important to
make sure that relieving personnel had safe
access to the observation post avoiding exposure
to direct enemy observation and fire. Another
pre-requisite was the communication with the
OPO/FOO's own battery. For this he had the WS
No. 22 or its remote control. We recall that this
set with its batteries was quite heavy and was not
portable, but the remote control unit made it
possible to use it at the observation post, while
the set was kept backwards in the OPO/FOO's
(Bren) carrier. As soon as possible a telephone
line should be laid between the observation post
and the troop position. If the situation made it
possible, the OPO/FOO tried to find places with
the best observation conditions, for instance up
in a church steeple or a water tower, but house
attics were often good as well. The latter is illus-
trated by the artist in Fig. 11-8
At the observation post. the OPO was
assisted by a Specialist, who was a NCO and
trained in target acquisition and fire observation.
He had the qualifications for replacement of the
OPO if needed. There are many accounts where
skilled assistants took over from the OPO, when
the latter was killed or wounded badly, and
directed artillery fire from many units. As many
other accounts show it could also happen that the
OPO quickly had to take over the command of
the supported unit, when its ordinary commander
was killed. But sometimes a skilled OPO had to
combine the two jobs, indeed a real challenge.
At the observation post, the OPO also was
assisted by one or more signallers who manned
the radio sets and telephone devices. Staving
behind at the carrier was the driver and
sometimes also a few signal replacements.
1231
