GUNFIRE
later well-known 'entrepreneur', Major General
Hobart, were of the opinion that in a modern
mobile war would heavy guns never stand a
chance to follow the infantry and armour, only
heavy bombers could! As a consequence of this
debate Britain lacked modern heavy guns when
the Second World War broke out.
As far as light artillery is concerned, the
lessons learned were taken into account, not least
the enormous logistic challenges encountered in
a modern war such as the First World War. These
had been particularly severe due to the fact that
many different types of gun had been employed.
It was wisely decided soon after the war that one
new standard light gun should be developed as
a substitute for the RHA 13-pounders, the
18-pounders and the 4.5-inch howitzers of RFA.
In order to achieve this the new gun must
combine the characteristics of these guns by
given the possibility to fire with flat trajectories
at long ranges like a true gun, but also with
steeper, curved traiectories
an howitzer
Maximum
range
should
15,000
yards
(13,650m).
This opened the stage for heavy debate and
squabbles regarding different
issues such as
calibre, types of shell, weight of shell, type of
carriage
and manv
more
details. It
would
therefore last twenty years before everything was
settled and a new gun could be introduced in the
organisation, which eventually took place in 1940.
The first issue that had to be settled was the
weight of the shell; it was decided that it must be
25 pounds. This in combination with the range
requirement determined the
calibre, approxi-
mately 88-mm, which was slightly larger than
that of the 18-pounder. The range was an issue
for much discussion too, and it was not settled
until long into the 1930's. It had to be reduced
to 13,000 yards (11,880m), this due to another
requirement. The maximum weight of the gun
should not be more than 30cwt (approximately
Regarding the type of carriage, the struggle
was as to whether the traditional British box-type
should be selected or an open V (split trail) type
with two legs.
This took time to agree on. Before
this could take place towards the end of the
decade, a modernised 18-pounder was designed
and manufactured, with a new barrel, and a
25-pound shell could be used. The gun also had
pneumatic rubber tyres. It was
designated
Ordnance QF 25-pounder Mark I, but daily just
the 18/25-pounder, or for short the 25-pounder.
When the 'real' new 25-pounder, Mark II, even-
tually arrived, the former was often inadvertently
taken as the latter. I will come back to it in
Chapter 4.
One of the most important development
steps between the World Wars was the introduc-
tion of radio. Trials with short-wave devices were
made as early as 1928. The following year, 1929,
Colonel, later Field Marshal, Alan Brooke wrote
that a successful introduction of radio commu-
nication would imply that no need for artillery
below the divisional organisational level would
exist in the future. What he had in mind was that
an observer by utilising radio equipment could
concentrate all available artillery in the division
not only for divisional attacks, but also in
support of attacks
by
battalions or even
companies. Exchange of intelligence data, orders
and other type of information between units
would also be much facilitated. The trend gained
momentum and when the Second World War
commenced all Observation Officers and their
parties were equipped with wireless sets. 43
Goodbye to the horse
A radical change took place on the transportation
side. With inspiration from the experience of the
First World War, the development of motor
vehicles for the artillery was going on for many
years between the wars, and this not only for the
heavy artillery but also for the lighter guns. While
this was going on, the light artillery was stil
horse-drawn and the mounted gunners could
continue galloping in good old style.
But then came the important decision to
retire the horse for good. This was not an easy
decision to make in the Army with its traditions
and
conservatism.
However,
the process
commenced in 1937 and by 1939 the artillery
was fully motorised. An exception was the few
Mountain Regiments, which retained their horses
and mules by necessity. The Royal Artillery had
now become the first major artillery force in the
world to be almost completely motorised. The
change brought about another important change,
viz., re-equipment of the guns with pneumatic
rubber tyres. These changes tons ther implied that
British artillery went to the new war with much
improved mobility.
Organisational adaptation
Finally, a few changes of the artillery organisation
THE PERIOD UP TO THE SECOND WORLD WAR
during the years between the two World Wars will
be observed. The split enacted in 1899 of the
Royal Artillery into a mounted part, Royal Horse
Artillery and Royal Field Artillery, and a dis-
mounted part, the Royal Garrison Artillery, i.e.
basically the light artillery, the heavy artillery and
coast artillery, was abolished in 1924 and once
again it was only the Royal Regiment of Artillery,
or Royal Artillery for short.
The 'brigade' became 'regiment' in 1938.
Field Regiments normally had four six-guns
batteries. This was now changed, a regiment was
to consist of two twelve-gun batteries and these
were divided into three four-gun troops. It was
to be shown later that this was not an optimal or-
ganisational structure, and a revision was to take
place in 1940-1941.
An important reinforcement of the Territo-
rial artillery took place beginning in 1920. It was
the transformation of a number of Yeomanries
to artillery formations. This process went on until
it was basically completed in 1940.44 Many old
volunteer cavalrymen found it an awful change
to become gunners, others found it quite exciting
and an inspiration; after all they still had to use
horses. Many of the converted formations were
to become a corps d'élite in the Territorial Army.
Traditions and names
Artillery formations have had, as seen, various
names and denominations through the centuries
The senior title has, however, since 1722 been
the Royal Regiment of Artillery. This as such has
not been a fighting formation of its own, but has
served as an 'umbrella' for numerous formations
organised for war and which have had their own
titles. When we now are coming to the end of this
brief historical review, it might be of interest to
have a look at some examples of formation
names from the years preceding the Second
World War.
The
Roval Artillery
had. as
mentioned earlier, their guns as their Colours
and since 1833 'Ubique' as the regimental motto
A system of Honour Titles granted to batteries
in commemoration of victories and gallantries
was later introduced
The field (light) artillery was organised in
'Field Regiments' with traditions from horse-
drawn as well as mounted artillery formations
A few examples:
• Ist Regiment RHA
• 115th Army Field Regiment RA
• 24th Field Regiment RA
• 112th (Wessex) Field Regiment RA, TA
• 11th (Honourable Artillery Company) Field
Regiment RHA
• 150th (South Nots Hussars) Field Regiment RA
(converted Yeomanry)
Medium, Heavy and Super Heavy Regiments
mostly used a numbering system:
• 64th Medium Regiment RA
• 3rd Heavy Regiment RA
• Ist Super Heavy Regiment RA
But there were also a few heavy regiments which
were converted Yeomanries, an example:
- 52nd (Bedfordshire Yeomanry) Heavy Regiment RA
Regiments consisted of 2-4 batteries. It was the
batteries who were to be the bearers of traditions
and honour titles, not regiments. The title was
attached to the organisational number and name
of the battery and could be the name of a place
where a notable action had taken place, or it
could be the name of an old formation or a
distinguished commander. As is known, this
system is still in use. A few contemporary
examples are the names of the batteries of 12th
Field Regiment RA:45
- 12 (Minden) Battery RA
- 9 (Plassey) Battery RA
- 58 (Eyre's) Battery RA
- 'T' Headquarters Battery (Shah Sujab's Troop) RA
And as we saw in Chapter 1 the memory of the
British rocket gunners taking part in the battle at
Leipzig in October 1813 is commemorated
through the honour title granted to a Battery of
1st Field Regiment RHA:
- O' Headquarters Battery (The Rocket Troop)
RHA
seen hove
'RA' stands for the Royal
Regiment of Artillery' and 'RHA' for the 'Roya
Horse Artillery'. On maps contained within thi
book I have, in order to save space, written FR
Hield
Regiments;
MR
for Medium
Regiments and HR for Heavy Regiments.
