GUnFIRE
point of view: Surprise or precision? The
problem has existed since indirect fire was intro-
duced at the beginning of the twentieth century.
And indeed it was a matter of much controversy
in Britain
throughout the war with many
opinions in the air 146
Those in favour of predicted fire stressed
the importance
surprise,
Often
with
arguments that the enemy should be exposed to
the artillery fire when most vulnerable, which
was before taking shelter in trenches and other
fortified positions. One should furthermore not
reveal own intentions, for instance a planned
attack, by first ranging. Tactically this was of
course correct, but onlv if the fire hit the right
place at the right time. However, bad prepara-
tions might lead to missing the target and all
would be wasted
The opponents against
'predicted fire'
argued that, almost every time, it was a waste of
valuable artillery resources. Hence, alwavs give
priority to ranging and other good preparations
using a limited number of guns before the giant
knockout blow was struck.
Superior effect
required artillery fire at the right place, was the
message! And furthermore, it was not always
necessary to do the ranging against the ultimate
target. A nearby point could be chosen, if its
geodetic relation (bearing, distance) to the real
target was known, i.e. go for a Witness Point!
The reader might wonder how this delicate
choice of alternative was made in daily situations
The answer is that the experienced and skilled
OPO/FOOs and artillery commanders, who were
well familiar with the artillery characteristics.
shifted between the two strategies with the
objective to suit the tactical requirements; quite
Often
also
combining the
two.
The
less
experienced and more cautious, and those less
spirited, used to stick to a more routine-like
action. Of course this could imply that the most
forceful option was overlooked
In this discussion we should, however, not
forget that ranging required good observation
opportunities, not least that the target itself could
be observed, and observed fire control being
possible to pursue. If this was not possible
"predicted fire was the only option. As we have
seen, sometimes help with fire control could be
given by the 'sound rangers', a sort of middle-
alternative. We will touch on these problems
again when counter-bombardment is discussed.
Another problem often encountered by
OPO/FOOs was whether the artillery fire was
intended for destruction or neutralisation. The
former meant annihilation of the enemy soldiers
and their equipment, fortifications, etc. The latter
method implied making the enemy unable to
fight during the course of the bombardment, for
instance when the own infantry was attacking his
positions. During the Great War the first method
had been extensively used, but it was often found
to be uneconomic, as enormous amounts of
ammunition could be spent without resulting in
destruction of an enemy well dug in and protected
by strong fortifications. In this stationary war they
had had plenty of time to construct and improve
fortifications continuously. Besides the cost of
wasted ammunition all the craters from exploding
shells completely destroyed the terrain and made
it much more difficult for advancing troops and
vehicles. In other words, it meant a counter-
productive use of artillery.
Hence, it was better to use the artillery to
force the enemy soldiers to keep their heads
(and weapons) down while own infantry
attacked, unprotected as they were. This
became the leading doctrine during the Second
World War, as far as the British were concerned,
but still a matter at issue all the time. It worked
well in Europe, but in Burma the British met
the Japanese, who were masters of digging
shelters and building strong, deep fortifications.
As they also were opponents who fough
fanatically without
respect for their own
security, the British found the need for strong
artillery fire that could lead to destruction,
much stronger in this theatre than in Europe.
This was a problem, as the projectiles of the
lighter
guns
(25-pounders
and 3.7-inch
mountain howitzers) rarelv could penetrate the
ground sufficiently. More medium and heavy
guns than allotted to this theatre were thus
needed desperately. The few available could,
however, often be efficiently used as 'bunker-
busters' by means of direct fire against enemy
fortifications.
The relation between effect and ammunition
spent was a matter for marfect and arcanalyses
during the war. Tiny fot many systematic anaires
the result of a known ammunition spending
could be studied in a ammunition spediers.
destroyed equipment and fortifications etc, gave
00dd answers as to the physical citests. It was
much more difficult to analyse psychological
effects of the fire. How to analyse perh eded
132
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
for neutralisation of a battle-experienced group
of soldiers as compared with neutralisation of
un-experienced soldiers? What did fire intensity
mean? And would a fewer number of large-
calibre shells be better than a larger number of
smaller? Such questions were many, and finding
definite answers was difficult.
Anyway, an
illustration of the relation
between ammunition consumption and effect is
given in Table 12-1, which is made from data
presented by Nigel
Evans. 147
In this
table
'Neutralisation' has the
meaning
discussed
above, i.e. the enemy soldiers cannot observe
and use their weapons as long as the artillery
firing is going on. 'Demoralisation' means that
there is a lasting effect long after the fire has
ceased. Reduced ability or will on the part of the
enemy to continue fighting is noticed. Finally,
'Partial Destruction' means that about 2% of the
soldiers in trenches are killed or wounded, 20%
if they lack this kind of protection. In the table,
the area covered by fire is assumed to be
100x100 yards.
Table 12-1. Ammunition required for effect
as soon as possible whenever this was possible.
It became routine for British gunners to dig
themselves in as they always were at risk for
being exposed to enemy counter-bombardment
when near the guns or at observation posts
'Sweat saves blood!' was an undisputed lesson
from the war. 149
Neutralisation
Partial destruction
of unit equipments
25-pounder
5.5-inch Gun
8-32 rounds/min
3-12 rounds/min
40 rds/hr during 4 hours
16 rds/hr during 4 hours
100 rds/min during 15 min
30 rds/min during 15 min
40rds
16 rds
Note. For more precise definition of effects see Evans 'British Artillery in
World War 2, Effects and Weights of Fire
The effect of protection on ammunition
consumption is illustrated in Table 12-2 by
means of data from Evans. 148
Table 12-2. Relative risks of becoming casualty
Protection level/position
Relative probability
Standing
Firing from open trench
Crouching in open trench
The doctrine was there, but battle
techniques were to be gradually
developed
Lieutenant P. Boyle of 17 Field Regiment RA
acted as FOO in the attack by the 38th (Irish)
Brigade at Centuripe (Sicily) in July 1943. He
tells that he sent thousands of shells over the
enemy positions. On one occasion he and the
commander of the unit he was supporting
observed large enemy formations moving at the
opposite side of a ravine and the commander felt
that the enemy was preparing a counter-attack
Boyle judged the character of the target to justify
a few rounds with the entire regiment, so he gave
the order 'Monkey [Mike] target' (code word for
engagement by regiment) and the map refer-
ences for it. He first fired a few ranging rounds,
and when the fire was close enough he ordered
'10 rounds gunfire'. Within 60 seconds 240
shells landed within an area less than a football
ground.
The
company commander at his side
obviouslv was very impressed, to such a degree
that he excused himself and asked for another
round. As Bovle saw it, it was not necessary as
the risk for an enemy attack had been eliminated,
but he used to follow the principle that if his
infantry commanders requested something, he
gave them what they wanted. Without further
discussion he therefore turned to his signaller
Corbet and said, 'Repeat' and another 240 shells
whistled above them and landed right upon the
target 150
The account tells us of some aspects of
British artillery doctrine during the war. These
and a few others are
1/15 - 1/50
1/25 - 1/100
The figures show the relative likelihood for being
hit by shell splinters. Not least the final line illus
trates very clearly how important it was to dig in
A commander (infantry/armour) to be
supported should have the FOO or the
artillery commander with him for close
liaison
The artillery plan should always be well
integrated with the plan of the supported
commanden
A FOO could always order' fire and did
