9. How to Hit the Target - Geodetic Requirements
Good maps a must
A first question is related to maps, grid systems
and bearings etc., i.e. what for hundreds of years
has been the profession of surveyors. In the
British Army the responsibility for this rested
with the Corps of Engineers [RE]. Their
primary task was to provide good maps for the
fighting units wherever in the world they had to
fight. Either own maps were produced, as was
the case in the British Empire, or maps were
acquired from authorities in other countries and
adapted to meet British requirements. The latter
was applicable for Italy and France who had
modern national maps of their own
Britain standardised map scales for the
Army around 1936 as follows:
1:250,000 for planning and high-level
command of operations and transports
•
1:100,000 for tactical planning and
command of mobile operations, in particu-
lar for armoured units
• 1:50,000 for ordinary planning and
command of operations
• 1:25,000 for artillery fire planning and
controll
The classic British map scales, ¼ inch to the mile
and one inch to the mile were much used as well,
in particular within the British Isles.
The Gunners had chosen the 1:25,000 scale
as standard as it was sufficient for giving gun
deployments and target locations with sufficient
accuracy
firing without
rangine
requirement for this was a maximum radial
deviation of 15 yards.
The maps should preferably be in four-
colour print with elevation curves inserted. As it
was to be shown this was quite often a problem.
Another problem that sometimes occurred was
that heights could be given either in feet or in
metres, which could be confusing if not properly
observed. Aerial mapping could give reliable
data but was a scarce resource during the first
years of the war
Maps as such were not enough. All military
activities, not least those of the artillery, required
fixing of locations by means of grid coordinates.
No universal grid (reference) systems existed at
the time. A
grid system covering a large
operational area, a theatre grid, was always
preferred. The RE's ambition was to introduce
such grids on all maps, but it was not always
possible. In particular during the first years of
the war it was often necessary to use local grids,
sometimes without any. In Egypt, for instance,
before the final battle at El Alamein in 1942 two
different grid systems existed, and far to the
west none existed. Fortunately the boundary
between the two systems was east of El Alamein,
but some mistakes occurred from time to time
when two different systems had to be used for
location data.
If no grid system existed, or was not
available for any reason, when the Gunners were
to fire their guns, it was necessary to establish a
grid as soon as possible for the establishment of
correct geodetic relations between gun deploy-
ments and targets. This was built from the lowest
levels, for troops or batteries, and was then
gradually extended to become a regimental grid.
And from this level it was always important to
extend this to be used by all artillery units within
the divisional area, a divisional grid. Sometimes,
even a corps grid could be devised.
The Gunners had methods and procedures
to change from one preliminary grid system to
a permanent one, once this had been made
avallable. Locations for the guns and targels
could be corrected using these coordinates.
Sometimes this also included a slight correction
of the 'North' direction.
Which 'North' to use?
A correct grip on geodetic relations also required
that bearings could be correctly determined.
This in turn required that the difference between
various
'North' were known and correctly
observed. These normally were the following:
Meridian North, i.e. the circle through the
terrestrial poles, True North
109|
HOW TO HIT THE TARGET - GEODETIC REQUIREMENTS
Magnetic North, i.e. the magnetic northern
pole
Grid North, i.e. the northern direction of
the grid system
As is well known the 'Magnetic North' is
changing all the times. The deviation (m) from
the 'Meridian North' is normally given in maps
and is not only changing by time but is also
different depending on where on the earth you
are located. During the war 'm' was quite big on
the British Isles, around 10°, whereas in Burma
it was not more than around 1.5°. In the fire plan
for the large allied Rhine Crossing in March
1945 the 'm' was given as 5°.
When devising new grids for operative use
it was an endeavour to make the difference
between 'Meridian North' and 'Grid North' as
small as possible, normally 0°-1.5°.
Deviation from 'Meridian North', 'True
North', was given as 'western' or 'eastern'. In
calculations it was important to know whether
the deviation was positive or negative. But was
it important to observe the deviation? Certainly
it was!
If the Gunners at the Rhine Crossing had
not observed the deviation the fire would have
hit ground some 400 yards from the intended
impact point (target) when the firing range was
as moderate as 5km. The fire of the medium and
heavy guns with their range of 10-20km would
show an even more destructive dislocation. This
illustrates the
need for
good
procedures,
including control functions, when it comes to the
technical gunnery requirements.
If you had the 'correct' north somewhere,
how to get others to get it too? Well, there were
several methods. Most important was the tradi-
tional survey methods.
Traditional survey again honoured
The most important methods for establishing
correct geodetic relations between two locations
were
Triangulation
Traverse
Astronomic bearing fixing
Simultaneous measuring towards a
celestial object
Astronomic determination of a bearing was
normally done by means of a theodolite or a
sextant, which could be done in daytime towards
the sun or during night towards a star such as
the North (Pole) Star. Calculations were quite
demanding but were a routine for experienced
surveyors.
Simultaneous measuring towards a celestial
object could be done by Gunners, as well as by
survevors. Where directors (an instrument like a
theodolite) were available, as was the case at the
gun deployment areas and often at observation
DOSTS. thie
was a practicable method. When
applied, for instance the course of North Stai
across the sky was followed by those taking part
in the process. The director that had the correct
bearing, which was to be transferred to the others,
was leading. Once all, who were in connection
with each other by means of telephone or radio,
followed the star they were at a certamn exact
moment ordered to stop following the movement
of the star. The leader then informed the others
in which bearing their director now was fixed. To
be sure the measurement could be repeated a
couple of times.
Good maps with grid systems inserted gave
a good picture of geodetic relations between
guns and targets by using coordinates, but it was
not always possible to determine the coordinates
with sufficient accuracy. Fixing the grid relations
between different gun deployment areas from
the maps only was not always possible either.
Other methods were necessary.
Fixing more exact coordinates for the gun
deployment required survey. The first question
was where to commence the survey, the starting
point. It was normally the responsibility of RE
to provide exact coordinates and a sample of
bearings at a number of trig points, sometimes
called just trigs. from which
the
arullery
surveyors could start transferring data to the gun
deployments by means of the survey methods
mentioned above.
"Trig points' were often
presented as a network of many such points
which had been fixed by Ordnance Survey or
RE
through
the classic
survey
method,
triangulation.
The principle of 'triangulation' is based on
the fact that if one side and two angles of a
triangle are known, the two other sides of the
trianole
can be calculated b
means
elementary trigonometrv. When this has beer
done a new 'trig point' has been fixed. and the
process can continue with an adjacent triangle
for fixing of another "trig noint' ete
