Fig. 16-1 Growth of BEF: s artillery resources was a
process taking half a year. At first regular regiments
were transferred to France and later Territoria
Regiments. Most of the latter must first be equipped
and undergo complementary training in Britain before
being sent to France (Author)
As we can see, more than 40 field regiments
with more than 1,000 guns were ready when the
fighting began. Most of the guns were 18/25-
pounders.
but
some
regiments
had
vintage18-pounders (Mark II and Mark IV) and
the old 4.5-inch howitzers. The BEF had a few
hundreds of 18-pounders and around sixty of
the latter
We can also see that the number of medium
and heavy regiments was limited. Around fifteen
medium regiments, each with sixteen guns, had
been allotted to the BEF. Their guns were
basically the vintage 6-inch howitzer and the 60-
pounder gun, 200 and 60 pieces respectively.
Many of these old guns were still equipped with
ironclad wooden wheels.
The price for neglect
during the inter-war period was too short ranges
and poor mobility for a modern war
The three heavy regiments sent to France had
the old 6-inch gun and the obsolete 8-inch and
9-inch howitzers, a legacy from the Great War
Some of the old field, medium and heavy pieces
are illustrated in Part 1, Fig. 3-1 and Fig. 3-2.
The Field Regiments had the 1938 organi-
sation, i.e. they comprised two 12-gun batteries
besides
regimental headquarters.
Each
battery had three 4-gun troops. Regiments from
the Royal Horse Artillery had smaller batteries,
two 8-gun batteries.
Medium Regiments had two 8-gun batteries,
each comprising two 4-gun troops. The Heavy
Regiments had 2-4 batteries depending on the
type of gun/howitzer.
The Royal Artillery Order of Battle early
May 1940 is presented in Appendix 1. From
GUNFIRE
this we can see the distribution of resources in
Table 16-1, with a summary of number of
regiments per formation. 191
All the 'front divisions' had the nominal
number of regiments, i.e. three, except one
which had two (42nd Infantry Division). Besides
these divisions, there were as mentioned another
three further back along the supply lines to the
ports in the South, the 12th, 23rd and 46th
Infantry Divisions, which had no artillery.
It may be noted also that no armoured
divisions had been deployed in France when the
fighting broke out on 10 May 1940. About one
and a half weeks later, however, the first units of
the
Ist.
Armoured
Division arrived ir
Cherbourg.
The two field regiments of this
division were in place already in the autumn of
1939 and were grouped as 'GHQ Troops'.
Half the artillery force came from the TA as
far as field artillery was concerned. Two thirds
of the medium artillery force were TA forma-
Table 16-1. British artillery resources in France on 1 May 190
Type of formations
Number of regiments
Army artillery (GHO Troops)
Army Field Regiments
Medium Regiments
Heavy Regiments
I Corps artillery
Field Regiments
Medium Regiments
Survey Regiment
I Corps artillery
Medium Regiments
Survey Regiment
Ill Corps artillery
Field Regiments
Medium Regiments
Survey Regiment
Divisional artillery
I Corps (3 divisions
Il Corps (4 divisions
III Corps (2 divisions
Other divisions (2)*
9 Field Reaimente
11 Field Regiments
6 Field reaiments
5 Field Regiments
*) Employed in the Saar Region and south of River Somm
166
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
Fig. 16-3 The Gort-Line in the winter 1939/1940. The British used the time well for reinforcement of the border
between France and Belgium waiting for a German attack (Olmperial War Museum O 844)
tions too. But the few heavy regiments were all
regular regiments.
An important decision was made in January
1940 implying that each division was to have two
regiments equipped with 18/25-pounders and
one regiment with 18-pounders and the vintage
4.5-inch howitzer. The background was that this
would facilitate ammunition supply when the di-
visional
armament
became
standardised.
Another reason was that no division would be in
a worse situation than others when it came to the
firing range of available guns. After all, the
18/25-pounder was better in this respect than
the oldest
runs
(the
18-pounder had a
maximum range of around 9km and the 4.5-
inch howitzer not more than 5-6km).192
Preparations for the coming battle included
Fig. 16-2 Large amounts of artillery ammunition for
the BEF artillery were stockpiled during the autumn
1939 in France (Olmperial War Museum F 2410)
extensive storing of spare parts and other
supplies of all kind. Fig. 16-2 shows stockpiling
of artillery ammunition.
The gunners had to undertake tasks that
were not possible for them to train for very much
in peace time, namely full-scale digging of
trenches, gun pits, command posts etc., and con-
struction of fortified positions, anti-tank ditches,
setting up barbed wire defences and much more
Artillery units were quartered initially a
distance from the Belgian border, as most units
were. They were engaged immediately in recon-
naissance and preparation of battery positions
to be used once the fighting began, battle
positions. Alternative gun positions and other
temporary positions were reconnoitred and
prepared as well. Gun pits and other fortifica-
tions were prepared as were observation posts
everything was well camouflaged. Fig. 16-3 is
a unique photograph from the 'Gort Line' as it
was known; it is well illustrating battle prepara-
tions made over the winter 1939/1940 with
fences, wire hindrances, anti-tank ditches and sc
on. The name emanated from the C-in-C BEE,
General Gort.
The 3rd Infantry division, commanded by
Major General Bernard L. Montgomery, took
over a front sector north of Lille in October 1939
and prepared itself for immediately going into
battle. The
divisional artillerv
headquarters
issued already on 10 October its first operational
order. Oneration Order No. 1. In this order. it was
informed that the division would deploy with two
brigades beside each other and the third brigade
