GUNFIRE
of very sharp splinters over a wide area. The det-
fire were dramatically reduced when the 'VT'
onation took place when the projectile hit the
fuze came during the last few months of the wai
ground. This was accomplished by using a fuze
As mentioned the dominating shell was the
called 'Direct Action Percussion Fuze'. As illus-
'HE'
shell which
besides
charge for
trated it happened that best effect was reached
fragmenting it into sharp splinters also carried
when the
ignition was delayed a little, for
some phosphorous material to create a small
instance when the enemy took shelter in bunkers
white cloud of smoke, which could facilitate
or other types of fortification with a roof pre-
observation of the fire. In addition to the HE'
venting the enemy from being hit by splinters if
shell there were others, the armour-piercing
the burst took place at ground impact. The fuze
projectile already mentioned. Another one
for this was called 'Graze Percussion Fuze'. This
which was used frequently, in particular during
could also be used to get airbursts if the descent
the battles of the second part of the war, was the
angle was small enough to make the projectile
smoke projectile. Less frequently used were
ricochet
upwards after hitting ground.
projectiles creating artificial light or dispersion
required a fairly flat and hard ground surface.
It was soon realised after having fought
of propaganda material over the positions of the
enemy. For these special types of fuze were
many battles during the first years of the war that
the effect of bursting projectiles would be much
needed.
A gas
projectile
had also heer
better if the burst took place above ground, say
introduced, but it was never used during the war.
8-10 m up for a 25-pounder. This required
Development of ammunition during the
another type of fuze, which caused the fuze to
war was an ever-ongoing process and it was a
ignite the shell after a pre-planned flying time
large number of different propellants and fuzes
This was accomplished with the 'Time Fuze'
that were devised. 128 A few of the fuzes most
Three types were provided, one with a burning
commonly used were the following:
igniferous train that ignited when the shell left
the gun. The burning time was set before firing
• No. 117. Direct action percussion fuze,
and took into account the range to target and the
which were the standard for 25-pounders
when delivered from factories
required height of the burst. Another type used • No. 119. Percussion fuze with graze
a mechanical clock, which was set to provide
ignition after the set time. A third type was
options
developed during the war, but was not available
No. 210. Time fuze
until the last few months of the war. It was the
: No. 210. Simift to the previous but
'VT' fuze, or 'Proximity Fuze', which had a
specially designed for 'bouncing' (ricochet)
small radar' device, which ignited the shell when
bursts
the fuze registered the proximity of the ground.
No. 213. A combined percussion and time
'VT" stands for 'Variable Time'. This was the
fuze. Time function was baussion annen
most accurate type
chanical clock mechanism
again, it arrived too late to have any significant
of fuze for airbursts, but • No. 221. Fuze designed for special projec-
impact on the few remaining battles.
tiles and which had a time function based
When
an I
OPO/FOO
on a burning gunpowder string
wanted to fire
airbursts he had to take into account the un-
T 97. Proximity fuse der stridesigned for
avoidable dispersion along the trajectory, this
the 25-pounder and the 3.7-ineh mountain
when the 'Time Fuzes' were applied. During the
howitzer
first vears of the war it was considered to be too
T 100. Proximity fuze (VT) designed for
complicated a task on
the
part of
the 5.5.-inch gun and the 7.2-inch
young
OPO/FOOs with less training to control and
howitzer
direct the fire in three dimensions which delayed
the supply of such fuzes to the field units. But at
Time fuzes with mechanical time function were
last, in November 1941, deliveries started. 127
Gradually the interest for these increased. Not
preferred as they implied ll time funsion long
the trajectory when firing HE' projectiles. But
least the Canadians who were eager to avail
they were more expensive than those using a
themselves of the opportunities provided. The
difficulties on controlling and directing air burst
burning string. But the latter were good enough
for smoke and other special projectiles, as these
were not dependent on the same accuracy as the
HOW TO HIT THE TARGET - TECHNICAL GUN CHARACTERISTICS
former. Even more costly were the 'VT' fuzes
with their superior accuracy. Evans tells that 2/3
of the bursts were at the correct height after
ranging when using the fuzes with mechanical
time function and up to 90% when firing with
'VTs', 129
The possibilities to fire high air bursts
against points with known coordinates became a
popular method to bring different fire units into
the same grid when the battle was very mobile
and good maps were missing. This was the case
when Eighth Army rushed westwards in pursuit
of Rommel after the battle at El Alamein in
October/November 1942.
One gets, however, the impression that use
of percussion fuzes for direct ground impact was
by far the dominating method throughout the
war. Hence, the potential of firing airbursts with
their superior effect on the enemy seems to have
been much neglected.
For gun crews the use of different fuzes
always required strict observance, and needed
special handling when the standard fuze was not
to be used. For instance when a time fuze was
ordered the correct flying time to the burst above
Fig. 8-8 The selected fuze and its setting (fuze length)
determined whether the burst should take place
above, on ground impact or below ground level. Fuze
keys were used to attach the fuze to the shell and to
set the time to burst (fuze length). Such a key was on
display at Royal Artillery Museum (No. 9) (Author's
COllection)
ground must first be determined by means of a
Fuze Indicator. Correct flying time was then to
be fixed on the fuze using a Fuze Key. Such a
key can be seen on Fig. 8-8. The method was
improved during the war and later a special Fuze
Setter was introduced. This was so designed that
exactly the same flying time could be fixed for
all projectiles to be fired.
After this short review of technical aspects
of gun firing and the ammunition applied it
would perhaps be most logical to look at gun
laving and how this was done to secure target
hits. We will however first look at another prereq-
uisite for target hitting, the geodetics required for
determining and fixing the geographic relation
between guns and targets, which must be ac-
complished and this in three dimensions.
