Epilogue
Interview with Major General (retd) Jonathan B.A. Bailey CB, MBE, PhD
Major General Jonathan B. A. Bailey CB, MBE, PhD
This book deals with British artillery history
from World War II, after a brief look at the his-
torical background. It does not include the post-
war history and the Cold War. In order to get a
perspective on the British Army in general, and
specific strategic issues during that period and
the near future, I have turned to a distinguished
authority, Major General (ret.) Jonathan B.A.
Bailey CB, MBE, PhD. He was Director of the
Royal Artillery (and Inspector of Artillery) in
2000-2002. During the period 2002-2005 he
Was
Director
General
Development
Doctrine British Army. After his retirement he
has worked in the industry, but also as Visiting
Research Fellow of the Oxford Leverhulme
Programme on the Changing Character of War.
General Bailey has published several books and
articles on national and international defence
strategies and the historical development of
British artillery. The future development of the
national defence strategy has also been one of his
subjects for articles and lectures.
We met in September 2011 when I had the
opportunity to raise a set of questions, which are
presented in bold below. The answers and
comments kindly given by General Bailey are
with his permission summarized here.
Has observation of traditions and history
always been important to The Royal
Regiment of Artillery? What has it meant
as regards morale and fighting spirit?
- I must answer this question in the context of
British Army overall. Yes, it has over time been
demonstrably important in terms of perform-
ance and morale. I have for instance a survey
about battalion commanders in the first Iraqi
war of 1991, which clearly confirmed the impor-
tance of history. One Commander stated that he
felt very pressed to perform in line with the
proud history of his formation. So, knowledge
about the history strengthens the identity of the
formation, and this leads to a sense of pride of
serving there
In The Royal Regiment of Artillery the
battery seems to be the bearer of tradi-
tions?
- The Royal Regiment of Artillery, as an
umbrella organization for all artillery units, is of
course the bearer of all artillery traditions, but
batteries are in daily life the real bearers of tra-
ditions. This is marked by the fact that almost all
regular batteries have a title of honour attached
to it, such as I Battery (Sidi Rezegh) Royal
Horse Artillery'.
Another example that may be
of interest to Swedish readers is the 'O Battery
(The Rocket Troop) Royal Horse Artillery com-
memorating the battle at Leiprise fileren ome
2nd Rocket Troop Royal Horse Artillery' was
attached to the Swedish Armore Artilesy fras
a 'Room of History' at the barracks of most of
the batteries. This is not the case with regiments,
which in most cases are much younger than the
batteries.
3601
Why so?
-The reason for this role on the part of batteries
is Britain's long history. Batteries were often
deployed to support the infantry when 'policing'
the various corners of the Empire. They were
equipped for this role to act as independent for-
mations capable of supporting themselves. From
time to time they were 'brigaded' into temporary
regiments. Infantry companies on the other hand
vere seldom used independently as batteries
were. Their battalions were their natural homes.
Is it in your mind important to learn
from history?
- War is always a matter of human endeavour.
Clausewitz said that the purpose of study [of
history] was to establish an educated judgment.
With knowledge and understanding of history
you prepare your power of intuition for decision-
making in new situations. Technology and tactics
change, but man's nature does not. Therefore you
can learn much from history. Trying to judge the
future without knowing the history is a grave mis-
guidance and can prove to be dangerous. This is
not to say that history will be copied, but under-
standing the mechanisms behind it may prove
important in new situations. However, when
judging the future it is not necessarily the recent
history that is most important, it might well be
the much earlier history. Looking for instance on
the situation in the mid-90s, when the future role
of the armed forces was to be judged for the next
twenty years, the Cold War history with its linear
deployment and logistics had become irrelevant.
The types of conflict prevailing after this period
have called for manoeuvre capability, including
concentration of power at the right place at the
right point in time. There is much to be learned
about this in the history of the fluid battles of the
18th Century.
So, what seems irrelevant in
history now, might well become very relevant in
a new situation in the future.
What were the key issues for the
development of the British Army after
World War II?
- One should be clear about the fact that both
word wars were significant aberrations from the
traditional role of the British Army. Britain had
never had a huge standing army. The Royal
Navy was to
protect Britain from getting
inored in a larcent Britain rout in ting
the major wars Britain had to mobilize a huge
EPILOGUE
army of civilians. The inevitable question after-
wards therefore was, will this be the future? Or,
can we go back to real 'soldiering' in the Empire
only? After World War Il the British Empire was
bankrupt, but we had residual interests to protect
militarily during the process of colonial disband-
ment. At the same time we had to retain a
military capability to meet the Soviet threat in
Europe. For this task we had, as a member of
NATO, the British Army of the Rhine (BAOR),
or as would have been more correct to call it, the
British Army of the Elbe. So, the key issue was
to find a balance of capabilities for both tasks.
We had to retain the conscript system until 1963,
when it was finally abolished. Britain had always
disliked the conscript concept and wanted to get
rid of it as soon as possible.
And tactically?
- That was to further develop the capability of
mass concentration of artillery fire at shortest
possible time. A continuation of the successful
doctrine of close cooperation of ground forces
and the air forces was also to be pursued.
Does it mean that all-arms-cooperation,
which often failed during World War II,
was improved in the post-war period?
- The forces of the various member states of
NATO were to be used only within their own
allotted sector of the front, they had their 'slot in
the wall', so to speak. Hence there was not much
room for manoeuvre. The role of artillery was
defensive, not to support infantry and armour in
attack. There was an endeavour to further
develop cooperation between armoured forma-
tions and the infantry; but not with an emphasis
on just three-arms cooperation, i.e. armour-
infantry-artillery,
but
also
on
cooperation
between land and air forces. By the late 1980's
NATO had adopted plans that required greater
manoeuvre and ideas of air-land cooperation
reached their height with US-led thinking on 'Air
Land Battle'
- This change of NATO strategy in the mid-80s
took place upon British initiative (Field Marshal
Nigel Bagnall).
The restrictions of national
sectors on NATO's Inner German borders were
reduced to permit huge NATO counterattacks.
Instead of linear defence and linear logistics,
manoeuvre was to be the new operational
strategy. There was an emphasis on land-air co-
