GUNFIRE
This was completed on 31 May; the road to
Narvik was now laid open to the invaders.
How to employ 203 Battery RA?
As we have seen, the battery was complete again
on 1 May after having received guns and
vehicles after one week of waiting. Ammunition
was plentiful, around 400 shells per gun. And
more was under way. The ship Ciscar arrived
with a large load of ammunition on board;
34,920 high explosive shells and 7,200 smoke
shells were unloaded for the artillery, a clear in-
dication that there had been plans for much
more artillery later on than the single battery
hitherto landed, 261
But with whom to cooperate and give
support? Of course the Guards Brigade was a
natural alternative, but was the battery to operate
as one 12-guns unit or were the resources to be
delegated out to the three battalions? These were
not deployed together and much indicated that
they would be given quite different tasks. Hence,
this indicated a forthcoming delegation, not to
say fragmentation, of the only artillery available.
The battery commander was already the
first day ordered to prepare the battery for
movement and to allocate one FOO with
assistant and signallers to the South Wales
Borderers battalion still in quarters at Skanland,
but to be engaged on the Ankenes peninsula west
of Narvik.
Captain Sabrum, commander of F Troop,
was given the task. Next day, 2 May, he was
ordered to take a section of two guns to the port
of Harstad for loading on board a vessel to take
them to Ankenes. This was done around 20.00
hours this day. They arrived at Bogen on the
northern side of Ofoten Fjord around 04.00
hours on 3 May. The transport then continued
across the fjord to Skjomnes where they were
transferred to two smaller landing craft. It was
unclear during the day as to where to be landed.
resulting in inactivity, but eventually they were
landed at Meieri.
In the morning 4 May, British artillery
opened fire for the first time in Norway, let alone
at a small scale. Ranging against a target near
Narvik with 12 rounds per gun took place. The
weather was pleasant and it was fairly warm in
the sunshine. Towards the night, however, the
temperature dropped below zero. The ranging
was not only the first artillery fire in Norway; it
seems likely that it was the very first time during
the Second World War that British artillery of any
kind became engaged in battle!
The battery commander and his subordi-
nates at Harstad were engaged the following
days in reconnaissance of new quarters and
possible gun positions. Reinforcement of the
section from F Troop now deployed at the
Ankenes peninsula was also prepared. RASC
stocked more ammunition at Liland for that
section. The two guns now supported the French
battalion that had been deployed at the
peninsula. Observation zones were excellent and
most of Narvik could be well observed and fired
at, which the gunners did already on 8 May!
The rest of the battery still had not been
engaged, no task had been assigned to them, so
on 9 May an exercise with D and E Troops was
arranged in the neighbourhood of Ervik. The
war diary tells: 'This was practice for working as
detached troops under the conditions prevailing
in Norway?262 This is another confirmation that
one was not thinking in terms of concentration
of resources, nor fire. Was the historical heritage
a'ghost?
The diary says the same day that the planned
move of the remaining F Troop section to Ankenes
had been postponed. On the other hand, next day
D Troop was placed on two hours' notice to move
to Bodö via Harstad. The loading was completed
at 22.00 hours. The task was to support the
Scottish battalion down south at Moesjöen.
Day after day then passed and no tasks were
given to the remaining half of the battery. In the
afternoon 13 May, it was placed on two hours
notice for movement, but soon this was cancelled
and the gunners had again to continue their
waiting. One can imagine that General Auchin-
leck was met with frustration when he came to
the battery on 19 May at 09.00 hours for inspec-
tion. It was now requested permission for the
battery to, at least, practice some shootings on
their own, which the General accepted, and later
the same day the battery commander and the
commander of E Troop reconnoitred for such an
exercise. But it was to last a week until the
exercise could be done.
The days in between were used for other
types of exercise, which was not that easy as the
gunners had to experience daily air attacks as
well. The Battery sent spare wireless batteries
and cables etc, to the section at Ankenes. The
battery commander and other officers visited
their fellow-gunners
across the fiord. Even
2101
FAILED INTERVENTION IN NORWAY
contacts with D Troop south of Bodö were tried
to some extent.
Not known to the battery was that Auchin-
leck in a written order to the commander of
Guards Brigade on 13 May had said that 203
Battery was to be put under his command at
Bodo. It was furthermore said that it was 'hoped
that this could be arranged the next day' 263 This
did not happen because the brigade had been
forced to halt the transport to Bodö due to
bombing and ship grounding. The survivors had
returned to Harstad without their equipment.
On 20 May, brigade headquarters managed
to be back in Bodö and both the Welsh and the
Irish battalions were also on their way, albeit at
reduced strength. Also two Norwegian battalions
were now in the area. Therefore more artillery
was needed than the four guns of D Troop
already engaged down at Moesjoen and Mo sup-
porting the Scottish battalion.
Auchinleck made the decision at his daily
staff conference on 22 May that the battery
commander with a headquarters detachment
and one troop would be placed on six hours'
notice for transport to Bodö.264 But again no
movement was ordered. It has been said that
only one vessel with capacity for transport of
guns and vehicles existed, and other tasks for it
had been given higher priority.
One troop would be left at Harstad. It may
have been the intention to transfer the two
remaining guns of F Troop over to the Ankenes
peninsula and reunite them with the section that
had been there since 4 May. The war diary reveals
that this transfer never materialised. Further
problems again in finding suitable vessels?
The Minutes from General Auchinleck's
conference on 26 May breathed hesitation: 'C in
C [Auchinleck] said remainder 203 Bty may
need to be sent south?265
A reason for this might
be the fact that Auchinleck the day before had
received London's decision that the Expedi-
tionary Force would be evacuated. More about
this later.
The gunners at Ervik could do nothing but
wait, until on 29 May at 08.30 hours it was at
last possible to perform the shooting exercise
organised a week ago. The war diary
explains
that link shooting' was practiced by E Troop and
the remaining section from F Troop
On 31 May, a rumour reached them that D
Troop had returned from Bodö and the next day
2nd Lieutenant Clapham arrived informing the
battery commander that the troop had been
evacuated by a destroyer without the guns. He
and the others had been put ashore at Borkenes.
Map 17-1 shows where the various parts of 203
Battery were deployed and the dates and times
when they were evacuated.
We will now go back one week to have a brief
look at the course of the battle around Narvik.
Narvik recaptured
After a successful landing at Bjerkvik on 13 May
and subsequent fighting north- and eastwards,
and at the same time Norwegian advance south-
wards, the allied attack against the southern
shore of Rombak Fjord at Orneset was launched
at midnight 27 May. As usual up here it was
preceded by intensive fire from many naval
ships. The French artillery battalion and a
Norwegian mountain battery took part. These
artillery units were now deployed at the Öyjord
peninsula. After hard resistance, the German
garrison in Narvik retreated and the city was re-
captured finally on 28 May.
At the same time as the battle on the eastern
side of Narvik went on, the battle of the Ankenes
peninsula was initiated too. After the British and
French units had been relieved in the middle of
the month, the fighting was done by two battal-
ions of the Polish Brigade under Genera
Bohusz-Szyszko.
The Polish brigade was well trained and its
fighting spirit first class. They had now been given
the opportunity to take revenge for the German
attack on their country the previous autumn!
The Polish 2nd Battalion would attack
Ankenes in the night between 27 and 28 May
and push the Germans into the sea, so was the
final plan. In a coordinated attack the Polish 1st
Battalion would concentrate on Skuvtua and
Hestefjell and push the Germans away here but
also from Beisfjord, by which a retreat by road
from Narvik would be prevented. One company
would simultaneously by a flank attack capture
Tvedalsryggen.
A French battery with four 75-mm guns
and the two British guns from F Troop of 203
Battery RA were supporting the Poles. The
attacks were also to be supported by heavy fire
from the cruiser HMS Southampton equipped
with 6-inch guns
In the
official Royal Artillery History
(Farndale (1996), The Years of Defeat) it is said
that besides the two guns from F Troop also the
