GUNFIRE
not have, as in other armies, first to request
permission to do so. At company and
battalion level immediate support by a
troop (4 guns) or a battery (8 guns) could
thus be provided. Often the FOO, as
indicated in the example above, was autho-
rised in advance to engage his whole
regiment, sometimes many regiments
Ammunition shortage normally was not an
issue. Hence, speed and concentration of
fire were the priorities
Speed and concentration of fire often was
a higher priority than precision and
extensive fire preparations
• Striving for surprise was always encour-
aged
• Artillery was to be used also for deception
purposes
•
Fire plans should always be as simple a:
possible, even when large, in favour of
speed and reduced risks for errors in cal-
culations at command posts
The British batteries had more guns
(normally 8) than was common in other
armies (4-6). This facilitated concentra-
tions of firepower
This is how the central features of the British
artillery doctrine can be summarised. The
doctrine was well established already when the
war started. But the battle techniques necessary
for implementation were less advanced. Hence,
concentration of firepower was
not normal
practice, maybe for historical reasons
The
'Battery' was the administrative unit and central
point for fire engagement
rather
than
the
'Regiment'. Arms prestige and rivalry had not
favoured the so important all-arms exercises,
which were almost non-existent between the
world wars. Commanders of tank formations
seemed to believe that they did not need any
artillery support at all, 'they had their own guns
Perhaps a modern 'Balaklava Syndrome'? 151
Brigadier R.G.S. Bidwell touched upon the
problem in an article 1967:
The British Army has [...] another fatal mental
habit, which is to consider problems on a single
arm instead of an army basis. An American, a
Russian or a German commander would be as-
tonished at the doctrine, which British gunners
tamely accept, that it was (and is) part of an
artillery commander's duty not only to instruct
the other arms in the correct use of artillery, but
to go cap in hand selling his wares.
The development of radio
communication
technology had not been taken advantage of by
the infantry. Many old-timers considered it
unnecessary to use radio sets. A loud and clear
voice would do! And if this was not enough one
could always use dispatch riders. With this
attitude it was even more difficult to establish an
efficient all-arms cooperation including artillery,
not least when it came to concentration of
firepower in mobile battles.
The doctrine introduced later during the war
that artillery resources were to be tactically led at
highest possible level, Centralised Command,
and the technical management at lowest level,
Decentralised
Control,
Wae
not even wel
understood and accepted in the Royal Artillery
during the first years of the war. A consequence
was that it was more difficult to live up to the
doctrine of rapid concentration of firepower.
Although not an organisation with just fairly
lame interest in modernisation, it took time until
development of tactics and battle techniques in
the Royal Artillery geared up; when it did so, this
was in the first place attributed to devoted efforts
by a few determined men. Generals Jack Parham
and Sidney Kirkman, (Brigadiers in 1941-1942),
must be mentioned as the foremost of these.
After
evacuation from
France in
May/June 1940, which will be discussed in detail
in Chapter 16, it was easier to get acceptance for
changes, this in the light of bitter experience
from the campaign in France and Belgium. But
the leadership had to come from individuals with
the correct understanding from individuas with
opportunities
offered
technological development. offered bucceed
these individuals had to be well respected for
their professionalism and, not the least, be in
possession of a true entrepreneurial spirit. Jack
Parham was a man of this calibre. Another was
the mentioned Sidney Kirkman. We will come
back to these distinguished men several times
later in the book.
During the critical period 1940-1942 both
Were as mentioned ira peris a 1940-1942 both
enjoyed strong supporters alter Dunk Alan
Brooke, who himself had a background as
gunner, and during the first a backgrohad the
important position ofistonial years -Chiel
Home Forces (from 25 December 1941 Chief
1341
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
Imperial General Staff). Another supporter was
Brooke's artillery commander Otto Lund, Major
General Royal Artillery.
Back to Brigadier Bidwell:
Assisting with fire in protection of seized
ground/terrain
Harassing with fire on depth enemy's
transport, supplies, work at headquarters,
communication centres, etc.
.... Fortunately some single-minded and deter-
Providing forceful counter-bombardment
mined men, acting largely on their own and
against enemy artillery and mortars before
sometime in defiance of accepted habits of
and during attacks by own forces
thought, forced their ideas on the Army, but this
• Sealing off part of the battle theatre with
is not the way to handle great affairs. As long as
smoke
wars are fought the business of artillery is the
Providing some artificial light in support of
business of all. 153
attacks during nights
Taking part in deception operations
In this context we must not forget the Corps and
Division Commanders who early in the war un-
derstood the importance of all-arms training, one
of them the renowned commander of V Corps
(later commanding XII Corps and South-
Eastern Army, Home Forces during the early
years) Lieutenant General Bernard L. Mont-
gomery.
The old doctrine got its real meaning
through further development of methods and
techniques and - not the least - training. It is well
justified to state that the most important phase
of the new trend was concluded in the autumn
1941 with the historical huge army Exercise
Bumper. I will discuss later what it meant. At this
stage, I would however like to say that the battle
methods and techniques presented in this book
from here onwards represent state-of-the-art
from 1942 to the end of the war, although some
adaptations of these had to be made during the
final years in the light of new experience gained
and increased resources.
Now we are to look a bit more closely at
battle techniques applied for attack, i.e. offensive
actons
Violent, persistent - battle techniques for
attack
Even if the objectives of the artillery fire could
vary quite a lot, and there was room also for flex-
ibility in its application, a few basic techniques
were to be used. They can be summarised under
the term 'Covering Fire'. These were:
Facilitating the attack by supported units
by launching a barrage
By means of immediate observed fire sup-
porting an attack when this was pursued,
once the primary objectives had been
reached
It might be added that the artillery bombardment
sometimes was carefully coordinated with fire
from naval artillery, strategic bomber formations
and fighter-bombers, the latter using guns and
rockets.
This kind of cooperation
was
particular arranged in connection with the huge
landings in Italy and Normandy, but also in
connection with the smaller operations in Burma.
In these cases officers from the Royal Artillery
were engaged for liaison and fire control. It is not
possible in this book due to lack of space to
discuss the details and outcome of such
cooperation. Later on I will, however, briefly
touch upon some related issues 154
The large barrages fired during the war
became a special token on the part of the British.
But only after three years of war the resources
were available and the competence at hand. It
was then possible to fire a barrage for several
hours in support not only of divisional attacks,
but also one or two coordinated Corps attacks
could be well supported by this kind of covering
fire. This was at the upper end of the scale, in the
lower
end were barrages
fred for sinole
companies
and battalions.
Aven
such
situations the aim was to concentrate firepower
from more units than normally attached to them
for support
Robertson (1986) gives an example from
Burma in the spring of 1944:
At 22.20 the guns opened up on Cain, Rabbit and
Poland - all hell was let loose. In the Kalapanzin
Valley the guns of 136th, 139th, 7th Indian and
6th Medium and from west of the Mayu 130th
Field and 1st Medium fired simultaneously
Seventy-two 25-pdrs. sixteen 3.7-inch howitzer
and thirty-two 5.5-inch guns poured a torrent of
shells on the two features for twenty minutes. The
1351
