JUNFIRE
increase thus came about by all the new forma-
tions established, l.e. the 'war formations, al
process that culminated by the first half of 1943.
By then, some 50 'war formations' had been
organised. Some of these did not survive for
long due to war losses. Others were converted or
aisbanded for
various reasons
Hence the
number of active regiments was to change over
the years of war
After the peak in 1943, the number of field
regiments was affected by decisions to convert
light (field)
regiments to medium or heavy
regiments during the last few years of the war.
As regards these
categories the number of
regiments increased in 1944 and 1945. Increased
deliveries of guns from the domestic and Com-
monwealth industries, and from USA, as well as
battle experience, were driving forces in this
process.
A new light standard gun for divisional
artillery
As seen, the Roval Artillery went to war with -
albeit modernised - obsolete guns, and these
were
furthermore available in insufficient
quantity. To fully equip the around 120 field
regiments mobilised at the end of 1939 2,880
pieces were needed (24 per regiment).
addition to these many more were needed for
training, replacement of damaged or lost in battle
etc. An estimated increase to a total number of
around 3,500 pieces would be required. Roughly
half this number was available.
The fighting in Belgium and France in
May-June 1940, which ended with the evacua-
tion at Dunkirk, had a disastrous consequence
as regards the stock of artillery equipment. This
was particularly the case as regards the most
'modern' guns, the 18/25-pounder guns. Only
some 1,100 of this type had been delivered to the
Army and most of them had been sent with BEF
to France. One source (uncertain) says that only
334 of these were saved and brought back to
England. Most likely these were saved from
Cherbourg and a few other southerly ports in
France and not from Dunkirk 66
When this catastrophe came, and indeed it
was a catastrophe, the manufacture of the new
real' 25-pounder, i.e. Mark II, had begun, but
only a very limited number, if any, had been
delivered to active units. In any case, none had
been delivered to BEF. The first version of the
new gun was designated QF 25-pounder Gun
Mark II. The weight of the gun was 1,750kg.
Three versions are illustrated in Fig. 4-3. The
piece was a gun-howitzer
with the calbre
87.6mm. It may be called 'gun-howitzer' as it
was able to fire at long ranges with a flat trajec-
tory but also with higher trajectories with steep
descent like a howitzer. In order to facilitate this,
the shell was not fixed to the cartridge case but
the shell was first inserted into the barrel and
then a separate cartridge case. The latter was
filled with bags of propellant, the number of
which was dependent on which charge that was
to be used: Charge 1 for short ranges (blue bag),
Charge 2 (blue + white bags), Charge 3 (blue +
white + red bags) and for the longest ranges -
Super Charge. Some additional propellant bags
were supplied later during the war as Charge In-
crements. These charges gave more alternatives
for affecting the trajectory; e.g. Charge 2 + incr.
These options were in particular used in Italy
and Burma, when firing at targets behind
mountains and ridges was required, i.e. with
elevation higher than 45°: this is called the
'Upper Register'
The fourth charge, Super Charge, was one
entity and could not be combined with the
others. With this the gun could be fired at
maximum range, around
12,250m (13,500
yards), i.e. further than the 18/25-pounder
could. This charge was also used when direc
firing with anti-tank rounds at short distances
was needed, this thanks to the greater muzzle
velocity it provided. However, it should be
observed that this highest charge was normally
available only for around 25% of the stock of
ammunition supplied to the guns. This had to be
taken into account tactically when employment
of the guns was ordered. It was important to
avoid plans requiring extreme ranges, as there
could be a shortage of ammunition due to this
restriction. The 18/25-pounder could not use
Super Charge.
As mentioned, it would have been better if the
new gun could have fired one or two kilometre
further, as initially we sped one on two kilometes
to be abandoned as it was in conflict with the
requirement to have the weight of the gun under
approximately 30cwt (approx. 1,500kg).
After many years of discussions, not to say
squabbles, it was agreed that the gun carriage
should be of the box-trail type and not a split-
trail carriage. This meant that traverse within the
carriage was limited to 5° in both directions. That
Fig. 4-3 The new generation of field guns.
The 25-pdr became standard field gun but several
versions were manufactured during the war. From
1943 it was equipped with a muzzle brake
QF 25-pdr Gun Mark II (RAHT)
QF 25-pdr Mark Ill with muzzle brake (Olmperial
War Museum B 9985)
25 pdr with the so-called Jury axle adapted for
conditions prevailing in Burma (Author's collection)
A DECISIVE REARMAMENT
disadvantage was eliminated with a creative
design solution: a firing platform on which the
gun was placed and locked. The platform was
designed to absorb the recoil, which thus could
be avoided as far as the box-trail was concerned.
No spade was needed. Hence it was very easy to
traverse the barrel 360 around
Elevation was limited to 40-45° and depres-
sion to 5°; however, higher elevation was found
necessary. A special sight was introduced to
make this possible, but one still had to improvise
the deployment of the gun. This could, e.g., be
done by placing the wheels of the guns higher
than usual or digging a pit into which the end of
the box-trail could be lowered. By such arrange-
ments elevation up to around 70°
could be
applied (Fig. 10-7).
An ammunition limber was hooked to the
gun during transport. This contained a ready for
use stock of ammunition comprising 32 complete
rounds. When firing ceased, and redeployment
was ordered, the gun was hooked to the limber
and this to the tractor. This was the same
arrangement as for the 18/25-pounder. It can be
seen as a kind of legacy from the earlier period
when guns were horse-drawn.
When the new gun went into service, three
types of shell were supplied, a high explosive shell
(HE), a solid armour-piercing projectile and a
smoke shell. Later also a chemical shell was man-
ufactured, but it was fortunately never to be used.
The HE shells could be used with different
types of fuze. By means of these, bursts above
ground, on (Instant Impact, IA) or below it
(Delayed Impact) could be arranged. A variant
of delayed burst was the 'ricochet burst' which
required fairly flat trajectory and flat ground
Time fuzes of different types were available,
both one based on a burning train of gunpowder
(combustion) and one based on a mechanical
(clock) device. The mechanical time fuzes were
not introduced until 1941
The armour-piercing projectile had a tracer
element attached to it to facilitate observation
when fired.
The first smoke projectile produced white
smoke, but other smoke colours were also
available later in the war. Projectiles for artificial
light were available too, but this type does not
seem to have been used very much.
A special projectile was the propaganda pro-
jectile. It could be filled with numerous printed
propaganda sheets. which when fired were
