Preface
This book was first published in Sweden in 2013, written for those interested in
military history, in particular artillery history. The English version is a slightly
revised edition in order to take into account valuable comments and suggestions
received from readers and experts in Sweden and U.K. Many photographs have
been replaced by substitutes made available from various sources during the
process of preparation.
The conceptual idea was to provide insights as to how artillery resources were
established, developed technically and tactically and used during the Second World
War, with the British Royal Artillery as an example. This is often very sparsely dealt
with in the voluminous literature on Second World War battles.
The book is not a scientific treatise, neither regarding theory nor methodology.
It is based on observations of particular interest to me, hoping, however, that this
will give readers a better understanding of the role of artillery in the Second
World War.
The reason for selecting the British artillery as a subject for this book is partly
a consequence of different coincidences, but it is also due to contacts with some
British war veterans during the early 2000s. I have also been inspired by a statement
about the British artillery that Lieutenant General Brian Horrocks often gave in
his forewords to various publications, but also expressed in many public contexts.
He was, as is familiar to many readers, one of Field Marshal Bernard L. Mont-
gomery's most valued and engaged Corps Commanders during the war. One of
his statements reads as follows: 'Although I am an infantryman, and proud of it, I
have many times said that the Royal Regiment of Artillery, in my opinion, did more
to win the last war, more than any other Arm of the Service?
After having seen similar statements several times, my interest arose to investi-
gate what really laid behind these positive words about the British artillery effort.
In my studies, I first examined the artillery resources built up by the British, what
equipment they had, how the resources were organised, what technical, tactical, and
combat methods etc. that were applied, all against an historical background. The
latter is important to have some knowledge of, thus giving a better understanding
of the position of the British Artillery just before and during the Second World War.
Great Britain had, as is well known, hundreds of years back in time a vast empire,
with India as the largest and richest possession. The Army's main task had histori-
cally been geared primarily to defend this empire. For the artillery this meant
'policing' with smaller units, a few guns organised into troops and batteries. It was
due to this 'historical burden', but also because of serious negligence in the interwar
period, that Britain was ill prepared in the late 1930s for a modern continental war.
It became a rude awakening, and we can see that the necessary renovation, mod-
ernisation and adaptation of a new organisational structure and modernised
methods and tactics, which started in late 1938, was a process that was to take about
five years to complete. This despite the fact that the country and its industry were
put on a war footing in 1939 for fastest possible rearmament.
PREFACE
The build-up of new resources and associated technical requirements and ca-
pabilities as well as modernised tactics is discussed in the book's first two parts,
Part 1 and Part 2. It should be stressed here that artillery fire was not just about
guns and shells. The context is a complete system with many components; it is
usually called the 'indirect fire system'. It was the system efficiency that was crucial
and a prerequisite for success in battle. A distinction to mention here is that I have
only written about what usually is called field artillery. Anti-aircraft, anti-tank,
coastal artillery and artillery for the protection of merchant navy ships are largely
left aside. As the two former artillery services beyond their primary functions
sometimes were used also in ground combat in addition to field artillery, they are,
however, sometimes discussed briefly in this book. It should also be noted that
artillery commanders in higher units, corps and divisions, were in command of all
the artillery participating in battle, i.e. the field artillery as well as anti-aircraft and
anti-tank units.
The Royal Regiment of Artillery, colloquially Royal Artillery or only RA, from
the early 1700s is the formal home of all artillery units employed for combat since.
It was, and is, itself not a combat unit but a sort of umbrella organisation. Hence,
the existing resources in 1939 and those gradually established later during the war
had their home, so to speak, within this organisation. The resources were organised
in regiments, which in their turn consisted of 3-4 batteries. I have chosen to retain
the term 'regiment' in order not to obscure the connection to the source material
and the parlance accepted in UK, Field Regiment, Medium Regiment etc. The reader
should, however, be aware that a British artillery regiment was roughly the same
as 'artillery battalion' in other countries' armies.
The book's third section, Part 3, describes how the British artillery resources
actually were used during the war. Obviously, it has been impossible to analyse and
describe this for all kinds of battles that took place. The selection of battles made
has intended first to describe the use of, or lack of use, of artillery during the early
war years, with the resources then available and methodological conditions pre-
vailing - in the campaigns in France and Norway in particular. Then I have devoted
much attention to the most important battle in the middle of the war, namely El
Alamein that took place on 23 October to 4 November 1942. This battle meant a
new trend in terms of mass employment of artillery and close air support. During
the last two years of the war the British artillery was at the height of power and
versatile capabilities. This is covered in some chapters on some of the major oper-
ations in Northwest Europe in 1944-1945, the grand finale being the Allied
crossing of river Rhine in March 1945. The British artillery can be said then to
represent the state-of-the-art. The same or similar technologies, organisation, tactics
etc. came to survive relatively unchanged in most countries for another 40-50
years, i.e. basically the Cold War period. With computers, GPS, gyro compasses
and precision ammunition the next trend came, or if you like, the next paradigm
shift, say around 1990.
One of the concluding chapters briefly deals with the fighting against the
Japanese in Southeast Asia in 1941-1945. The gunners were there to face a
different, extremely brutal and ruthless opponent characterised by a different
culture and a different view on human value than they had met in Europe, an
opponent who also was extremely dedicated and talented in everything he
undertook. They also had to face him there under appalling terrain and climatic
conditions. The use of artillery resources was influenced by all of this, and was thus
