GUNFIRE
niscence from the Great War when the gun
positions, well protected behind static fronts.
very rarely risked an enemy infantry attack
The vehicles
When the war broke out the British Army had not
standardised its stock of vehicles and thus many
different types of various manufacture existed
This situation prevalled during the course of the
war and was further complicated during the last
few
vears of the war by addition of many
American and Canadian vehicles to those manu-
factured in Britain. In particular foreign-built
vehicles were used for heavy transport.
All vehicles used by the Royal Artillery can
thus not be illustrated in one, not even in a
couple of photographs, but a selection of them
are presented in Fig. 5-2
Vehicles with two-wheel and four-wheel
drive were used. Many special vehicles were also
used, for instance for water transport or as am-
bulances. Many were used as vehicles for radio
communication or staff work
One special vehicle was the mentioned
Ouad, the tractor for the 25-pounder and its
related ammunition trailers. It existed in many
versions designed and manufactured by several
manufacturers in Britain and overseas. In total
some 22,000 are said to have been manufac-
tured. The Quad was very robust and reliable.
but a disadvantage was its weak engine, which
caused problems in difficult terrain and when
steep hills had to be climbed.
During the final vears of the war, plans were
made to replace the Quad with a half-track
tractor, after inspiration from Germany, to be
implemented as a standard vehicle for field
regiments but also for anti-tank and anti-aircraft
guns. Nothing, however, materialised during the
war. For medium guns a suitable tractor, the
Matador, existed which also was used for heavy
anti-aircraft guns. For the vintage heavy guns the
Scammel tractor was much used
Supply transport were normally undertaken
by means of 3-ton lorries, some of them with
four-wheel drive. Another much used vehicle
was the light truck, the 15 cwt truck 4x4, which
also was used for many other tasks. The Jeep did
not exist during the first vears of the war, but
when it arrived in 1942, it became immensel
popular for all sorts of purposes; e.g. towing of
suppl
trailers, mountain
guns
and
Jack
howitzers. It replaced many older small British-
Fig. 5-2 A sample of vehicles used by artillery for-
mations for different purposes
The Quad was through the war the standard gun
tractor for regiments equipped with the 25-pdr
gun. It was made by many different manufacturers
in Britain and Canada (RAHT)
The Matador was used as gun tractor for medium
and heavy anti-aircraft guns (RAHT)
The 15-cwt light lorry was used as a radio car, for
transportation of observation parties and other
purposes (RAHT)
made vehicles
As mentioned, the standard vehicle for ob-
servation parties with the infantry divisions was
the Universal Carrier,
which
was retained
through the war. An example of this use of the
carrier is illustrated in Fig. 5-3
ARTILLERY GROUPING, ORGANISATION AND EQUIPMENT
Fig. 5-3 A sample of vehicles used by artillery
commanders and observation parties
The light Universal Carrier was the standard
vehicle for the observation parties in the field
regiments of infantry divisions. The main radio was
the No. 22 wireless set which was fixed in the
vehicle. A remote control unit made traffic possible
at distances up to some 700 yards from the carrier
Note the telephone cable at the front (RAHT)
During the final vears of the war halftracks were
often used by the artillery in armoured divisions.
This one is from a post-war museum (Shutter-
stock.com No. 74245039)
Observation parties of the armoured divisions hac
to use tanks or halftracks in order to be able to
follow armoured units to be supported. One alter-
native was the Churchill tank seen here, Sherman
tanks were also used frequently. To provide
necessary space for signallers and wireless sets the
gun of the tank was often removed and the barrel
replaced by a wooden dummy (Author's collection)
Self-propelled guns required a
modernised stock of vehicles
Field Regiments equipped with self-propelled
guns required more of skilled maintenance and
supply personnel than the ordinary regiments
such us gun technicians, and mechanics
Around 25 more men were needed in these
regiments, the size of it thus increasing to around
750 men for the Sexton-equipped regiments
organised from 1944 onwards.
As regards transport vehicles, one major dif-
ference was that the Commanding Officer, all
Observation Post Officers (OPOs) and the Gun
Position Officers (GPOs) were given tanks, the
total number normally being thirteen. Further-
more, the medium trucks (15cwt 4x4) that were
equipped with radio equipment were replaced
by half-track vehicles. In total 46 such vehicles
were avallable in the regiment. These changes of
vehicles implied much better protection and
improved mobility.
During the last years of the war it was quite
common to dismantle the guns of Sherman and
Churchill tanks used by the gunners and install
a wooden dummy in order to give more room
for signallers and their radio equipment. Fig. 5-3
illustrates some vehicle alternatives
Organisation of Medium and Heavy
Regiments
As mentioned the Medium Regiments nominally
had tun
Batteries
each with eight guns
Although the gun detachments were larger than
those of the 25-pounders, ten instead of six men
the total size of the regiment was smaller, around
590 men. Apart from the gun tractors these
types of regiment had the same types of vehicle
as the Field Regiments. The gun tractors were
bigger and stronger than the Quads, the Medium
Regiment had as mentioned the Tractor, 4x4
medium or just Matador, which is shown in Fig.
5-2. This was a powerful and reliable tractor. The
gun tractor for the vintage 7.2-inch howitzer of
the Heavy Regiment normally was the old-timer
but efficient. Scammel, but the Matador was also
used. The Observation Post Officers and their
parties were transported by means of the
Universal Carrier as was the case in the Field
Regiments. But two tanks were also provided,
one for each Battery Commander
A limited number of Medium Regiments
were equipped with the two types of medium
gun, the 4.5-inch and the 5.5-inch gun. The
