GUNFIRE
the beginning of August and was replaced by
General Harold Alexander (Later Field Marshal
Earl Alexander).
Auchinleck has remained a controversial
person up to these days. On the one hand, this
was due to his skills and on the other hand to his
weaknesses. This will not be discussed in detail
here, but it might be relevant
to
raise the
question as to whether he lacked one of the most
important qualities of leadership, so important
both in the civilian life as in the military sector.
namely the ability to recruit good subordinates
and with them establish a strong managerial
team. We had an early indication of this already
when looking into his role in Norway 1940. This
became even more obvious in North Africa. But.
to his credit, he was the man who stopped
Rommel at El Alamein in July 1942.
The intention of Churchill was to get one of
the Corns
Commanders of the 8th Army.
General Gott, to replace Auchinleck as army
commander. However, he was killed when his
aircraft was shot down by a German fighter. The
order then went to Montgomery, at the time
commander of XII Corps in England. He was to
replace Auchinleck on 15 August 1942, but as
was typical, he took command on 13 August.
This, he told London by means of a short
message, and this just had to be accepted.
Qattara Depression - its historical
importance
El Alamein was small a village with a railway
station and a few buildings near the Mediter-
ranean coast. Despite this, the location has
received a place in world history due to the
battles that took place there in 1942. But the fact
behind this was not the place as such but the
terrain at large and the decisive importance of
the Qattara Depression. This formation has its
northernmost part some 50-60km south of El
Alamein. To the south, the Depression extends
140-160km.
The width of it in
west-east
direction is of the same magnitude. The Depres-
sion is situated around 10-50m beneath the sea
level
In the
northernmost part and falls
around
100m below
the
sea level
in the
southernmost section (the lowest point is said to
be - 133m).
The
Depression is
comprised
salt
marshes and sand dunes and was regarded at the
time to be impossible to
cross with motor
transport and large military formations.
Between the Mediterranean and the Depres-
sion, the terrain can be characterised as a plateau
10-50m above sea level in the North rising to
around 100-150m in the southernmost part.
There are several large hills in the latter part with
heights up to more than 200m above sea level.
Several fairly distinct ridges exist in the norther
part. These became important during the battes
to come. To the east, the Alam el Halfa ridge
dominated, southwest of this down towards the
attara Depression was the Himeimat Ridge
and northwest of this the Ruweisat Ridge. Inits
turn this had another ridge, which was to play an
important role, the Miteiriya Ridge located
northwest of it. And when we look further
northwest from the latter, we have the smaller
Kidney Ridge
(its shape reminiscent of a
kidney!) and west of this the important the
Rahman Track which went from the sea south-
wards. Close to the latter in the northern sector
was another hill, Tell El Aqqagir.
The ridges had a hard surface made up of
stones. It was practically impossible to dig in and
arrange battle positions with
shelters and
trenches. This was easier between the ridges and
hills where the surface generally was covered
with sand.
A distinct difficulty in this terrain was diffi-
culty in navigating. Lack of dominating features
and other distinguishable features made this very
difficult. Dust clouds from numerous military
vehicles and bursting shells made observation
even more difficult. A few methods used to
overcome this problem will be discussed later.
Due to the existence of the Qattara Depres-
Sion, all major military movements had to be
'channelled' into the narrow area between the
Depression
ana the
Mediterranean at El
Alamein. It was a natural edite on the part of
the British to establish strong defence positions
here; it was here that a strong detence premen
by the enemy could be prevented. Map 19-1
illustrates the area at larprevere the battles of
El Alamein took pat large where the d tralans
were on the western side of thmirns ine and the
British east of this.
When Auchinleck had stopped Rommel in
this particular area, ok had stopped Roween the
two opponents followed, and this behind huge
minefields and barbed wire fences. The Brish
detence was strongest in the ether part and
did not cover the whole
distance down to
Cattara Depression. The
denth of defence
2301
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
eastwards here was around 100km (as far back
as Alexandria) and to Cairo the distance was
around 200km.
The British supply lines were short, but for
Rommel and his Italian allies it was the other way
around. To the most important harbour, Tripoli,
it was as much as 1,600km and to the nearest
harbour with capacity, Tobruk, it was some
500km from the front. Added to this problem,
were the frequent attacks by the Royal Navy &
the Royal Air Force on the seaborne transport
across the Mediterranean. The Royal Air Force
also frequently attacked the transport routes on
land. The huge logistic challenges would dis-
courage the German High Command, one
might expect, but this was not Rommel's nature.
How had the artillery resources been
employed before El Alamein?
During the fighting in North Africa in 1940-
1941 the availability of artillery was limited. As
in other theatres obsolete guns were a huge dis-
advantage. Divisional artillery had 18-pounders
and 18/25-pounders, later
being
replaced
gradually by the 25-pounder Mark II. At the
time of the great offensive in October 1942, all
19-1).
the vintage field guns, however were gone (Fig.
The situation was really bad as regards
medium guns. A few medium regiments had 60-
pounders
and obsolete American 150mm
howitzers. No heavy artillery existed at all. When
the first few months of 1942 had passed, the old
medium guns were replaced by new guns. In
June 1942 the two medium regiments in place,
Medium Regiment RA and 64 Medium
Regiment RA, had been rearmed. Each received
one battery with 4.5-inch guns and one with the
5.5-inch gun. Later 69 Medium Regiment RA
was allotted to 8th Army also. That regiment was
equipped with 4.5-inch guns only.
The Eighth Army had in this period thrown every
rule for the correct employment of field artillery
out of the window, and was paying for it.
This was written by one of the true experts on
British artillery development, Brigadier R.G.S.
Bidwell, in an article about the employment of
British artillery in the Desert War before the
great offensive in October 1942.298 What
was
on his mind?
His primary criticism was about dispersion
of resources. The battles were generally fought
at the brigade levels, often by temporary battle
groups, so-called 'Jock Columns' 299 Such battle
groups normally comprised infantry and tank
units to which were attached an artillery battery,
in some cases a regiment. Sometimes could not
more than a troop (4 guns) be made available.
Fig. 19-1 Once British artillery resources were less dispersed, and fire could be more concentrated in battles.
artiller had a much more dedi resources were less disper of the first examples is when the besieged British
forces prevented Tobruk to fall in 1041 and event and exampic his maunder took mart in tha
