GUNFIRE
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
skilled in whatever he undertook, often lacked
logistic resources for
mass engagement of
artillery (except when Singapore was besieged).
Hence, artillery firepower was rarely applied.
The Japanese infantry units had to stick to direct
support from single guns or just a few. Counter-
battery fire was thus rarely applied in this theatre
and never caused the British too many problems
Counter-bombardment
against
enemv
artillery required accurate fixation of enemy gun
positions, normally quite far beyond the front
line, but a problem was that they rarely could be
observed from own observation posts. Instead
the intelligence resources, 1.e. sound rangers.
short and long observation bases and, not the
least air observers and RAF air-co-operating
squadrons, had to be used for the fixation of gun
positions. A special, important task was bom-
bardment of not only field guns but also enemy
anti-aircraft positions when airborne formations
were to be landed.
Towards the end of the war British heavy
anti-aircraft guns were much used in counter-
bombardment programmes, i.e. in a ground role
thanks to their long range and accuracy. Suitable
Fig. 12-7 An ever-existing threat against the British
troops were mortars and, as shown here, the 'Nebelwer
fer', which fired six rockets. Several versions with differen
calibres were used. For Air Observation Officers they
were good targets as it was very easy to detect their de
ployment thanks to the rocket trail (RAHT)
fuzes added to their versatility.
Counter-bombardment was the renonsibil
ity of every artillery unit. but the large-scale pro-
grammes gradually became the prime task of
medium
andl
heavy
batteries/regiments
organised in a number of 'Army Groups Roya
Artillery, 'AGRA' for short This meant that the
task more and more was centralized to Corp:
level, in particular during large operations. In the
Corps artillery headquarters a special branch
was therefore introduced for planning and im-
plementing large counter-bombardment pro
grammes. The head was the Counter Battel.
Incer (CBO) who was assisted hu a group of
officers and assistants. The acronum also mean
Counter Battery Office. For efficient commun
cation of data on enemy gun positions a specia
radio net normally was reserved on middlemen
Fig. 12-8 The German 105-mm Leichte Feldhaubitze 18 was the standard gun in German divisional artillery
Most of the guns were horse-drawn, but half-track vehicles were also extensively used as gun tractors (RAHT)
should interfere! Speed was crucial, and as we
will see, ten minutes from location of an enemy
battery until receiving the British shells was con-
sidered an acceptable, and necessary, standard.
In stationary situations and before larger
offensive operations, long lists with map refer-
ences (coordinates) for those enemy batteries
that had been located in
davance
were
Fig. 12-9 A German 170-mm gun in North Africa
This was one of several guns with long ranges (up to
30km) that the British must be prepared to destroy
either by means of fiahter-bomber aircraft or own
long-range artillery (RAHT)
produced. This was made by artillery headquar-
ters. The lists were continuously updated and
often complemented with special reports from
analyses made regarding the enemy artillery and
its deploment
Counter-bombardment
normalit
executed by means of a first heavy strike
followed by neutralisation for some time. The
doctrine required the fire to be planned for a su-
periority of at least 10-20. which meant that
each enemy gun should be engaged by 10-20
British guns, hence a battery of four guns would
attract the fire from 40-80 guns! This often
made it necessary to bombard enemy batteries
in turn. A programme like this was popularl
called a 'Milk Round'. The 'milk round' should
be kept fairly short with minimum delay before
the attack. When the attack was on. some units
should be read to repeat counter-bombardment
against batteries that had survived the first blow
It also happened quite often that new parlie,
undiscovered batteries opened up and required
immediate counter-battery fire
counter-bombardment
took place
without preceding ranging, which was normal
in large operations, i.e. predicted fire was
applied: huge
ammunition
shendino
required in order to acquire the wanted effect.
Svstematic investigations about the accuracy of
the large counter-bombardment programmes
fired in Oneration Veritable 7_8 February 1945.
close to river Rhine, gave the disappointing
result that only 5.1% of the shells fired at enemu
gun positions fell within 100 x 100 vards from
