GUNFIRE
huge institution. It had most qualified and expe-
rienced teachers and instructors covering all
aspects of gunnery and the use of the 'indirect
fire system'. At Larkhill, a systematic collection
and evaluation of war experience also took place.
Exercises at all levels an ongoing process
Repeated drill in all basic skills needed at the
guns, at command posts, at observation posts, at
headquarters,
signallers.
etc., was never
neglected by the Royal Artillery formations
Skills
needed by
everyone,
irrespective of
position.
should never fail
and duties be
performed even when one was exhausted or
wounded. The risk for human errors must be
minimised as discussed above. Drill was also
seen as a good means for imposing and retaining
discipline and a good spirit in the field.
But drilling in individual roles was not
enough; drilling gun crews, battery and troop
command post staffs and others must also
accomplish teamwork.
After
such training
exercises
at higher levels had to be run for
training of troops, batteries and regiments to be
able to act efficiently as coherent units in all
tactical situations.
Now a few words about one of the most
important challenges,
all-arms-training, i.e.
exercises for artillery to function efficiently in
cooperation with those to be supported by
artillery fire. This had been much neglected
before the war, and this with sad consequences
when the realities of war came. Some senio,
commanders with foresight drew the right
conclusions and changed the attitudes and
behaviour. Not least large all-arms exercises,
performed before planned large operations, were
arranged later during the war, and this with
decisive results.
And with the real battle, the final type of
training
came,
on-the-job-training!
00 ini
summary, the British gunners had to, all the
time, Exercise, Exercise, Exercise - when done
properly the battle could be won.
I will come back to these issues later in the
book.
No engagement by large formations became
effective unless their
headquarters
worked
efficiently and systematically, i.e. proficient staff
work of 'high calibre' was necessary for success
in battle. Without it, even the best commander
would fail, whoever he was. Having now reviewed
artillery battle techniques and tactics, we will
briefly look at the organisation of staff work.
14. Success Requires Efficient Staff Work
Three disciplines
Large battles described in literature and films
with formation symbols and coloured arrows
might give the impression that the General with
his pen and a few words was leading his troops
to victory. Everything looks so simple! But reality
was far from this. A commanding General might
have the right visions about what his troops
should accomplish and how they would act in
order to defeat the enemy, but without efficient
staff work nothing would materialise.
Staff work was needed at all hierarchal
levels, let alone to much varying extent. A Corps
headquarters and a battalion headquarters had
quite different volumes of work to do, and of
course the staff resources available for it were
quite different. Looking at principles, however,
much work was the same. During the Second
World War staff work included the following
tasks in most cases:
• Monitoring and evaluating the tactical
situation including preparation of various
reports
• Planning of battles and other activities in
the short and long term, often based on al-
ternative scenarios
Production of written orders or key data
for oral orders to be given
• Participation in presentation of orders to
subordinated commanders and units
Distribution of orders
Planning and leading supply of ammuni-
tion, fuel, food, spare parts etc.
Administration of human resources
including taking care of killed, wounded
and prisoners of war. Distribution of infor-
mation, arranging entertainment and leave
schemes
In the British Army, the staff was organised in
three disciplines. G' Staff was responsible for
operations, intelligence, communication and
training. 'A' Staff was responsible for manpower
administration includine disciplinary actions. O
Staff had to take care of administration of
supplies. In principle, the functions existed at all
headquarters, but at lower levels some of them
could be allocated to the same officer or a small
group of officers.
At higher levels, officers with different ranks
could be organised to take care of the different
disciplines. In their turn, they were supported by
assistants of lower rank, signallers and others
Looking at a divisional headquarters, as an
example, the following staff members were on
board:
General Staff Officer, Grade 1 (GSO 1)183
His task was to manage all the staff functions
and, if needed, be capable of replacing the Divi-
sional Commander. It can be said that he was re-
sponsible for the detailed operative planning and
acted as Chief of Staff. He was assisted by
General Staff Officer, Grade 2 (GSO 2), who
primarily was engaged in preparation of orders,
planning of marches etc. In his turn he was
assisted nu
General Staff Officer, Grade 3 (GSO 3/0]) and
General Staff Officer, Grade 3 (GSO 3 (I). The
latter was responsible for the important 'Intelli-
gence' function. In order to secure continuity he
was supported by an Intelligence Officer (I0).
When the war broke out, the staff also
included an officer responsible for actions
against chemical warfare and related exercises,
To provide effective liaison with subordinate
units, there were three Motor Contact Liaison
Officers (MCLO).
At the divisional level, security was
extremelv important to be observed in all radio
and telephone communication. The officer in
charge was the Cipher Officer.
The leader of the so important administra-
tive function was the Assistant Adjutant and
Quarter Master General (AA&QMG) assisted
by Deputy Assistant Adjutant General (DAAG),
who was responsible for disciplinary issues at the
highest level and Denutv Assistant Ouarter
Master General (DAQMG) who was responsi-
ble for supply of ammunition and other necessi-
