GUNFIRE
targets beyond the front line such as enemy gun
positions.
Target acquisition - the most difficult
Task
Each infantry or armoured commander would
be accompanied by an officer and an observa-
tion party from the supporting artillery unit. On
contact with the enemy, the Gunner officer's
task was to identify and locate the enemy
position in order to bring down immediate pro-
tective fire. Maybe the enemy fire was coming
from several positions, or from a cluster of farm
buildings, or from a section of the woods, or
anything else. The Gunner officer must quickly
relate the enemy's ground location to his map
and pass that data to his guns in preparation for
providing the supporting fire for the ensuing
attack, but how? The coordinates must be fixed
and communicated to the gun position. It was
not a good idea to ask the infantry commander.
He rarely could tell. If anybody could, it was the
Gunner. He had followed the advance on the
map and had a brief knowledge where the
advance had been stopped, but a more detailed
'map reading was necessary to find the exact
coordinates. In most cases he only had his
compass and binoculars as help, but he could
also be assisted. Occasionally his observation
party had an optical instrument for measure-
ment of distances, a rangefinder, which could be
used as a complement.
Map reading was one of the fundamental
skills that the Gunner officer had to learn and
master. This involved determining the correct
coordinates of targets quickly and frequently
when exposed to enemy fire and foul weather
conditions. Tohnny Walker told me that, during
his first service as 2nd Lieutenant, he was drilled
in this art by his battery commander. At any time
during an exercise he could get the question
from the commander: 'Can you see the big oak
over there? What are the coordinates? If one
could not provide the correct answer an extra
exercise in map reading after the normal work
on Saturdays was imposed.'13
Map reading in North Africa was particu-
larly difficult because of the lack of distinguish-
able terrain formations and similarly in Burma's
close jungles. It is easy to understand that the
impact of artillery fire could be completely
wrong under such conditions
Under more stationary conditions map
reading could be complemented by other means
for fixing targets or potential targets. First of all
it was a matter of getting a good overview of tho
coming fighting area.
Besides the personal
binoculars and hand compass instruments like a
director, observation binoculars, a rangefinder
or a theodolite could be helpful. With these the
Observation Officer could fix coordinates for
important terrain objects and potential targets
etc., and document the data on a panorama
sketch. Intersection from cooperating observa-
tion posts was another method, often used.
These could be manned by the Observation
Officers of the batteries but could also be posts
manned by the Flash Spotting Troops of Survey
Regiments
Targets were of course also to be located
deep into the battlefield bevond the reach of
human eyes. This required observation from
RAF aircraft or by
gunner
Officers in Air
Observation Posts (e.g. Auster aircraft); but also
by means of such methods as sound ranging
and, during the final phase of the war, radar
Despite all instruments and elaborated
methods accurate target acquisition was nou
always possible to accomplish. In such cases only
one additional method remained: ranging of
artillery fire to fix the exact target location. We
will come back to this later in the book.
How to deal with geodetic relations at the
gun positions?
As discussed above, the geodetic relationship
between the guns and target had to be estab-
lished correctly in order to hit the target but the
coordinates for these two locations had to be
from the same grid system. But how to get pro-
Jectiles fly between the two but how to get pr
At first the firing bearing from the Troop oi
Battery position must be determined and then
the range to cover. This could be done trigon-
metrically when the coordinates were known. At
the troop and battery command posts forms,
logarithm tables etc., were amand posts forml
culations. Slide rules were avalable for such care
calculations.
Graphic methods were more commonl
used. For these the command posts had one or
two artillery boards. Two sizes were available
one 21.5 x 21 inches, the other was larger, about
31 x 31 inches. The board was overlaid with a
tracing paper with a grid in scale 1:25,000 ol
1:50,000 and numbered such that the planned
11
HOW TO HIT THE TARGET - GEODETIC REQUIREMENTS
shooting zone was well covered. On the board a
metallic bearing arc was attached with the zero
line in the centre. Sometimes limiting boundaries
in line and range for potential fire beyond which
no fire was permissible could be drawn.
On the board the position of the deployed
Troop was
marked with a drawing pin.
metallic range arm was attached from this pin
The pin was placed exactly where the right
fourth gun of the Troop is positioned, the pilot
gun as it was called. The coordinates of this gun
were thus representing the location of the Iroop.
Similarly the 'pilot gun' of the left Troop in a
battery represented the location of the battery.
The arm was graduated in vards up to 12,000 or
16,000 yards depending on type selected. A
plotting protractor could be of help
when
plotung on the artillery board.
When arranged as presented, the artillery
board could be used for graphic solutions of any
problem involving map references, coordinates,
bearings, ranges, switches from the zero line etc
Normally, it was used for determination of
switches and ranges for targets with reported
map coordinates. It could also be used the other
way around, i.e. to deduce coordinates of targets
to which switch of line and range have been
recorded after firing
An artillery board could be used for survey
purposes as well, for instance by plotting a
traverse from a trig point to a bearing picket near
the guns. Targets from gridded oblique air pho-
tographs could also be transferred to the artillery
board
When the coordinates of a target had been
communicated from the OPO/FOO to the
command post, the exact location of the target
was plotted on the board. By means of the range
arm and the bearing arc the firing line (bearing)
to it could be easily read. As the range arm had
a graduated range scale the distance to the target
could also quickly be fixed
As every Troop command post had its own
artillery board and the Battery command post
also its own, it was easy by means of the latter to
get a double check of the data the troops had
found from their artillery boards.
It was also important as seen to determine
the height difference between the target and the
guns, as this had an impact on gun laving
The line and range determined at the
artillery board had to be corrected for factors
influencing the projectile trajectory as discussed
in the previous Chapter 8. Of particular impor-
tance were corrections due to deviating weather
conditions. The summary of corrections calcu-
lated was the Correction of the Moment
(CoM). When 'CoM' had been calculated and
added to the data from the artillery board, laying
data to the guns could be ordered from the
command post
An 'Artillery Board' is seen in Fig. 9-5. The
board shown has data from the battle of El
Alamein in October 1942 and was on display at
the Koyal Artillery Museum
Fig. 9-5 An Artillery Board was used at Troop and
Battery Command Posts for establishing the geodetic
relation between guns and target. The Board is
prepared with a reference coordinate grid on a paper
in scale 1:25 000 or 1:50 000 on which the aun de-
ployment is represented by the pivot marker at the
coordinates of the battery or troop pilot gun. From
this a steel range arm was placed towards a bearing
arc. Ine range and bearing from the auns to the
target could easily be determined when the target
had been plotted on the Board by means of its coor-
dinates. This example was seen at Royal Artillery
Museum (Mark Smith RAHT)
1131
