to be youn
Fig. 6-11 Observation bases of the long-base type
were normally established by the Flash Spotting
Troops of the Survey Regiments. The bearing to the
obiect to be located was determined by means of
directors or observation theodolites. In order to make
an accurate evaluation the participating observation
posts must be carefully surveyed and their location
determined with precision (coordinates) (Author)
also for acquisition and distribution of tactical
information from the front such as movements
and deployment of enemy infantry units, tanks,
artillery, supply vehicles etc. The observation
bases were also used for fire control in depth,
when measurement towards high bursts (40-
50m) could be made during ranging at distant
targets
The
same
method was
also
used
sometimes when fighting was very mobile and
various artillery formations were to be fixed into
the same grid and time for normal survey was
not at hand. Another example of the versatility
of observation bases is their use as a tool for cal
ibration of guns, by which determination of de-
viations of muzzle velocities from nominal
conditions could be accomplished (more about
this later in the book).
Supporting intelligence resources were
Corps units
We have now seen that the artillery could muster
GUNFIRE
a number of different intelligence resources
besides their own fire observation posts. Well-
organised support from the Royal Air Force
Army Cooperation Squadrons was also an
option. So, it is not wrong to talk about a system
of co-operating intelligence resources made
available by the gunners. Correctly used, they
provided necessary data for counter-battery fire
against enemy artillery and mortars, anti-aircraft
and anti-tank batteries but also data on other
types of target in the depth of the battlefield.
They also
delivered tactical information to
supported commanders, who often lacked pos-
sibilities to collect data easily with own resources.
Organisationally, the intelligence resources
of the artillery were Corps units under the
command of the Corps Commander Royal
Artillery (CCRA). This was not only the case as
regards the AOP Squadrons but all resources of
the Survey Regiments. When the war broke out
there were only four such regiments, 1-4 Survey
Regiment RA, two of which were regular forma-
tions and two Territorial Regiments. When the
Royal Artillery set up more and more field,
medium and heavy regiments, the need for more
survey regiments also came. The maximum
number, eleven Survey Regiments, was achieved
in early 1943,114
When the batteries that originally were parts
of a survey regiment had been reorganised to
become Composite Batteries, it became normal
practice to attach one to each division, where
they operated independently. By this arrange-
ment a division had access to all the three types
of discipline needed, i.e. 'survey', sound rangers
and flash spotters'. In the headquarters of the
Survey Regiment RA a survey section was
retained. Such sections were later up-graded to
complete 'Survey Troops' by which Short Base'
could be established also centrally.
Before leaving Part 1, and its review of the
artillery resources with which Britain went l
war and created during the rearmament years,
we will in the following Chapter 7 have a brief
look at air-landing artillery of the British Army.
7. Airborne Artillery
Construction takes time
Peter Wilkinson, one of the pioneer airborne
gunners, wrote to me:
Towards the end of the course [OCTU], each of
us was asked if we wished to opt to go into any
particular branch of the artillery - coastal, heavy,
medium, field, anti-aircraft, anti-tank etc [ ..
Keith had a brother who had been through
Woolwich just before the war and was currently
serving in a battery of Light Artillery which were,
in effect, descendants of the old mountain
artillery with their screw guns that had served on
the north-west frontier of India. We felt that this
was an interesting and exciting branch to go to
and duly applied for Light Artillery. [.. 1 In
March 1942, having completed the course, we
received our commissions. Carmel and I were
posted to 458 Independent Light Battery RA
and, after some leave, we joined the battery at
their base near Newbury in Berkshire. We had
heard rumours that the Battery had been selected
to form part of the newly forming Airborne
Division. When we arrived we found that this was
the case. [...] A month or so after I joined the
Battery, we moved to a new base at Bulford on
Salisbury Plain where the rest of the embryo
Airborne Division was located. Here our training
to become an airborne force started in earnest.
Apart from improving our skills as gunners we
had to experiment in ways of being transported
by air. We knew that we were to travel in gliders
although the Horsa was not yet available. There
were smaller gliders [most likely the Hotspur
author's notel and there seemed to be good
supply of 'Dakota' aircraft for towing and loading
experiments. Most of the officers and a number
of signallers were sent on parachute courses as
some would be expected to drop with the
parachute
supporting infantry
that
they
wonld
Yes, this is how it all started. Italy, the Soviet
Union and Germany had already during the
later part of the 1920s (Italy) and the 1930s
begun establishment of airborne troops, and also
to provide artillery for them. In Britain nothing
happened in this field, however, and the country
was 'caught napping' in 1940 when the Germans
successfully used such formations, at first in
Denmark and Norway and then in the 'Blitzkrieg
War' in Belgium and the Netherlands. These
units had, however, no artillery
The
German
examniec
immediately
triggered demands in Britain for establishment
of something similar. Churchill requested his
senerals to create
and tramn an airborne
formation of 5.000 men as soon as possible.
Later, in September 1941, a formal decision was
made to establish a complete airborne division,
the 1st Airborne Division as it was to be called.
The very first field artillery of the division was
Peter Wilkinson's 458 Light Battery RA, which
in June 1942 was re-named to become the 1 Air-
landing Light Battery RA.
In September 1942 a Commander Royal
Artillery (CRA) was appointed and in February
1943 the 1 Airlanding Light Battery RA was
extended up to the full size of a regiment. The 1
Airlanding Light Regiment RA was born. 116 The
same method as the one applied when the Terri-
torial Army was doubled was applied also here
to raise the strength of the new Regiment. The
only existing Battery was split into three Cadre-
Batteries, which later when new officers and
recruits had been provided became complete
Batteries. Many of the recruits had only six
weeks of basic training behind them.
The CRA with his tiny headquarters did not
have the same status as the CRA of an ordinary
infantry division. Although having command
also over two anti-tank batteries besides the
Light Regiment no major managerial or co-or-
dinating problems were anticipated. So, the CRA
had the rank of Lieutenant Colonel and not
Brigadier as in infantry divisions. This was
changed in late 1944 based on experiences from
Normandy and Arnhem, which I will discuss
more later on
Initially
the vintage 3.7-inch mountain
howitzers of the 458 Light Battery were used
when waiting for something better to come. The
