resources, as we will see more of later on
The new organisational structure was not
controversial and was quickly adopted by others,
though it was not officially confirmed by a
revised War Establishment until the spring of
1941.
The structure of medium regiments could
be retained. Such a regiment had 8-gun batteries
(two) already. Neither was there a need to
change the organisational structure of heavy
regiments. Four 4-gun batteries had proved
efficient and adequate. The problem on the part
of medium and heavy batteries was instead the
guns. So far the batteries had had to use vintage
guns and howitzers. These were not up to
modern requirements in terms of range and
mobility. Modern pieces were still pending.
Now we turn our attention to the invasion
threat at large as it was interpreted in the
summer 1940.
First phase of invasion defence - the threat
and need for improvisation
The rapid German victory in France meant that
a threatening invasion of the British Isles across
the Channel was felt to be imminent. People
were afraid of sudden air-landings of troops and
also various subversive actions through fifth
columns and enemy agents. But there was no
doubt that the public support of Churchill was
strong. The Government decided in May 1940
to organise voluntary forces to support the
armed forces by establishing Local Defence Vol-
unteers
(LDV).
When
the
decision
was
announced by Anthony Eden on 14 Mav it got
an overwhelming response. People rushed to the
recruiting offices; soon more than 300,000 men
at ages up to 65 vears were enlisted, with even
many above 80 vears of age attempting to enlist!
The number increased all the time and in August
it was over one million 284 The willingness to helr
was magnificent.
Thousands of women also
wanted to be armed, but that was not accepted
A great problem initially was the lack of an
established organisation to take care of the vol-
unteers. Neither were uniforms and weapons
available. Membership was shown in classic style
by means of armlets. Weapons of all kind were
supplied by improvisation. It could be anything
from private hunting rifles to axes, wooden clubs
and i
spears.
But
situation
gradually
improved. Uniforms and steel helmets were soon
distributed and a more efficient Home Guard
GUNFIRE
(as it was later called by Churchill in a speech in
July 1940) was developed and the denomination
was to last as the official one.
How was the army to counter an invasion?
The Commander-in-Chief Home Forces, General
E. Ironside, decided to apply a defensive strategy
in respect of lacking resources, Map 18-1. He
decided that all the southern and eastern coasts
of England, some 800km
(!), were to be
defended at the beaches by fairly weak forces, as
these could not be concentrated due to the
length of the defence line. Hence, Ironside did
not expect the defenders to be able to prevent
the enemy from getting ashore. They were to
fight as best as they could and then delay the
enemy's inland advance. The General deployed
two intantry
divisions between the Thames
estuary and Southampton: 1st Infantry Division
adjacent to Thames, and to the right of this 45th
Infantry Division towards Southampton. Later
further divisions were deployed all the way
towards Devon.
Ironside first
deployed three infantry
divisions north of the Thames in Essex and
Suffolk: the 15th, 18th and 55th Infantry
Division. None of the divisions, perhaps with the
exception of the 45th Infantry Division, had
more than half their nominal strength during the
summer 1940; the shortages of equipment and,
not least, transport resources were critical
These five divisions along the coasts had a
very limited stock of artillery. The resources were
deployed closely behind the beaches. In the
northern sector there were only 62 guns and in
the southern 53,285 This meant less than one
third of nominal strength. Furthermore, many
different types of gun had to be used - most of
them obsolete.
If we in the northern sector take the distance
between Southend and Great Yarmouth in the
north, which is roughly 150km, the artiller!
density was not more than one gun per 2.4km
(one per 1.5 miles). In the southern sector the
situation was
even Worse. The front from
Ramsgate to Southamporse, The froded was
about 200km, which implito be defend of one
gun per 3.8km (one per 2/4ied a dens old naval
guns deployed gradually a miles). Thest during
the summer did not signica the carove the
situation.
So one has to conclude that the
artillery had not been sa to conclude stely in-
terfering on large-scale inable of deces during
the summer 1940
218
FROM IMMINENT INVASION THREAT TO OFFENSIVE TRAINING
Part of the defensive strategy was the estab-
lishment of a fortified defence line further back,
the GHQ Defence Line, shown on Map 18-1. The
intention was to finally stop the invaders along
that line. Besides fortifications, all available anti-
tank guns would be deployed here, basically
2-pounders.
The offensive component was a mobile
reserve comprising three, relatively untrained,
infantry divisions, the 43rd (Wessex) Infantry
Division, the 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division
and the Canadian 1st Infantry Division, together
with two armoured divisions,
Ist and 2nd
Armoured Division. The latter two were also
weak and had together only 170 light tanks.
Around the nation, further divisions were
under restoration and training, for instance in
Scotland.
Ironside's strategy was criticised as being too
static and implying unacceptable risks. The
General himself had wanted a more offensive
strategy, but he saw no possibilities for that just
after Dunkirk. Severe shortage of equipment,
transport resources, armour and artillery in
combination with the insufficient level of
training made this impossible, he thought.
On 20 July, Ironside was replaced by
General Alan Brooke as Commander-in-Chief
Home Forces. He thought the time was ripe for
a more offensive strategy. He believed it vitally
important to try stopping the invaders right at
the beaches and thus preventing them from es-
tablishing a strong beachhead. If they were to
succeed in that, a continuous build-up of
resources with
artillery,
armour and more
infantry would make any British counter-attack
much more difficult. As a consequence, Brooke
redeployed the anti-tank units to the beaches.
He also saw to it that the artillery, now
becoming stronger and more mobile, was not
tied up in the local beach defence. The artillery
units would be ready for quick redeployment
and concentration to sectors where the main
landings had taken place. It was here that the
mobile strategic reserve was to counter-attack
with strongest possible artillery support. Only if
this could be done, there was a real chance of
defeating the invaders, Brooke thought.
General Brooke also redeployed formations
to make the defence in the southern sector
stronger and deeper behind the beaches. He fur-
thermore pressed on rearmament and training
But all-arms training at higher operative levels
were not yet possible. Possibilities for well-coor-
dinated counter attacks were thus still not the best.
In June
and July
political uncertainty
prevailed. Churchill was not at all willing to com-
promise with Hitler. The latter should be militar-
ily defeated and his Nazi regime completely
annihilated, even if it was to take time and
require severe sacrifices. But behind the scene,
there was a group of politicians who were not
reluctant to probe opportunities for peace with
the enemy. Hitler learnt about this, which was in
line with his own wishes.
Hitler wanted to accomplish a separate
peace agreement with Britain with or without
threats. His overriding aim was not the elimina-
tion of the British Empire. Hence, he waited with
directives to his armed forces to prepare for an
invasion of the British Isles. It is beyond the
scope of this book to review the political game
in Britain and Germany during the summer
1940. Neither will the considerations made by
the German High Command regarding how best
to perform an invasion be discussed here, nor
how Hitler intervened. We can only observe that
the planning commenced actively when Hitler
issued his 'Directive No. 16' on 16 July.
Hitler gave his generals four weeks for
planning the invasion, the much written about
Operation Seelöwe. This was to engage not less
than 41 divisions directed towards South East
England. An air-borne division was also to be
used. The logistic problems were
however
enormous.
A prerequisite, as seen from the German
side, was complete air superiority. Hence, the
Royal Air Force had to be defeated. It was also
necessary to hold off the Royal Navy from the
invasion lanes by means of mines, coast artillery
and air attacks. Weather and tide must also be
right. D-Day was thus postponed several times
in respect of all difficulties. the last time on 21
September 1940.
The battle of Britain, the gigantic struggle
between the Luftwaffe and the Royal Air Force
aiming at German air superiority
over the
invasion area, began on 7 August 1940 on a
limited scale. But it was in full force from 12
August, Adler Tag. As known, it did not result in
an easy victory for Germany within four days as
Marshal Göring had promised. The fight
continued into
October.
At the end of
September Luftwaffe had realised that it could
not annihilate the fighter squadrons of the Royal
219
