Fig. 22-8 Both Operation Veritable and Operation
Plunder implied extensive night artillery firing. Here a
Medium Regiment is seen in action (RAHT)
sunners
had
developed special means to
overcome such problems. This included boards.
strings and stretchers for carrying on foot the
equipment including batteries. This was just
what was needed here.
An exemption from the general concept of
fire plans with concentrations and 'Stonks' was
a barrage arranged as protection of the crossing
by the Commando Brigade and the initial
advance once ashore. It was planned as a
creeping barrage where four field regiments
opened fire against targets beside each other
Each one covered a front of 500 yards and
together they thus covered around 2,000 yards.
200 yards ahead of these units, another two
regiments were to fire, spread out over the same
front line, i.e. 2,000 yards. When the former
shifted 100 yards ahead, the latter made a similar
shift forwards and so on.
The fire plan for 'Operation Widgeon'
implied a remarkable concentration of firepower
in support of one single brigade. The entire
Corps artillery force was basically engaged just
before and during the attack across river Rhine!
A quite strong resource was reserved for
direct support of
the
Commando Brigade
during another ten hours, namely:
Two field regiments
One mountain regiment
Two medium regiments
One heavy battery
This meant that around 108 guns were at
the disposal of the brigade commander. This can
GUNFIRE
be compared with the normal allotment of
artillery for a brigade, which was just one field
regiment, i.e. 24 guns (only 25-pounders).
And then: concentrated firepower in
support of the main attack - Operation
Torchlight
The main attack within the XII Corps section
was carried out by the 15th (Scottish) Division,
who also was to be supported by the majority of
available artillery resources. Responsible for
planning and execution was the divisiona
artillery commander (CRA) and his staff. This
was a
tough undertaking,
Which can hel
illustrated by the fact that they under strong
pressure, due to the short available time, had to
produce and distribute 269 copies of fire plans
and coordinate lists for several hundred targets
down to all organisational levels; not to mention
the hundreds of traces (map overlays).
The
Tire
programme had the overall
structure with 'H' hour set at D-1 22.00 hours
as is summarised in Table 22-3.
During the initial attack phase, the artillery
resources were distributed roughly equal on the
two attacking brigades, 227 Infantry Brigade to
the left and 44 Infantry Brigade to the rightt*
When a shift of concentration southwards later
took place (at 08.20 hours) in connection with
softening bombardment before the air landings,
the former could rely on support from four field
regiments, one medium regiment and a heavy
anti-aircraft regiment (ground roles), and the
Table 22-3. Fire plans in support of the 15th (Scottish) Division
Day, time
fire Plan
Number of auns tunes
D-1/D, 23.30-00.30 Softening
D, 01.00-05.30
D, 05.30-07.30
160 medium
16 heaw (7 2-inch)
4 super heav 124N-mmll
Covering fire
288 25-pounders
144 medium
12 heavy guns (7.2-inch)
4 super heaw (240-mm
24 heavy anti-aircraft guns (3.7-inchl),
In around roles
Continued direct
One rocket battery
Same emolovment
support against
pre-registered
lardets
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
latter brigade one field regiment and one
medium
regiment.
•he|
Corps
artillery
commander could, however.
allot
further
resources to a brigade, if needed. For all of the
regiments, 'cease fire' was ordered for a few
hours when the air landings were taking place.
More about this later.
Three of the field regiments were reserved
for firing smoke belts on order from the Corps
headquarters. They constituted a special artillery
group commanded by the commander of 25
Field Regiment RA. It was to be shown that they
never had to be used for such tasks.
One medium regiment was
retained at
disposal of the commander of 9 AGRA (Army
Group RA) to be used for counter-bombard-
ment when special needs arose. This regiment
was to be used also for fire in depth in coopera-
tion with the Royal Air Force Army-cooperation
Squadrons acting as observation posts.
mentioned, such engagements would be ordered
a Victor Targets', which meant fire with all
arillery within the Corps. It was about dealing
with critical targets such as large enemy artillery
deployments 138
Some ten salvos with the Canadian rocket
batery were also planned. This only battery had
12 launching carriages for 32 rockets each (an
catter version was designed for 30 rockets),439
Finally, a few words about the Pepperpot
Programme, which was planned to begin one
and a half hour before the main attack. This was
the responsibility of the commander of 112
Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment RA. Three groups
vete organised, HOOP, WHISTLE and TOP,
each one comprising quite a number of firing
units of different kinds:
40-mm Bofors anti-aircraft guns
42-inch mortars
17-pounder SP anti-tank guns
Machine guns
The groups were deployed to cover the entire
Corps area. 40 During the period H-15 minutes
10 H+15 minutes, the Bofors guns would not be
used, as they were to mark the flank boundaries
o the atacking battalions with tracer fire bursts.
According to the plan for the Bofors guns of
HOOP group, they would engage nine different
targets between H-90 to H-15 minutes. Each
gun was to fire 180 rounds. In the second phase
from H+-20 to 490 minutes, seven targets were
to be engaged, and this with a total of 250
rounds per gun. This part of the 'Pepperpot' was
in support of 44 Infantry Brigade.
Before turning to the air-landings, we will
first have a summarising glance at the artillery
planning in XXX Corps.
Massive XXX Corps Artillery support -
Operation Turnscrew
In principle, more than 600 guns available to
XXX Corps would be used in the same way as
the artillery
of XII Corps. Timings were,
however, a bit different, and there was only one
major attack across river Rhine to plan for. The
51st (Highland) Division was to cross with two
brigades beside each other, one on each side of
the city Rees. These were to be followed by the
third divisional brigade and the temporarily
attached 9 Canadian Infantry Brigade. The
planning had to focus on the subsequent en-
largement of the bridgehead and also the
eventual breakout northwards and eastwards.
The violent, and in time stretched out, fire
programme was to begin with a softening fire for
four hours including counter-battery bombard-
ment. This would then at H-30 minutes be
followed by covering fire for the two attacking
brigades. Available artillery was divided into two
sroups. 'A›
and 'R'
The counter-battery
programme was a 'milk round', much liked by
the Corps commander, Lieutenant General
Horrocks. A special counter-mortar programme
was here included too. In this case, it is well doc-
umented.
Responsible
was
the
artillery
commander of the 3rd Infantry Division. This
programme was to go on for three hours.
Another important feature was the Pepperpot
programme, which was
planned also by the
artillery commander of 3 Infantry Division. It
was obviously given higher priority than that of
the
neighbouring
southern
Corps.
The
programme was here to begin two hours before
H' hour and include engagement of ten different
targets by the following resources: 441
22 tanks with 75-mm guns
48 17-pounder anti-tank guns (towed and
SP
72 40-mm Bofors anti-aircraft guns
36 4.2-inch mortars
Machine guns of seven machine gun
companies
3201
