GUNFIRE
and slit trenches and shelters for gun crews were
dug as best protection against enemy artillery
and mortars. Each battery fired 'harassing fire'
for four days before relieved. In certain serials
4.2-inch mortars also were engaged. This was a
typical day sequence:
07.30-07.50: Each troop fired one round against
three selected targets. One of these was engaged
a second time. The targets were enemy soldiers in
farm buildings or in encampments. The time for
this fire was chosen to coincide with catering or
relief of units. The firing by the two troops and
mortars were
well
synchronized even when
engaging different targets
15.00: Each troop fired one round against two
different targets, often the same as had been
engaged during the morning.
20.30: At this moment transport by means of
motor vehicles across a tank ditch used to take
place. A battery round was fired.
23.55: One troop fired one round against a likely
headquarters position
03.20: Ditto
The following day and night the programme was
quite different. 162
The concealing smoke
Sometimes the battlefield had to be sealed off
with smoke to prevent enemy observation and
for concealing attack preparations. During the
course of attack smoke was often an effective
means for making it impossible for the enemy to
use his heavy weapons such as machine guns
and anti-tank guns, this in particular on the
flanks. Blinding his artillery observation posts
was another good objective. Sometimes smoke
could also be used to protect sappers when
building bridges. This was the case when the
43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division was to cross
river Seine in France in August 1944. Douglas
Goddard:
On the 27th we should have crossed the river to
a gun position in the bridgehead but two survey
officers were captured with details of our existing
and future gun positions so the Regt made a
quick move to St Just, a hundred yards from the
river and fired a continuous smoke screen to
cover Sappers building the Class 40 bridge. 63
A smoke screen comprised a series of impact
points, the number of which was dependent on
the length of the screen and the wind direction.
If the two directions coincided a smaller number
was needed as compared with the situation when
the wind blew 90° across the screen direction. As
an example; 300 yards in the reen direction As
yards in the latter. A smoke screen must be
regularly maintained by firing repeatedly for
hours, sometime days. An example of a smoke
Fig. 12-6 Smoke fired along a line was an efficient way of preventing enemy observation towards own positions
It could also blind enemy anti-tank guns. The 25-pounders were often successfully used for this type of fire
Observe the white trajectories of the shells coming in here from the left (Olmperial War Museum NA 12255)
144
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
screen fired by the artillery is shown in Fig. 12-6.
The shells coming in from the left side can be
clearly seen.
In connection with large operations the
resources of the artillery were not always suffi-
cient. After all there were other important tasks
to pay attention to. In such cases
Roval
Engineers could activate stationary smoke gen-
erators along the front line. This was the case
when the fourth battle at Cassino in Italy in May
1944 was to take place. Such generators were
also used extensively for the 'great finale', when
the Rhine Crossing operation in March 1945
was prepared (Fig. 22-4).
The gunners could fire coloured smoke
although white smoke was more normal. This
was often applied in Burma for provision of
guidance to bombers and fighter-bombers,
where the dense jungle often made it difficult to
recognise targets from the air. For ordinary en-
gagement of guns it was often found productive
to commence ranging with one or two rounds
with smoke shells, by which it was easier to get a
better judgement of the fall of incoming rounds.
When firing a 'barrage' it could also be
helpful to include a series with smoke shells, for
instance to indicate a coming shift from one
beltline to the next one or for indicating that a
pause would come. Marking attack objectives
could be another use of smoke shells, in partic-
ular with coloured smoke.
Artificial light
Firing illumination rounds was never a great
issue in the British artillery as regards provision
of artificial light. During the first years of the war
this type was in very short supply. Hence, other
methods were applied. First, the date of an attack
was chosen such that attackers could avail them-
selves of strongest possible moonlight, as was the
preferred method in North Africa. Second, arti-
ficial light was provided by means of 90cm
searchlights from the
anti-aircraft regiments,
which were lit towards the bottom of clouds and
there reflected. 164 It was found that two search-
lights could be sufficient when an infantry
brigade was to attack in nights. Sometimes
searchlights were used also for direct illumina-
tion of enemy positions, which could be quite a
thrilling action.
Mortars could fire parachute illumination
flares, which seems to be a method applied much
more than having the artillery to fire such shells.
Artillery participating in deception and propaganda
The British were renowned for their skilful
deceptive operations, small and huge. Such pro-
grammes could include participation of the
gunners with fire and other means to conceal the
real intentions such as preparations and deploy-
ment of forces for a large attack, the planned
main directions of attacks etcetera. A deceptive
plan could include the firing of an ordinary type
of 'barrage', although at the wrong place, or
timed concentrations for quite a long period far
from the sector where the real attack was to be
launched.
As seen earlier in the book, propaganda
shells were available for the 25-pounders. Not
least in connection with some stationary situa-
tions in Italy this type was frequently used to
drain the enemy's morale.
Counter-bombardment always a priority
The Germans had less artillery units and guns
than their British opponents, although they were
skilled at concentrating fire from available
resources. Priority had been given before the war
to Luftwaffe and during the war there was not time
enough for decisive artillery rearmament. This
was much easier to accomplish as regards mortars
and rocket-firing pieces, which towards the end
of the war became a real scourge for the British.
Not least were the salvos from the much-feared
Nebelwerfer. This device was produced in several
variants with different calibres. In Fig. 12-7 is
shown one, which seems to launch rockets of
larger calibre than the 150mm most commonly
used I
The stock of guns in the Wehrmacht and in
the Italian Army was limited but vet large
enough to cause problems for the allies, when to
attack or in defence. Besides many batteries with
105-mm howitzers and other light guns
including captured Russian artillery pieces. the
impact of quite a number of heavier long-range
guns were also to be experienced. Fig. 12-8
illustrates one version of the 105-mm howitzer,
which was the standard piece of German divi-
sional light artillery.
Fig. 12-9 is a photograph of a 170-mm gun
in Egypt.
Enemv artillery could never be overlooled
and svstematic
counter-bombardment pro-
grammes must alwavs be part of all operations.
In South East Asia the Japanese opponent
was not rich in artillery either and, although
145
