sector 343
The field regiments fired an average for all
three Corps of 317 rounds per gun during the
first 24 hours. In XXX Corps area, where the
main attack was launched, the consumption was
as high as 577 rounds per gun as shown in
Kirkman's report, Appendix 3.344 The con-
sumption went down during the following days,
but on 2 November (during Operation Super-
charge) the artillery of X Corps fired on average
309 rounds per gun and their colleagues in XXX
Corps 314 rounds per gun.
Looking at the whole period, the 25-pounders
of X Corps fired on average 87 rounds per gun
and day. XIII Corps artillery fired 48 rounds per
gun and day on average, whereas the guns of XXX
Corps fired 159 rounds per gun and day. As an
average for all 25-pounders of 8th Army, in total
832 guns, 102 rounds per gun and day were fired.
In total the 8th Army artillery fired about one
million rounds during the 12 days the offensive
lasted. A lot to handle! Firing a large amount of
ammunition also required many cartridge cases to
be retrieved as salvage (Fig. 19-9).
The medium guns fired a large number of
shells too. The war diary of 64
Medium
Regiment RA says that the regiment fired 4,844
rounds up to 15.00 hours on 24 October, which
equates to approximately 303 rounds per gun.
The consumption then decreased, not only due
to the course of the battle as such, but also due
to technical problems that affected many of the
guns. Kirkman tells us that despite such problems
the 4.5-inch guns fired on average 133 rounds
per gun and day during the twelve days and the
5.5-inch guns 157 rounds per gun and day.
Summary of the role of artillery at the last
battle of El Alamein
The British had superiority over Rommel
in tanks and artillery, about 2-3:1. Looking
at technical performance and quality, the
balance was probably a bit more even, if
not to say to the advantage to the Germans
and Italians.
The rearmament of the British divisional
artillery to 25-pounders was complete.
Several field regiments could not, however,
be provided with guns for more than two
batteries instead of the nominal three. A
shortage of SP guns for the armoured
divisions had not been completely
eliminated
GUNFIRE
A large shortage of artillery for reinforce-
ment, i.e. medium and heavy guns,
prevailed through the offensive. This
hampered an effective counter-battery
bombardment in the depth. Neither could
the 25-pounders firing covering fire during
the main attacks be reinforced by such
artillery, as was to become normal practice
later in the war. It was difficult here to
combat enemy tanks with artillery except
when these had stopped for re-supply of
fuel and ammunition etc
A distinct drawback was that the new guns,
in particular the medium guns, proved to
suffer from various teething problems.
These were first discovered at El Alamein
as a consequence of the intensive and long
firing required. Thanks to an efficient
repair organisation the consequences of
these failures could be reduced.
Suggestions began to emerge that the 5.5-
inch gun should use a lighter shell than the
1001b shell. An 80lb shell would reduce the
mechanical strain and at the same time add
to the maximum range by 2km. The matter
was under discussion into 1943, when the
definite decision was made to introduce
this lighter shell.
Strategically, there was no shortage of
artillery ammunition, a situation that
prevailed through the whole war. This was
a distinct advantage on the part of the
British over the German/Italian forces that
suffered from shortages of most types of
supply. This favourable situation did not
exclude tactical situations where the British
artillery encountered a shortage of ammu-
nition for some time.
The available artillery resources were used
efficiently. Concentration of firepower was
now an art well within the capability of the
British gunners. Whatever the targets were,
they could be covered with fire from
hundreds of guns within a short time from
order. This could be pre-planned engage-
ments or just be improvised at a given
moment, for instance as observed fire to
support an attack or to meet an enemy
counter-attack. The British benefited in
this context from their doctrine that
Command', i.e. how tactically to use the
resources, should be centralised to the
highest possible level, whereas 'Control',
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
ie technical employment of fire, should be
decentralised to the lowest possible level.
The foundation laid by Kirkman and
Parham in 1941 proved now its worth (cf.
the huge Exercise Bumper in England in
October 1941).
El Alamein marked a new trend for the
British artillery. It might even be correct to
talk about a paradigm shift. But much
work remained in order to get all
concerned to understand the implications
and how best to employ artillery, not least
the many commanders of infantry and
armoured units. Time for necessary all-
arms training had so far been too limited.
The consequence at El Alamein and later
was that the artillery as a vital resource was
not used as best as it could, and the price
for this proved to be high. The problem di-
minished gradually but deficiencies
remained throughout the war.
• Cooperation between the Army and the
Royal Air Force developed favourably at El
Alamin. The result of this can be seen as a
final change of an earlier trend. But
resources still lacking for Montgomery
were army-cooperation aircraft for recon-
naissance and observation and direction of
arillery fire at depth. He had not yet
received any AOPs equipped with Auster
aircraft
The efficient acquisition of intelligence
data was to the credit of 4 Survey
Regiment RA. This was much due to the
new organisation with Composite
Batteries -
, initiated by the regimental
ommander Lieutenant Colonel Whetton.
Best results were obtained from 'Long
Base' established by the Flash Spotting
Trops of these batteries. They were
effective also when the offensive had
commenced, whereas sound ranging bases
could not work at that stage, due to the
batte noise. Beforehand they had,
however, been most useful.
The Brilish were very killed throughout
the war to implement large deception
plans. El Alamein is a good example of
what could be accomplished by creative
and interested officers and men. All attack
preparations were efficiently concealed.
They were performed in the dark. All
artillery positions including dumping of
large amounts of artillery ammunition
were for instance prepared during the
nights before the offensive commenced.
Everything was well camouflaged before
the dawn. This made it possible to keep the
immense concentration of firepower
concealed, which was a prerequisite for
success during the offensive.
Another feature of the deception plan was
to arrange deception attacks under partici-
pation of artillery, which was an effective
means for binding enemy armoured
reserves. This was not part of the overall
plan in the northern sector, but one might
see the whole operation in the south by
XIII Corps as a series of deceptive attacks
under artillery participation.
The massive, and at the same time flexible,
employment of the large artillery resources
at El Alamein had not been possible without
well-functioning communication systems,
both telephone networks and radio systems
with several different types of wireless sets
being used. The necessary equipment was
in place as were well-trained signallers. And
without these and adequate traffic proce-
dures and observation of strict traffic disci-
pline when using the communication
resources, the course of the battle most
likely could have ended in disaster. The high
standard was a result of innumerable
exercises, a need of which that was never
overlooked by the Royal Artillery.
A large-scale frontal attack as conducted by
Montgomery at El Alamein had not been
possible without the massive artillery support
that the Royal Artillery now could deliver.
Neither the following battles of attrition, 'the dog
fights' in Montgomery's terminology, in which
the British had to meet countless heavy decisive
counter attacks launched by Rommel's forces,
had been possible to bring to a victorious end
without the artillery resources being employed
skilfully.
Those stating that the Royal Artillery from
El Alamein onwards was a 'Battle Winner', have
a good point. The previous poor deployment and
use of artillery had finally been ended.
257
