3. Twilight - War and Mobilisation
The war leader-to-be Winston Churchill remained
loyal to the 'ten-years rule' for many years, but
asserted that he abandoned it in 1929, and that he
was right! This was because it took ten years, until
1939, before any major war broke out. However,
it would take a few vears into the 1930s before the
political establishment reluctantly was forced to
realise that international security steadily deterio-
rated as a result of Germany's, under Hitler, ag-
gressive politics. Another worry on the part of
Britain was Japan's aggressive foreign policy; this
was seen as a threat to the 'crown jewel' in the
British Empire, India, and the colonies east of this
sub-continent, not least Singapore
Japan's
invasion of China in 1937 caused chock waves in
London. Worrying from the British perspective
was increasing demands for independence in
India, with the Congress Movement under
Gandhi as a driving force.
World recession at the beginning of the
1930s was a true burden and prevented a sub-
stantial rearmament, with politicians preferring
to concentrate as long as possible on other issues
than 'bullets and guns'. Not much was done to
prepare Britain for a large European war, nor for
a war in the Far East. This was certainly the case
as far as the Army, and thus the artillery, was
concerned. The Royal Navy and the Royal Air
Force were better off and could invest for an ap-
proaching large conflict. The different arms were
oriented inwards. Focus on coordinated opera-
tions was of no interest, except for a few fore-
sighted individuals. All-arms training did not
take place during these years.
The last years of the 1930s were a period of
appeasement. Herr Hitler' was a man with whom
to discuss and enter into agreements with and not
• confront
militarily.
The same applied for
'Signore Mussolini' who more and more became
a threat against British interests in the Mediter-
ranean area and in East Africa. All this culminated
in September 1938
with the negotiations 1n
Munich between Hitler, Mussolini, Daladier of
France and Britain's Prime Minster Chamberlain
on the future of the so-called Sudetenland, i.e. the
'Czech issue'. Was Europe to be thrown into a new
devastating war or not? But a settlement came:
'Peace is saved!' as it was stated to the international
journalists at a dramatic press conference in the
middle of the night. 46
According to this, Hitler could without
risking intervention
occupy
the
German-
speaking Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia.
Hitler and Chamberlain then entered into a
written agreement regarding the future relations
between the two nations. 'Consultations' was the
method to be applied, not war. Well-known is the
situation when Chamberlain returned and at the
airport triumphantly waved with the agreement in
hand towards the journalists and photographers
and expressed: 'Peace in our time!' Unknown to
him at the time, this was to become a future
symbol of the appeasement policy.
The two dictators (Hitler and Mussolini)
had, as we know, their own agenda. In 1935 Italy
had invaded Abyssinia, and Hitler had re-mili-
tarised the Rhine-Land in 1936 and annexed
Austria in 1938, the latter based on the Munich
Agreement. The Sudetenland was occupied in
October this year. The final sign of the complete
breakdown of the hitherto followed 'Appease-
ment polcy
was the
echoslovakia in Mare 1959 Bu navineo
German invasion of
were set in the ground': No more concessions! If
Germany intended to occupy also Poland and
Romania, it meant war with Great Britain and
France. Although in reality, military resources
were lacking for guaranteeing misery eries in-
dependence such guarantees were given. This
was urged by the unexpectes Were gin-Soviet
Non- Aggression Pact pected German-Sgus
1939. When the Germa signed on 2a A caus
on 1 September, the ne attack on Poland same
avoidable.
The Territorial Army (TA) doubles
Even though the politicians hoped that the ap-
peasement policy would secure peace, the Britis!
public became more and more worried with what
they saw, and the will to defend the country rose.
TWILIGHT - WAR AND MOBILISATION
Many became convinced that a war could not be
avoided and a rush to join the Territorial Army
took place; the will to do something voluntarily
became strong in all classes. Germany's invasion
of Czechoslovakia
led to al
very important
decision in the Parliament in March 1939. The
Territorial Army was to be doubled immediately
from its present size amounting to 150,000 men
on mobilisation to around 300,000. No plan how
to accomplish this existed, however, neither how
all new units would be equipped and trained. But
the British are used to rapidly adapt to a new
situation and accept the situation as it 1S,
The Royal Artillery responded immediately
setting up new regiments by splitting the existing
'parent regiments' into halves and then gradually
expanding these up to nominal size and required
level of training. As an example, 112 (Wessex)
Field Regiment RA came to existence from the
splitting of 55 (Wessex) Field Regiment. The
latter had until 1938 comprised of four six-gun
batteries, which were to merge into two twelve-
guns batteries. Before this was completed, two of
the original batteries were transferred to the new
regiment, 112 (Wessex) Field Regiment, which
by this arrangement got a first core of trained
personnel when established in 1939.47
Another example was the establishment of
the later much appraised 64 Medium Regiment
RA. Here, the process was a bit slower, however.
Denis Falvey, who was recruited to the regiment
from the beginning and remained in service for
seven years until its demobilisation after the war
has told the story:48 At Offord Road, Islington
in the northern part of London there was a
Training Hall for the Territorial Army, which also
was the headquarters of 55 Medium Regiment
RA, another territorial formation from the Great
War 1914-1918. When the Territorial Army
was doubled Falvey's regiment, 64 Medium
Regiment RA was created. A squad of officers
and NCOs were sent to this regiment to take
care of training of recruits, which in peace-time
took place one evening every week and at a two-
week long training camp in the summer, as was
normal for territorial units. Falvey tells us that a
normal evening training sequence was often
followed by a round or two at a nearby pub.
The newly recruited and registered soldiers
represented a cross-section of the society: tech-
nicians, drivers, office clerks, grocers and many
others. They had reported on i April 1939, filled
in a form and answered a few questions from the
Sergeant in charge. 64 Medium Regiment used
the Drill Hall on another evening than the
'parent' regiment. The soldiers came in their
ordinary civilian clothes, as no uniforms were as
yet available.
The officers
(many of them bankers,
brokers or workers from the City) were given the
prudent task to place the 600 recruits in
positions in accordance with some kind of
coherent principles. School education was the
first criterion. Most of the recruits had left ele-
mentary school at the age of 14-15 years, but
there were some forty with higher education and
these were divided between the two batteries.
One was a middle age Architect and Falvey
himself was also amongst the graduates. This
group of new more skilled people were nominated
as 'specialists' and were to become real 'profes-
sionals' in the art of gunnery.
Those with appropriate physical strength
were to handle the heavy guns and ammunition;
lorry drivers became drivers of military vehicles,
and those with good brains became signallers or
gun layers. All these initial assignments were of
course provisional and had to be modified later
based on performance.
Falvey also tells us that when training
commenced the regiment had no equipment of
its own, and no guns of its own. 53 Medium
Regiment was equipped
Withi
old 6-inch
howitzers. These were on loan to 64 Medium
Regiment for basic training in deployment, gun
laying, and ammunition handling etc.
As with all territorial units before them, 64
Medium Regiment was sent to a summer camp
in 1939, and here ther
were issued with
uniforms for the first time. Still they had to use
vehicles on loan as was the case also for other
topes of eauinment needed. This was to be the
first and only summer camp as far as this
regiment was concerned. It mobilised on 1
September. After a
couple of months the
regiment got some civilian vehicles for the first
time, all requisitioned for use by the Army
Dennis Falvey's group was given a small truck
with 'Jones, the Fishmonger' displayed on it.
More vehicles came later and around New Year
1939/1940 the first guns of their own were
provided. The regiment received six old 6-inch
howitzers
. Some personal weapons were also
provided. During the spring 1940 the guns were
exchanged for 60-pounders, but not until the
autumn could the first rounds be fired for
