GUNFIRE
telephone lines cut off. They were also in-
valuable when traffic control and direc-
tions of redeployments had to be
improvised
The swift changes of the tactical situation
made it impossible for the three survey
regiments to establish observation and
sound ranging bases. As Pemberton
(1950) wrote:' they were soon brought to
impotence? 239 Problems in getting time
enough for the laying of extensive lines
added to the difficulties. The huge battle
noise hampered the possibilities for the
sound rangers to use their equipment. A
few sound ranging bases could, however,
be established and brought into successful
operation where the 51st (Highland)
Infantry Division was deployed near the
Maginot Line
Artillery reconnaissance and fire observa-
tion from the air by means of RAF Army-
cooperating Squadrons failed. The
Lysander aircraft used proved to be too
vulnerable. Most of those available were
shot down.
When required, gunners acted well as
infantry. This became necessary many
times during the final days of the
campaign.
Artillery units were skilled in marching and
redeploment even when roads were
jammed with streams of refugees, retreat-
ing French units, own infantry, supply
vehicles, etc. Young officers and NCOs
proved to be energetic; often acting with
great flexibility when units had been
dispersed or had taken wrong roads.
The poor structure of artillery command
at the Corps level with both a 'Commander
Corps Royal Artillery' (CCRA) and a
"Commander Corps Medium Artillery'
(CCMA) was clearly demonstrated. The
unsuitability of the regimental organisation
with two 12-gun batteries became obvious
too. A better conformity with the infantry's
three-pronged organisation was needed.
The shortage of FOOs/OPOs when sup-
porting the infantry was another weakness
of the battery organisation. Leading such
big batteries was difficult too; in particular
when the battle was mobile and the tactical
situation changed frequently.
The basic skills of the gunners acquired in
peacetime training and during the 'Phoney
War' drills resisted all challenges. Shooting,
they could always do!
Despite the fact that the artillery could not
generally be concentrated physically nor to
produce concentrated fire, but had to act in
lower formations, batteries or troops, in support
of the withdrawing infantry, the engagement
should not be underestimated. The willingness
on the part of all gunners to assist with artillery
fire to the last round was deeply rooted. The
gunners were often the last to vield to the
pressure from superior enemy units. The fact
that it proved possible to keep so many artillery
units in operation all the way into the final
beachhead is a proof that the spirit and discioline
of the Royal Artilery this wit and discipline
Thanks to this, the gunners could protect the
evacuation during the very last days until almost
no soldiers
were left. They did what was
expected from them and more so, despite
continuous shelling and bombardment from the
air. Without its arulery, umbard would m the
been annihilated.
At a meeting with the French and Belgian
leaders on 31 May 1940, Churchill stressed that
Britain had lost 1,000 guns and thousands of
vehicles and other equipment. There were only
some 500 guns left at home, he said. This was
extremelv
serious
in respect of a possible
German invasion. He meanech of a fessitie
force, well equipped with artillery, landed in
England, it could not be met by an equally strong
force. But in his typical way, he added, that if this
took place, 'the civil population would fight with
desperate energy and unconquerable resolve? 24
10c
17. Failed Intervention in Norway
We have in the previous Chapter seen how the
5th Infantry Division had a decisive role in the
battle at Ypres-Comines 26-28 May, an engage-
ment that probably saved BEF from being com-
pletely encircled at Dunkirk. But the division
could have had quite a different role. On 29
April 1940, it was ordered to march to Le Havre
for transport to Norway.
While waiting for embarkation, it suddenly
became known, however, that the plan had been
cancelled, and the division should return. Again
it was attached to BEF just before the German
attack on 10 May. *
Maybe the redeployment order for Norway
had not been a complete surprise. After all, one
of its brigades, 15 Infantry Brigade, had already
at the beginning of April been relieved and trans-
ported to Norway.
Norway a country of strategic interest
Both sides had their eves on Scandinavia, in par-
ticular Norwav, already when the war broke out
in September 1939.
As to the Germans, the Norwegian coast
was of interest as a potential base area for its
naval forces, the Kriegsmarine, in the coming
battle against the Royal Navy. The warfare
against the transatlantic transports to Britain,
Which were so important for the allies, could be
much easier with submarine bases in Norway.
From British military point of view, control
of the Norwegian sea lanes would also be an
asset. It would make a blockade of German ports
easier to maintain and also be a benefit as to the
defence of the Homeland. The most serious,
urgent problem to the British political leadership
was, however, the sea transport of Swedish iron
ore from Narvik to Germany. These took place
particularly during the winter months when the
port of Lulea in Northern Sweden was difficult
to use due to widespread ice cover in the Baltic
Sea. Sweden was one of the neutral countries of
Europe at the time.
The British regarded the iron ore transports
as very important for Germany's ability to
sustain a long war as the country lacked own ore
resources. As the transports from Narvik took
place on the sea-lanes of neutral Norway it was
seen crucial to stop them by mining the corridor
used, irrespective of Norway's neutrality. But
even better would be landing of a strong force at
Narvik and having this to cross the Swedish
border to capture the Swedish ore fields at
Kiruna and Gallivare. If that proved to be unre-
alistic a strategy, mining of the port of Lulea
from the air from Norwegian bases to stop the
summer transport to German ports might be an
alternative. Churchill argued during the whole
autumn 1939 for some action in Scandinavia.
But he faced much opposition from other politi-
cians who were against military actions against
neutral countries
When the Soviet Union, with the support of
the Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact, attacked Finland
on 30 November 1939, a completely changed
strategic situation arose. Britain and France
reacted strongly and began contemplating if and
how they could intervene in support of Finland.
The League of Nations told member countries
to intervene. This seemed reasonable in respect
of the fact that Britain and France had declared
themselves
as protecting nations in 1920
following Mannerheim's diplomacy in connec
tion with the Finnish declaration of independ-
ence (France had already in 1918 and Britain in
1919 officially recognised Finland as an inde-
pendent nation).
The British now saw an opportunity for
capturing the Swedish ore fields by requesting
permission from Norwav and Sweden
transport an intervention force to Finland from
Narvik via Lulea in Sweden to Finland. A good
excuse, thought Churchill and some other politi-
cians in Britain and France. He had the idea that
two British divisions would be used. 242 But while
this prospect was discussed. probed and negoti-
ated, the war between Finland and the Soviet
Union ended with a truce on 13 March 1940.
The two British divisions were instead now sent
to France and BEE, but still in England were ten
infantry battalions intended for intervention in
Norway. However, the planning for
them
