GUNFIRE
roughly 1,000, deployed by the Germans
within or close to the dropping and landing
zones. When the British artillery was
ordered silent, most of the German anti-
aircraft guns were back in action after only
15-20 minutes with devastating
consequences for the air-landing troops.
Bad visibility added to the problems. A
large number of aircraft and gliders missed
the dropping and landing zones. For the
British, the losses the first day were over
1,000 men killed and wounded and half
the heavy equipment was lost.
A complete air-landing light regiment was,
for the first time during war, flown in on
one day, not only with its own 24 guns, but
also with two extra 25-pounders attached.
But the regiment suffered around 30%
losses already during the landing phase.
Due to the 'cease fire' imposed on all
artillery west of the Rhine, this loss of
initial fire support to the landed forces was
a severe set-back, which was further
worsened by the significant losses of
ammunition that took place
A lesson learned at Arnhem, which in this
operation was observed, was that airborne
formations should not have to rely only on
its own limited artillery resources. Artillery
from relieving formations, in this case close
to the Rhine, should be at hand for
reinforcement soon after the landing.
Strong resources could here be used in
support only a few hours after the
landings. It was furthermore possible to
deploy some regiments east of the river
already on D to D+1.
Another problem which had been resolved,
was the establishment of good and reliable
radio communications between fire
observers attached to the air-landed
brigades and the artillery regiments west of
Rhine, this right from the beginning.
Selection of appropriate and controlled
wireless equipment; good organisation; and
well-trained signallers, made the communi-
cation this time, work very well.
No airborne troops were landed in the
sector allocated for the assault crossing by
XXX Corps. Hence, no 'cease fire' order
had to be imposed, except for a few units
close to the XII Corps area. In respect of
the much harder resistance encountered in
the north, it would have been very difficult,
not to say impossible, to establish a suffi-
ciently large bridgehead there without the
uninterrupted support from all the 700
guns available to the Corps. Backed by this
huge resource, the Corps was successful.
The survey and intelligence resources from
the artillery, including many AOP Flights,
were employed effectively, in particular for
the collection of intelligence data needed
for detailed planning, and this not only for
the counter-battery planning.
Close air support was applied effectively
and the coordination with the artillery
worked well.
The implementation of the gigantic
artillery resources made available for the
Rhine crossing was effective. The use of
artillery can be said to have represented
the state-of-the-art of the time. Concentra-
tion of firepower from several hundreds of
guns of a Corps within a few minutes was
applied frequently (all Corps artillery on
the target within 6-8 minutes was not an
unusual feature). The prime characteristic
of the arm to be an area-covering deadly
weapon never failed when the numerous
enemy counter-attacks were to be broken.
The artillery was up to its reputation as a
'Battle Winner'.
In summary, the Royal Artillery contribu-
tion to the success of the Rhine Crossing and the
subsequent swift increase of military strength
made the British dash to river Elbe and the Balti
Coast possible, the latter reached one month
after the Rhine Crossing.
This said, it does not mean that everybody
was satisfied with the artillery procedures and
how the 'tool box' had been used. The debate as
to whether the use of artillery should be based
more on surprise actions (through predicted fire),
if the artillery should strive for accuracy
(through ranging), continued to the end of the
war (e.g.
the Commander of 8 AGRA,
Brigadier A.P. Campbell, who in a letter to the
commander of VIII Corps in March
1945
expressed strong opinions on this issue) 46l Other
topics for ongoing arguing was the emphasis on
simplicity, which had been stressed many times
by officers like Jack Parham and Sidney Kirkman,
and the need for innovative, flexible use of
artillery, thus avoiding plain routine.
23. From Defeat to Success - Burma
Ubique!
When we have now made some descents into
British Second World War artillery history, we
have got a pretty good view over the rearmament
and the gradual build-up of new resources and
techniques
how these were used. We have seen how battle
and
technical
methods
were
developed and adapted to different conditions,
not the least the terrain and climate conditions.
We will however not forget that the gunners had
to fight in many more theatres than those
discussed, and this under much varying terrain
and climate conditions. They really had to meet
the requirements of the first Latin word of the
Royal Artillery motto, Ubique Quo Fas et Gloria
Ducunt, which means Everywhere'.
In the north, gunners landed not only in
Norway but also on Iceland, where a British
force acted as a guard dand, where a British
the war until the Americans took over. They did
not have to fight there, however, as the country
was not invaded. In the Mediterranean area,
gunners were engaged in Greece, Syria, Iraq,
Persia and on the island Crete, albei notion a big
scale. The battle against the Italians took place
not only in North Africa but also further to the
South, in Abyssinia. An enezgement took place
in Madagascar in May 1942, with the first real
amphibious landing of the Second World War.
The aim was to prevent the island held by a
French garrison, loyal to the Vichy Regime,
being occupied by the Japanese.
Extensive fighting in North Africa went on
after the battle of El Alamein in late 1942 and
continued over the winter until the final defeat
of the Axis powers took place in May 1943. The
large invasion of Sicily, Operation Husky, then
came in July. This was in its turn followed by the
allied landings
on the Italian mainland in
September 1943 The artillery met new chal-
lenges and had to adapt again to new and more
severe terrain conditions.
The final break-through
of the 'Gustav
Line' south of Rome in May 1944 (Fourth Battle
of Cassino) was preceded by one of the largest
artillery engagements of the
Second World War.
The capability of the artillery to meet and stop
large-scale counter-attacks with huge concentra-
tions of firepower was demonstrated many
times, for instance, during the defence of the
bridgehead at Anzio in the springtime 1944.
It can be noted that the trend shift as regards
the use of artillery resources that took place at El
Alamein was further firmly established during
the subsequent battle in North Africa and later
in Italy Abundant artillery resources and efficient
and concentrated use of these was the message
of the day. The methods for close cooperation
between air resources and ground forces were
also refined during this period, as was the use of
naval artillery against ground targets on land.
AOP Squadrons, belonging to the Royal Air
Force, but manned by artillery officers as pilots
and observation officers, had got their firm in-
troduction. Airborne formations had become
available at large scale towards end of 1942. One
parachute brigade was landed on Sicily in July
1943 in connection with the allied invasion. But
there were as yet no glider resources available for
transport by air of the light artillery regiment of
the 1st Airborne Division. The regiment stayed
on in Tunisia until 9 September when the whole
division was sea-transported to Taranto at the
'heel' of the Italian 'boot'. Once there. the
regiment was much appreciated for its role as a
sort of mountain regiment during the autumn
1943 before taken back home to England to
prepare for engagement in Normandy together
with the major part of the airborne division
(except one parachute brigade).
The battles on Sicily and at the Italian
mainland showed again the good ability on the
part of the gunners to adapt to new conditions.
Nowhere would the test, however, be as hard as
in South East Asia, which the British included in
the Far East.
The new enemy
Early in the morning of 7 December 1941 the
Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbour took
place, as is generally known. This made USA go
to war against Japan immediatelv. The German
