GUNFIRE
noise of the guns firing and the shells exploding
echoed and re-echoed off the many ridges of the
Mayu in a fantastic volume of sound. It was a
very bright moon that night but the continuous
flashes from each of the gun areas looked like
bursts of summer lightning
All the noise ceased as abruptly as it started,
to be replaced by a new sound. In the Gun and
Happy Valleys we were roughly five thousand
yards, say three miles, from the forward infantry
of the 1/11th Sikhs whose attack went in the
moment the fire of guns ceased. But we could hear
their shouts and war cries as they went in with the
bayonet...] and nothing could have withstood the
ferocity of their attack, and they gained their ob-
jectives in grand style. The attack was followed at
once by that of 4/15th Punjabis on Point 142
which had also been included as one of the targets
of the artillery concentrations [...].155
Large barrages needed extensive preparations
with many fire plans and plans for ammunition
supply and stocking in advance, sometimes also
plans for redeployment of hundreds of guns
and much more. Hence, a lot of paper work was
required! The principle was to have strong
artillery fire on the enemy front positions when
the own troops approached the starting line for
their attack.
. When this was commenced the
artillery fire was moved in steps backwards into
held
the
enemy
aiming
neutralising him when the infantry approached
their positions. Sometime the objective could
also be
destruction of such
positions and
heavier weapons such as machine guns and
anti-tank guns
'Covering fire' was planned in accordance
with one of two principles
Fire concentrations at selected well-defined
targets for a certain period of time, and
opening of fire at specified times. The fire
was subsequently moved ahead in line with
the attack to new targets until the attacking
infantry/armour had reached their
objectives. These were 'Timed
Concentrations
Rolling or creeping Barrage against line
targets, shifting from one line to another
after a couple of minutes determined by
the speed of the attackers
application in accordance with the first principle.
A prerequisite was that the enemy positions had
been fixed exactly from previous fighting and/or
intelligence
sources
(not least
using the
intelligence resources of the artillery). It was also
necessary to determine when and where the
enemy would be most dangerous against the
attackers during various phases of the attack.
The advantage
with this method was that
precious artillery ammunition was not wasted on
non-existent positions.
Some of the described techniques were stan-
dardised and much practiced during exercises
and other attacks thus to facilitate planning and
distribution of orders. The aim was always to
reduce the necessary paper work during prepa-
rations. The paper work at headquarters and
command posts was still a real burden. It was a
manual work with paper and pen with the
support only from standard forms, logarithm
tables, and paper traces etc. Not easy a task when
one is exhausted due to lack of sleep and exposea
to enemy fire! Douglas Goddard recalls how it
was when the 112 (Wessex) Field Regiment RA
planned for Operation Clipper, the offensive at
Geilenkirchen in November 1944:
Robertson's account above is an example of
Spent very cold morning at new gun positions
At front line and rather lively. Rained all evening
and my bivouac got soaked through. Constantly
working on fireplans. The night's air activity had
hordes of ours
going out and some of their
coming in [.
1156
A measure taken to make the planning of 'Timed
Concentrations' a bit easier was, as mentioned
above, to use standardised terms for description
of targets and how much artillery to engage
depending on the size and importance of targets,
Mike Target (regimental), Uncle Target (divi-
sional), etc. They could help when this type of
covering fire' was planned.
largete
to be engaged in support of
infantry/armour attacks were given letters and
numbers showing what kind of target they
resented, M1234' for a Mike target yep,
for an 'Uncle' target and so on. In the fire plan
the map references (coordinates and heights)
were given for such targets, and with which units
to engage them. Time when the fire was to start
had to be given as well. Type of ammunition and
ruzes must, as well as the fire intensity, be given
in the fire plan. In case some kind of ranging was
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
needed this should also be noted (although not
often).
Provided batteries were to be laid at the
same point for all guns in a regimental concen-
tration (25-pounders) covered an area of around
250x250 yards and a divisional around 350x350
yards or a bit more. If medium guns were
engaged as well, this area increased to around
400x400 yards. These dispersions of fire must
be taken into account in the planning as must
related safety distances
for
infantry/armour.
the advancing
The fire plan was
as discussed above
carefully coordinated with
the plan of the
commander of the attacking units, taking into
account the time needed by these to reach the
'start line' for the attack. Sometimes the fire had
to remain in this position quite a long time,
maybe up to an hour or so before the attack
commenced. When it was underway, the fire had
to be moved in steps into the enemy's area, i.e. a
Creeping Barrage. Ideally the attackers should
follow the fire, just close behind it, thus taking
advantage of its neutralising effect. Normally the
fire plan included all the shifts forward needed
until the attacking units had reached their first-
hand objectives.
Next, the plan was designed to give as good
support as possible when the attackers were to
pursue their advance towards the second objec-
tives. This would in most cases require more
neutralising fire for some time against the most
dangerous enemy positions (targets). Such neu-
tralising concentrations were often to begin with
a massive punch with all participating guns
shooting as quickly as possible a certain number
of rounds, remember the fire order 6 rounds
gunfire or the like, this before the enemy took
shelter in slit trenches or fortifications. Then
firing could proceed more slowly during the time
needed for neutralisation. As a basis for planning
Table 12-3. Intensity of covering fire (Rounds per minute
25-pounder
Medium guns
(4.5-inch/5.5-inch)
Heavy guns
(7.2-inch)
Slow
of covering fire' a set of standardised terms for
fire intensity existed, which are shown in Table
12-3.
It might be added that a 25-pounder crew
when ordered 'Gun fire' used to fire 6-8
rounds/minute. 157 If, however, firing at this rate
for a long period was ordered this could result
in over-heating of the barrel, in particular when
high charges were used. When planning this was
another factor to take into account, especially
when large fire plans were to be implemented.
Large operations often included fire plans lasting
as much as 5-10 hours of continuous firing. To
avoid over-heating fire intensity was kept as low
as possible. Another measure was taking the
guns out of action every 45 minutes for a 10-
minute break. This was an appreciated break also
for the crews. An even more drastic measure to
deal with over-heating was to spray the barrels
with water, if available.
The safety distance, ie. how close to the
moving fire the attackers could proceed without
being hit by own shells, varied with calibre. As a
rule of thumb the British used 150 yards for
shells fired by 25-pounders and 300 yards if they
attacked behind the fire of medium guns. These
distances were approximate and were valid when
the direction of fire and the direction of attack
roughly coincided. If the angle between the two
was 90° one had to increase the safety distance
for 25-pounders to around 200 yards, which was
due to the fact that the fragments from the
bursting shells were dispersed more across the
fire direction than along it.
We will now have a look at the second
principle for arranging covering fire, 1.e. the
Barrage principle. This fire could be either a
creeping or rolling belt of fire against linear
targets. It was much used, in particular when the
artillery was to support major operations. The
advantage was that the fire covered the whole
area over which the attackers were advancing, ir
respective of whether a section of it was more
dangerous than the other. The disadvantage was
that it required much more ammunition and that
quite a lot of this might fall where no enemv
vosluons existed
The whole front was initially to be covered
with fire as close as possible to the attacking
units, the 'opening line'. From this the fire would
move from one line to another in intervals
equalling the pacing speed of the attackers. Fior
infantry a shift of 100 yards every 2-4 minutes
