GUNFIRE
longer act as the leading unit of the brigade. The
task was now to protect the western flank of the
airborne perimeter down to the river to make an
evacuation possible.
During the night 24/25 September half of
the Dorset battalion was transported across the
Rhine behind a protecting heavy artillery
bombardment. Around 400 men embarked the
boats but due to heavy fire from German
positions only some 300 managed to get across.
and they found themselves engaged in heavy
fighting with the enemy west of Westerbouwing
with further casualties as a consequence. Due to
strong
currents in the river the boats were
dispersed over a longer distance than planned.
The force was thus split up in small groups and
these were unable to fight as a coherent unit
Only a handful managed to infiltrate through
German positions into the airborne perimeter.
While the attempts to relieve the airborne
division was going on, hard fighting was taking
place at the
Groesbeek Hill, southeast of
Nijmegen, where the Americans were being
attacked in force from
the
East
and the
Southeast. Around Veghel on 'Club Route' the
battle also raged. As we have seen, several severe
German counter-attacks closed the road to
Nijmegen several times, which severely interfered
with the advance of the two infantry divisions
following the Guards Division. A severe shortage
of artillery ammunition also
occurred as the
movement of the RASC vehicles was halted
Serious
too
was
the fact that boats
amphibious vehicles, badly needed in the north,
were delayed. 'Club Route'
was completely
closed to transport on 20 and 22-23 September.
Once opened again, a renewed closure was
enforced on 24-26 September.
On Sunday
24 September, the Corps
commander, General Horrocks or possibly
Montgomery himself, now promoted Field
Marshal, decided that the attempts to relieve the
airborne division by crossing the river should be
cancelled. The remaining parts of the division
were to be evacuated to the southern side of the
river Rhine. General Urquhart had advised that
his forces could not hold out any longer. The
order went to the commander of the 43rd
(Wessex) Division in the morning of Monday,
25 September, to organise the evacuation. The
latter, in his turn, gave the order to 130 Infantry
Brigade to execute the evacuation that night. A
Canadian unit of Engineers with assault boats
was put at their disposal. All available artillery
units were to support the operation
At 10.00 hours, Monday morning, the order
reached General Urquhart: Berlin tonight! He
immediately gave his orders to those of his
subordinate commanders still available. We will
come back to that, but first we will have a look at
what happened to the infantry division, which
was so anxious to assist, but never got the
chance.
The air-transported reinforcement
division
The
52nd (Lowland) Division had initially
trained in a specialist mountain warfare role
before carrying out further training to allow it to
operate in an air-landing role.
The purpose of the division was now to
reinforce other units when sealing off the are
north of Arnhem towards Ijsselmeer. All were
enthusiastic about this plan and being given op-
portunity to, at last, make a substantial contribu-
tion to the liberation of Europe.
The plan was to fly the division in to the
Deelen airfield located on the northern outskirts
possible to do this on the fifth day of Operation
Market Garden. It was thought that quite a lot
of repair work first had to be undertaken at the
airfield. For this purpose an undertaken at the
Engineer battalion had been assigned, the 878th
Aviation Engineer battalion, which in its turn
likely
would have to arrive by
some 150
gliders 392 The airfield had been an important
centre for the direction of German fighter for
mations. It was also used as other command
headquarters
On 20 September it was obvious that the
division could not be flown to Deelen. An alter
native plan,
of reduced
scope, was hastily
devised. It called for a battalion battle group with
support units to be landed by gliders to reinforce
the 1st Airborne Division. This operation too,
was cancelled in the morning of 23 September.
Thoughts were raised about landing the
whole of the division or ad about laa sui the
grass field south of river Waal. This field had
been found during the initial days of the
operation at Keent, which is located a few kilo-
metres downstream of Grave where the river
Maas
overlooked
makes a meandering turn It had beer
when
orioinal
Operation Market Gae original plad, for
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
when the opportunity to use it emerged it was
quickly decided to change this by, in the first
place, using it for supply flights, but also as a
potential landing site for the 52nd (Lowland)
Intantry Division. 393
On 30 September, several days after the
evacuation took place, it was finally decided that
the division should not be employed. Disap-
pointment was great. The division was eventually
to be engaged in battle a month later when the
northern shore of the river Schelde had to be
cleared, this time as 'sea-borne', but this is
another storv.
How the
gunners of this division had
prepared themselves for action we will come
back to later
We will now see how the artillery units were
used in Operation Garden after the initial days
of the battle, and will take a step back in time.
The artillery dispersed but at last concen-
trated again
On 18 September, the second day, 153 Field
Regiment RA supporting the Guards Division
was able to advance and deploy just south of
Valkenswaard. Here it could help in breaking the
German barrier between Aalst and Eindhoven.
The regiment reached the latter city during that
afternoon and went on to the Wilhelmina Canal.
The bridge there had been blown up as we have
seen, so the regiment had to wait until the
morning the next day, 19 September, before it
could proceed over the new bridge. Then it
became a speedy advance. Malden, a few miles
south of Nijmegen, was reached in the afternoon
and at 15.00 hours the regiment was ready to
open fire. From this position they were able to
support the heavy street fighting in the city. This
culminated in the spectacular crossing of river
Waal during the afternoon of 20 September.
During the evening that day, one of the
batteries fired in support of the 82nd Airborne
Division at Groesbeek Hill. Most likely one of
the regiment's batteries, 129 Battery RA, crossed
the river Waal at Nijmegen that evening and
deployed half a mile southwest of the village of
Lent. If so, this battery would have been the first
from XXX Corps to cross the river and almost
gOt Arnhem within range. The distance to the
road bridge at Arnhem was not more than 13km,
where the men of Frost's battalion were just
facing the bitter end of their heroic struggle.
It is not known whether the two medium
guns that were attached to the regiment during
the march also had deployed north of the Waal.
If so, the Arnhem Bridge had been within
range. 394 Firing had, however, required radio
communication with the gunners north of the
Rhine. But the observation party of 1 FOU, that
had tuned the flick frequency of its wireless set
to the command net of 153 Field Regiment RA,
had no contact with the regiment. The section
with medium guns from 84 Medium Regiment
RA was most likely connected on this net, which
meant that neither of these could fire against
targets north of the river Rhine.
The rest of 153 Field Regiment RA joined
the battery near Lent around 12.00 hours the
next day. Here they would remain in support of
the Irish Guards Battle Group until the following
day, 22 September until 18.00 hours when
ordered to re-deploy back to its former position
near Malden south of Nijmegen, so no help to
their brothers north of the river Rhine could be
provided by this regiment.
The
second regiment of the Guards
Division, 55 Field Regiment RA seems to have
passed 'Joe's Bridge' on 18 September, D+1, and
had to wait for the temporary Bailey bridge at
Son to be ready the next morning. On 19
September the regiment reached the Maas-Waal
Canal southwest of Nijmegen and deployed
there. The bridges across the river Waal were
Within comfortable range about 6km to the
North. So this regiment too could take part in
the firing during the afternoon 20 September
when the large bridges were captured.
After these
1WO
regiments, the three
regiments of the 43rd (Wessex) Division would
come closer (94, 112 and 179 Field Regiment
RA). The first of these crossed the border in the
afternoon 19 September, but the following day
they had to wait for the road between Eindhoven
and Son to be opened after the Germans had
blocked it. The two other regiments crossed the
border during the evening 20 September and the
following night. All regiments were deployed late
on 21 September near the place where 'Club
Route' crossed the Maas-Waal Canal not far
from Nijmegen. Here they remained deployed
until 23 September when they could nroceed
and cross the road bridge over the river Waal for
deployment at Slik-Ewijk.
"The
reinforcing
regiment that was to
support the 130 Rrioade of the 43rd (Wessey)
Division with two batteries, 147 Field Regiment
