pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
WAR DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
1. The objects of a war diary are two-fold: -
OBJECT.
(a) To provide information from theatres of war in sufficient detail and in such a form as to provide dáta
upon which to base future improvements in Army training, equipment, organisation and administration
The views and constructive recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under, I (a) above.
It is therefore of the utmost
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para. 11 below.
GENERAL.
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
on the L. of C.
b)
Unit commanders.
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(e) Heads of services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
combined war diary as is found convenient.
4. Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: —
(a) Cover;
(b) Index as printed on cover;
(c) Narrative;
(d) Appendices.
SovAl details if the weis an a pendin will & detachmen the concerned, the name of the parent unit, period
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
6. The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staff
officer. It is a secret document.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
oftence under the Official Secrets Acts.
7. In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
will be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
routine.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices.
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
8. The narrative should be written up daily. It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
a precis of any of them. It should contain: —
(a) Account of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
b) Notes of how orders were carried out.
Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
d)
Note of any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome them.
Note of how time not accounted for above was spent. The type of training, etc., should be specified.
(f) Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and
important messages and a reference to the
Appendix letter and folio number; and, only if necessary, a very brief note of the contents.
(i Totes of any movement visits paid and received by commanders and senior staf officers. It is equally
important to make a note of the reason for the visit and decisions taken.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GENERAL.
or other important documen is prepared, yo copies will be mode at the are ipti, ley o ain a dia policy
Assignment of copies of the war diary.
commanders "persian ta copiemi-ofti impstans doic on shind te placed in the war diary,
and demi-official messages which contain instructions of operational importance.
including
NOT in simple or the rendides. The a indiced to be semily inteReS show on the cover,
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
the appropriate space in the index.
In cases, where additional appendices appear suitable for the branches of certain headquarters or for certain
units the relevant papers should be inserted by groups and lettered accordingly, beginning with "K."
10. NoTEs.
Appendix " A." The forms which constitute this appendix are intended for use by operational units and
headquarters of divisions and below.
The form will be completed whether the unit or formation is engaged in
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
ORIGINAL
AnY Form C. 2118.
Commanding Officer
bol. N.h.
WAR
LI TELL
DIARY
0 R
I GE
SUIZARY
Unit. =1.
Month and Ycar.&
August 194s.
(Delete heading not required)
Eferonco to Appondácos
Place
Date
Hour
Sumary of Events and Information
LION VERT.
1.
1015....
Le main offonor smug from nold laude sentio
luck were badly senatue to ens advene on tees. Hank
14.30..
1719..1
1.808.
18.30
105.mm.
k3.4,0 l

