Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
26
what really mattered was how well their civilian conscript soldiers used this vast
array of machines.
Montgomery also appreciated the interrelationship between the morale of
British civilians on the Home Front and that of his troops; senior commanders
also had to bolster the former to prevent the morale of their troops being
dragged down by any despondency discernible in the letters they received from
home.
Montgomery's pre-invasion tours and addresses sought to bolster the
morale of both the troops and civilians; his effectiveness in persuading the
public to put their trust in his abilities was evidenced by how widely it was
believed that "with him in command every battle would be won; without him
most would be lost."17
A key issue in this examination of how Montgomery sustained the morale of
his troops is what Montgomery really felt about the capabilities of his troops.
Professor Michael Howard has argued persuasively that Montgomery's concern
with maintaining the morale of his troops prevented him expressing his negative
opinions about the real capabilities of the British soldier relative to that of the
enemy.
Both Howard and Hastings rightly argue that Montgomery privately
remained well aware of the limitations of his own troops. Consequently, much
of the praise he lavished on his troops was rhetorical !8 One simply cannot take
at face value Montgomery's statements that the "Overlord" Army was "the best
army we have ever had" and that "the British soldier is the finest fighting man in
the world, if properly led."'' Indeed, Howard astutely makes the crucial point
that "in the Second World War this was not true. Monty knew that this was not
true, and by far the most difficult part of his job" was "to make the British army,
the British public, and everyone else believe that it was [true]. "20 This statement
encapsulates what the maintenance of morale meant to Montgomery.
Some historians have suggested, however, both that the Field Marshal re-
mained genuinely proud of his troops and thus that his praise was genuine, not
rhetorical? However, these two views are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
To suggest that Montgomery, the military professional, recognized the limita-
tions of the British army in 1944 does not deny that he was also genuinely proud
of his troops, as indeed he clearly was. That the British army had risen from its
1940 nadir to a point in 1944 where it could take on the highly effective German
army and consistently win was itself a tremendous achievement, of which
Montgomery and his peers were justly proud.
Yet, at the same time, the Field
Marshal understood that there was still far to go before the British army could
defeat the enemy without the benefit of overwhelming superiority in matériel.
Indeed, even though the Field Marshal's praise was both part genuine and part
rhetorical, the extent of the rhetoric is indicated by the fact that all of his post-
operation congratulatory messages were virtually identical in their praise,
irrespective of the success or failure of the operation concerned 22
Even though Montgomery realized that there was a long way to go before
the British army could match the enemy on equal terms, the situation facing
Britain in 1943-44 provided little opportunity to make much headway toward
this herculean goal. However, such a target never constituted a viable option or
a stated objective for the British army. For Britain, what really mattered was
The Maintenance of Morale
27
that the war was won, not the military methods with which this was achieved.
As Max Hastings penetratingly observed, Montgomery's purpose in Normandy
was not "to demonstrate the superiority of [his] fighting men to those of Hitler,
but to win the war at tolerable cost." His task in mid-1944 was to do the best
with whatever weapon the war-weary British Commonwealth could muster; to
somehow "persuade" his troops "to do enough-albeit, just enough —to prevail
on a given battlefield," and hence secure final victory while avoiding a repeti-
tion of the slaughter of the Great War?3 Moreover, because there would be no
second chance if "Overlord" failed, Montgomery would have to nurse this
weapon for as long as it took for weight of numbers to bring the enemy to
collapse?* Leigh-Mallory, the Allied Air Commander-in-Chief, observed that
success in the campaign "all boil[ed] down to a question of morale" within the
21st Army Group.25
That Montgomery succeeded in nurturing his forces
throughout the campaign represents his greatest achievement of the Second
World War.26
Having explored the importance that Montgomery placed on morale, this
study now examines the factors that he considered important to the maintenance
of morale. From his earliest days in the desert, Montgomery recognized the
overwhelming significance of success in battle to the maintenance of high
morale. He observed that "the troops must have complete confidence in their
higher commander, they must know that the battle is safe in his hands, that he
will not sacrifice their lives needlessly, [and] that success will always crown
their efforts."
If a commander achieved these conditions, Montgomery de-
clared, "the troops will have the highest morale," for soldiers "will always
follow a successful general."27
After the war Montgomery affirmed this
conviction when he stated that "no leader, however great, can long continue
unless he wins victories. "28
The Normandy experiences of Brigadier James
Hargest, the highly regarded New Zealand army observer attached to the XXX
Corps, and a trusted friend of Lieutenant-General O'Connor, convinced him of
the perspicacity of such a view.?9
The ordinary British soldier, Hargest com-
mented, "will accept losses without losing morale provided that he sees some
results. "30
Brigadier Richardson, the army group's Brigadier General Staff
(Plans) —BGS(Plans) -observed that when he had got to know Montgomery
better, he realized that the latter's confidence and relaxed attitude "was but an
outward sign of a self-imposed regime, designed to ensure that the Army's
morale did not deteriorate, "31
There exist other factors that the majority of commanders have long recog-
nized as being important in the maintenance of morale.
The most important
factors appreciated by Montgomery included good leadership by officers; that
the men believed in the abilities of their officers, especially their Commander-
in-Chief; firm but fair discipline; thorough and realistic training; comradeship,
self-respect, and physical robustness; that leaders believed in the justness of the
cause for which they fought; and that the troops enjoyed the support of the
largest possible weight of matériel 32
Moreover, Montgomery
believed that
good administration and man-management, in the sense of
"removing all
discomforts, by eliminating every form of unpleasantness," also remained
