Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
firepower-based attrition, caution, and alternate thrusts, which together formed
the crux of Montgomery's set-piece battle approach. Chapter 5 then examines
the remaining four fundamental tenets of Montgomery's operational technique,
together with the seven ancillary characteristics.
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF MONTY'S OPERATIONAL TECHNIQUE
Montgomery's concept of the master plan represented a crucial part of his
operational technique. This notion, a classic military principle, referred to first
the development and maintenance of a clear plan for how an operation of
campaign would develop, and then the utilization of forces to enact this plan.""
Montgomery's conception existed in three forms that might be termed the
operational level, suboperational, and single operation senses of the master plan;
these related, respectively, to the overall development of a campaign, to the
development and sequence of several operations in fulfillment of the operational
master plan, and to the
development of a particular operation.
In reality,
however, Montgomery's practical soldier's mind used the term master plan
indiscriminately to refer to any of these three senses. This imprecision exacer-
bated the misunderstandings that emerged between senior officers during the
war and in the postwar literature - in part based on their misconstruction of
which of these senses was intended by a commander's use of the terms master
plan or plan.
To avoid such confusions, it is important to establish which of
these senses Montgomery meant when he discussed his master plan concept.
In his postwar writings, Montgomery often lumped together the operational
level and suboperational senses of his master plan concept. He believed that "on
the operational side a Commander-in-C[hief] must draw up a master plan for
the campaign he envisages. "32 This sentence illuminates the haziness of the
distinction between the operational and suboperational senses of Montgomery'S
master plan concept. As it appears that he is referring to an entire campaign, it
seems that he is discussing the operational level sense of his master plan, but in
fact he is referring to both this and the suboperational senses. For he is arguing
not just that an overall conception of the development of the entire campaign is
necessary, but also that a more detailed operation-by-operation plan for
achieving this theater strategic conception is required.
Montgomery's written thought also emphasized this master plan concept in
its individual operation context, concerning the development of a single
operation. He believed that an operation "must develop within a predetermined
pattern of action" and that a commander must decide both how he will "fight the
battle before it begins" and then "use the military effort at his disposal to force
the battle to swing the way he wishes it to go."33
As it is the corps that typically
plans and fights individual major operations, Montgomery's statements represent
an admonition to his senior subordinate commanders to conduct their respective
battles in this manner.
Montgomery also believed that once the master plan of an operation had
been devised at the corps level, it had to be adhered to and protected from
distortions "created by subordinate action" that did "not suit the master plan."
85
The Set-Piece Battle
Though Montgomery conceded that "the master plan must never be so rigid"
that the commander could not "vary it to suit the changing tactical situation," he
insisted that "nobody else may be allowed to change it... especially, not the
enemy. "34
Clearly this concept was based on Montgomery's desire to seize the
initiative and thus impose his will on the battlefield.
Montgomery's emphasis on preplanned control of individual operations
sheds light on his attitudes both to the conduct of battle and to the British army.
This approach suggests that Montgomery possessed both supreme belief in his
own abilities, and a certain distrust of his subordinates, as well as concern that
subordinate action might distort the intent of superiors.
In Montgomery's
opinion, adherence to a master plan minimized the risk of error during an
operation.
Through the individual operational master plan and the meticulous
planning and preparation it entailed, every soldier taking part in an operation
would know both his particular role and contribution to the overall battle. This
prior planning and
preparation enabled formations and units to undertake
specific training and full-scale rehearsals of the types of action they would
undertake in the next operation.
This preplanned approach suggests that
Montgomery both sought to achieve the maximum potential out of a force
whose limitations he fully recognized, and possessed a neat mind that sought to
create order out of the chaos inherent in active operations.
This command style
is far removed from the mission-analysis approach of the modern, professional,
British army, which stresses the exercise of initiative by subordinates within the
superior's overall intent, to enact successful maneuver warfare.
Montgomery's emphasis on the master plan also formed an integral part of
his style of leadership.
The latter reflected some distrust of the staff because
Montgomery was determined to remain the central impulse on
operations,
especially with planning, where the staff's influence was potentially strongest.
Throughout his career after reaching battalion-command level in September
1918, Montgomery felt that once a commander produced an outline plan his
main task was to ensure that "the basic foundations" were "not broken down" by
the detail worked out by the staff.?s
His concern over the role of the staff
manifested itself during the planning of operation "Husky," the invasion of
Sicily, where he inherited a finalized staff plan that he considered unacceptable.
He savaged the notion that an operation could be planned with just a planning
staff but without a commander. The correct procedure, he insisted, was for the
commander who was to implement the operation to make "the original outline
plan" and only then should the staff plan the details.?6
When Montgomery
assumed command of the 21st Army Group for "Overlord," he faced the same
situation, inheriting the prepared COSSAC D-Day plan, with which he was far
from satisfied.37
Having examined how Montgomery's master plan was depicted in his writ-
ings, this study now examines how this concept manifested itself in his conduct
of this campaign. Montgomery placed much emphasis on his operational level
master plan in his writings, and in practice he did conceive, with the cooperation
of his senior colleagues, an overall master plan for the Normandy campaign.?8
Historians have debated ever since what precisely this strategy was and whether
