50
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
three assertions: first, that the 1944 British army manpower crisis was extremely
serious; second, that the British High Command had anticipated this crisis long
before the 21st Army Group landed on French soil; and third, that the crisis
exerted a profound influence on Montgomery's conduct of the campaign.
THE MOTIVES BEHIND MONTY'S CASUALTY-CONSCIOUS METHODS
Four interconnected motivations lay behind Montgomery's desire to attain
victory with tolerable casualties.
First, as the previous chapter demonstrated,
Montgomery realized that avoidance of unnecessarily high casualties would
help to nurture sufficiently the relatively fragile morale of the 21st Army
Group's civilian troops so that they could achieve final victory over the West-
heer.
Second, as he understood, Britain by 1943-44 was suffering a chronic
manpower shortage in both the military and economic sectors of her war effort.
During 1944 a chronic infantry reinforcement problem would hamper British
army operations in general, and those of the 21st Army Group in particular.
Third, the horrors of the First World War trenches-the shadow of the Somme
and Passchendaele -had profoundly influenced Montgomery, as it had many of
his peers. These commanders were determined in their conduct of this war to
avoid a repetition of this slaughter of British troops.
Finally, in impeccable
Clausewitzian style, Montgomery fully appreciated the British politico-Imperial
dimensions of the military campaign he was to conduct.
Britain had gone to
war, in addition to resisting Nazi aggression, to protect her influence on the
Europe that would emerge after the war.
Montgomery, like Britain's senior
commanders and politicians, realized that being among the victors was insuffi-
cient to secure British war aims. If Britain emerged as one of the victorious
Allies, but with her army destroyed, Britain's ability to influence the shape of
postwar Europe would be diminished. This ability was already waning fast as
the two nascent superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, steadily
eclipsed Britain.4
As Northwest Europe represented the major British (and
Western Allied) effort of the Second World War in Europe, these political
considerations dominated Montgomery's conduct of the campaign.
The combination of these four factors made Montgomery determined in
Northwest Europe to avoid unnecessary casualties while seeking ultimate
victory. After examining the last three of these four factors in more detail, this
study then demonstrates that casualty conservation was the prime motivation
behind Montgomery's attritional firepower-laden approach: Put simply,
saved lives."S
"shells
Consequently, "at the end of a long and exhausting war all
commanders" felt "that if the expenditure of thousands of tons of projectiles"
saved "a few lives or made success more certain then it was fully justified.""
The Manpower Shortage
By 1943, the United Kingdom was suffering from an acute shortage of man-
power. Given the enormous manpower requirements of both the armed forces
and wartime industrial production, by 1942 Britain had mobilized all of its
available manpower to these two sectors. Consequently, the British could only
Casualty Conservation
51
expand the manpower resources of one sector at the expense of the other. This
situation strictly limited the amount of manpower available for the 1944 British
army as reinforcements to replace casualties —or "wastage" as it was euphemis-
tically termed.
As early as 1942 the British army had become a wasting asset;
manpower intakes did not match actual wastage, and hence the High Command
had to disband field formations to provide reinforcements for combat divisions.
The most acute reinforcement shortages existed in the rifle infantry, upon
whom the majority of combat casualties fell?
The British army had long anticipated that the 21st Army Group was likely
to suffer some degree of manpower shortage in Northwest Europe.
The War
Office could not avoid the occurrence of some shortage during 1944, despite its
strenuous efforts after autumn 1943 to minimize the problem. Though D'Este
recognized the long-term precursors to the summer 1944 manpower problems
experienced by the 21st Army Group, he nevertheless argued that this crisis
emerged suddenly during July 1944 because the War Office miscalculated
infantry wastage rates.
uste 2so clicoesied tnar inis misca ciliaton torced
Montgomery to disband formations within the 21st Army Group.®
Despite
D'Este's arguments, the 21st Army Group simply could not avoid experiencing
some degree of manpower shortage or the necessity to disband field formations
to provide much needed reinforcements. In fact, the War Office's miscalcula-
tion of infantry wastage rates "merely served to exacerbate an existing and deep
rooted problem."?
Long before D-Day the British army realized that a serious manpower crisis,
especially with rifle infantry, would occur during the campaign. As early as 20
October 1943, the War Office recognized that it would have to dispatch large
drafts from the six Lower Establishment Infantry Divisions to provide rein-
forcements for the 21st Army Group in Normandy.
These six divisions,
intended for home defense only, formed the bulk of the strength deployed by
United Kingdom Home Forces, the formation tasked with defending the British
Isles. As early as 28 December 1943, Home Forces expressed their anxiety that
the required infantry drafts might "exceed. the total available fit personnel"
under their command. Hence, just after Christmas 1943, it was clear to many
British senior officers that the British army would need to bleed dry Home
Forces, and thus to take risks with the security of Great Britain, in order to
provide sufficient replacements to keep Montgomery's command operational in
Nazi-occupied France.
Concerns over this manpower shortage overshadowed the whole of the
"Overlord" planning process.
On 19 March 1944, Montgomery informed
Lieutenant-General R. M. Weeks, the Deputy CIGS (DCIGS), that
"the
situation" with regard to "reinforcements is not good."
Montgomery, the
military realist, added, "We must take things as they are and find the best
answer," which was "to try and do this business with the smallest possible
casualties." If the British played their "cards properly," Montgomery continued,
"I believe we could do it fairly cheaply "11 Weeks then made a verbal request to
de Guingand connected with this exchange with Montgomery.
This prompted
de Guingand on 20 March to reply, "You asked me to ensure" that Montgomery
