160
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
accept a demotion to command a division in Italy to gain vital operational
command experience.24
Crerar did not command, as Montgomery conceived the word, because he
was neither decisive nor able to grip his subordinates?5 In September 1944, for
instance, when discussing the impending operations to clear the Scheld estuary,
Crerar told Montgomery that his comments were only "tentative because my
staff have not yet had adequate opportunity to analyze, and present to me, the
various issues involved. "26
In contrast, Montgomery and Simonds made their
decisions and then set the staff to work out the details. According to senior
Canadian officers, Crerar was also too cold, aloof, humorless,
"reserved, and
self conscious" to be able to inspire his command? He was also too pedantic to
be inspirational - for instance, insisting in the field in Italy on proper paperwork
and strict adherence to dress codes; his own written reports stood out for their
prolixity.28
In Northwest Europe, Brigadier Beament recalled seeing Lieuten-
ant-Colonel Anderson, the army's (Operations) first grade staff officer
[GSO1(Ops)), returning despondently from a morning conference with Crerar
because the General had spotted an incorrect map reference in Anderson's report
of the previous night? Crerar was hardly following Montgomery's maxim thai
commanders avoid detail and concentrate on the essentials! In late September
1944, Crear's ponderous modus operandi was highlighted when Simonds made
an "electrifying" impact on the army staff after he temporarily replaced the sick
Crerar.30
Montgomery also believed that Crerar was a poor judge of men. On 7 July
1944 the Field Marshal informed Brooke that in Normandy, Major-General
Keller, the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division commander, "has proved himself
quite unfit to command a division." Montgomery went on to deride as "absurd"
Crear's earlier suggestion that Keller should be the next Canadian general to
obtain a corps command."
Montgomery's concern with Crerar's judgment
reflected his cognizance of the latter's growing antipathy toward Simonds. To
Mongomery this feud represented an example of allowing personal feeling 10
get in the way of operational judgments - a weakness the ruthless Field Marshal
fought to contain.
Hence, even though Montgomery had "great personal
affection" for Crerar, he refused to let this influence him into making "unsound"
judgments of the Canadian General's military capabilities.
Not only was Crerar an unsound judge of men, according to Montgomery,
but he sometimes handled badly his subordinates.
Crerar quarreled with
Lieutenant-General Crocker, the commander of the I (British) Corps, within a
day of the First Canadian Army becoming operational in Normandy.
This
prompted Montgomery to comment spitefully to Brooke that Crerar "thinks he
is a great soldier, and he was determined to show it the moment he took
command at 1200 [hours] 23 July. He made his first mistake at 1205 hours;
and his second after lunch."33
Montgomery also believed that Crerar lacked
patience and that he was not calm in the midst of a battle. For instance, during
"Totalize" —the first battle fought in Normandy by Crerar and the First Canadian
Army -Montgomery commented to Brooke that Crerar not only was "so
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
161
anxious that he worries himself all day," but also failed to realize that "battles
seldom go completely as planned. "34
Montgomery's poor opinion of Crerar, however, was formed not just from
operational considerations but also from political ones —or, more precisely, from
the area where the operational and political realms of military decision-making
blended together. For it was also Crerar's staunch defense of both the Canadian
army's national interests and his own authority in overseeing these rights that
prompted Montgomery's hostility toward him.3s
Crerar insisted on being a
Canadian army commander instead of the compliant clone of a British com-
mander that Montgomery
wished him to be; as Brigadier
Elliot Rodger,
Simonds' Chief of Staff, commented, Crerar stove to ensure
"that Canada is
'done right by' as far as it is humanly possible. "36
By 1944, it had long been established that Canadian forces serving with the
British army had the right, as a last resort, to refer any matter concerning them
to the Canadian Government.
Prior to D-Day, Crerar's position was that, as
senior combatant officer of the Canadian forces in Europe, he had an inalienable
responsibility to the Canadian Government for all Canadian troops overseas.
Montgomery had already clashed with Crerar -then commanding the I Cana-
dian Corps —on this issue in July 1942 over the Dieppe raid, which Canadian
formations under Montgomery's command were to undertake. Crerar requested
that he be present at 11th Fighter Group Headquarters, "the only place in
England from which the operation could be effectively influenced once it had
been launched. "38
Montgomery refused on the grounds that no commander
could share his responsibility with, nor abrogate it to, another commander.
Crerar refused to accept this denial of what he saw as his inalienable responsi-
bility. Standing his ground, he warned Montgomery, his superior, that he would
raise the issue at "the highest political levels" where, he added confidently, "the
decision would go against" Montgomery; consequently, the British commander
backed down.?9
Crerar later told Colonel Stacey, the Canadian Official Histo-
rian, that he had discerned then a pattern that was to be often repeated: Mont-
gomery would "always go through a yellow light: but when the light turned red,
he stopped. "40
By 1944, while both the War Office and Montgomery accepted the Canadian
right of referral, the key issue was which officer should exercise this right.
Montgomery maintained that the proper channel for this right was the Chief of
Staff at Canadian Military Headquarters [CMHQ] in London, Lieutenant-
General Stuart.
CMHQ dealt with the War Office, while the First Canadian
Army dealt with British operational commands; there remained, however, a
continuing debate on the precise relationship between these two Canadian
commands. Montgomery remained concerned that Crerar's defense of Canadian
national military autonomy would be detrimental to the conduct of operations.
Moreover, if Montgomery accepted that Crerar was the correct channel for this
referral, it followed that Crerar had responsibility for Canadian forces within the
21st Army Group but outside Crerar's First Canadian Army.
The units con-
cerned were the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division and the 2nd Canadian Armored
Brigade, both serving under the I (British) Corps in Dempsey's Second (British)
