172
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
inexperienced to assume an army command; by the end of Normandy this
position had, however, completely changed.
Some key similarities existed between the situation facing Crerar and that of
Burns's I Canadian Corps in Italy.
Initially Burns's experienced divisional
commanders —Hoffmeister and Vokes—had
reasonable confidence in their
superior, despite his inexperience, as long as Burns held them on a loose rein
permitting them to fight their own battles.
However, British criticism of Burns
revolved around the fact that he would not command or grip his subordinates.
To protect Burns from Leese's criticism, Stuart advised him to "exert his power
of command" and to "express his personality more. '19 It was, therefore, ironic
that Burns, in endeavoring to exert his will on his subordinates, not only failed
to gain the confidence of Leese, but also lost the confidence of his subordinates.
The latter development ended Canadian resistance to British criticism of Burns,
who was consequently replaced in November 1944.
Indeed, Vokes's perceptive
observation that "command is often not what you do but the way that you do it"
seems to have been the crux of Burns's problems in Italy; the dour corps
commander -sardonically nicknamed "smiler"-was "not a member of the 'club'
and made no attempt to be. "120
The critical issue, however, is whether Montgomery's limited faith in Cre-
rars abilities irrespective of whether this was justified - affected the manner in
which the 21st Army Group conducted the campaign.
Did Montgomery's
Comes influence the tasks and resources Montgomery allocated to Crera's
Army during the campaign? In general the Field Marshal treated the First
Canadian Army less favorably than Dempsey's Second (British) Army.
This
was at least partly due to Montgomery's distrust of Crerar, although he was
equally suspicious of the majority of Canada's inexperienced senior formation
commanders —with the exception of Simonds.121
On 8 October 1944 Ralston
discusted with Montgomery who might be appointed & October 1 of the Fion
Canadian Army if both Crerar and Simonds became casualties.
Montgomery
replied that there was not "any Canadian" in whom he had "the necessary
confidence" and that he could only suggest "one of the Corps Commanders in
Second [British] Army. "122
It is interesting to speculate which British corps commander Montgomery
would have suggested. From hindsight Horrocks may seem the best candidate,
yet in 1969 Montgomery stated that he would "never have given him an
army. "123 Montgomery also had informed Brooke in 1945 that "Crocker would
not command an army in the field."124
The performance of the XII Corps'
commander, Ritchie, had been competent rather than spectacular, so his chances
of promotion seemed slim. 2s
At this time O'Connor's relationship with
Montgomery was no longer at its height but was not yet completely soured. It
seems plausible that O'Connor may have been promoted, especially as Mont-
gomery considered him rather old to be a corps commander.
Montgomery's concerns over the abilities of senior Canadian commanders
mirrored Leese's attitude in Italy during 1944. Leese was reluctant to make use
of the I Canadian Corps, because Burns lacked both "tactical sense" and the
"power of command."
Leese remained loathe to place experienced British
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
173
formations under Burns's corps command, yet this formation lacked sufficient
Canadian forces to reach full combat power without British reinforcement.
The
choice facing Leese was stark: to give the corps "a task beyond the powers of
the Commander" or one "below the capacity of the troops."126
In Normandy, Montgomery's limited faith in Crerar prompted him to keep
the First Canadian Army back in England.
The Field Marshal confided to
Brooke that he was keeping Crerar "out" of the battle "as long as I can,"
allowing Dempsey's Second (British) Army to control no less than five corps.!27
There were sound operational reasons for this, because the confined area of the
lodgment area could take an additional corps headquarters but could not
accommodate the ancillary troops associated with an army headquarters.
However, Montgomery also manipulated this valid reason as a justification for
keeping Crerar out of the battle.
Montgomery's distrust of Crerar's abilities also influenced the tasks he set
the latter's command.
On 11 July 1944 Brooke informed Montgomery that
Canadian opinion left him no choice but to accept that Canadian forces would
all have to serve under their national army and be commanded by a Canadian.
Brooke made clear, however, that Montgomery should "keep [Crerar's] army
small" and give it "the less important jobs."128 On 22 July, the day that the First
Canadian Army became operational in France, Montgomery responded to
3 rooke that he would only give Crerar "tasks within his capabilities."
Given Montgomery's attitude, it appears curious that in August 1944 the
First Canadian Army assumed a spearhead role by undertaking Operations
"Totalize" and "Tractable." It was other operational circumstances, rather than
faith in Crerar, that prompted Montgomery's choice.
With the Americans
advancing swiftly in Operation "Cobra" and threatening to outflank the German
forces from the south, it became imperative for the 21st Army Group to rapidly
advance southeast to meet the Americans near Trun, surrounding the German
forces in the Falaise pocket. This objective necessitated an immediate attack
from the Caen area down the main road to Falaise. Simonds' II Canadian Corps
held this part of the front. Before Crerar's Army became operational, Simonds'
Corps served under Dempsey's Second (British) Army, spearheading the
advance south from Caen in Operation "Spring." Once the First Canadian Army
became functional, Montgomery had to bow to the demands of nationality and
place Simonds' Corps under Crerar's Army command. Hence, Montgomery had
to assign Crerar's Army the vanguard role —despite his limited faith in its
commander —because Simonds' II Canadian Corps held the sector where an
attack was immediately required. The failure of Crerar's Army to seize Falaise
in "Totalize" and "Tractable" exacerbated Montgomery's existing misgivings
about Crerar's abilities. Given the Field Marshal's high regard for Simonds, he
was likely to place any blame for these failures, perhaps unfairly, on Crerar.
However, these failures had as much to do with Simonds' corps plan, despite its
commendable tactical innovations, and with troop performance, than with
failings at army headquarters.130
A lack of faith in a subordinate was a prime factor in the phenomenon of
"overcontrol" by higher commanders.
One might fully expect, therefore, that
