92
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
power due to the troop fatigue that resulted from inadequate retention of
reserves.
Irrespective of the merits and disadvantages of these two national
operational approaches, neither succeeded in overcoming easily the effective-
ness of the German defense.
Both the Anglo-Canadian and American ap-
proaches, however, concurred that the key to unlocking this resilient German
defense lay in lavish use of massed firepower.
Firepower-based Attrition
Montgomery's reliance on firepower-based attrition combined with his em-
phasis on concentration formed the foundation of his operational technique.
The key to his conduct of battle was utilization of overwhelming concentration
of massed artillery firepower, supplemented by aerial bombardment where
possible, in a set-piece style of war based on attrition, which the Germans
termed Matérielschlacht.
Attrition based upon massed artillery fire, together
with the antitank action of the six-pounder gun, had brought success at Alamein,
and this "impressed itself indelibly upon" Montgomery's mind, "almost to the
exclusion of everything else."?6 The principal lesson of the North African
campaign was that only Allied attacks with strong artillery support could
overcome German defensive power."
With this firepower-laden approach, Montgomery never suffered a serious
operational defeat after his initial success at Alamein. 78
His methods sought to
blast the infantry onto their objectives with an overwhelming weight of shell.
This was not dissimilar to the artillery bombardments of 1914-18, as his
detractors observed with some justification.
Unfortunately for Montgomery,
this comparison conjured up the associated connotations of Great War Chateau
generalship. This comparison was ironic because Montgomery's operational
approach could trace its origins to his revulsion at this very type of generalship
with its callous disregard for the lives of the troops. However, the crucial point
was that Montgomery adopted methods similar to those used in 1918 specifi-
cally to save lives, not throw them away needlessly.
Between 1939 and 1944, the British army enhanced enormously the effec-
tiveness of its use of artillery. This improvement resulted largely from technical
developments such as improved communications that enhanced command and
control (C3), and thus tactical handling? In Northwest Europe, the 21st Army
Group could bring down simultaneously the accurate fire of hundreds of Allied
guns on an enemy target. The combination of this effectiveness with copious
availability of pieces enabled Montgomery to centralize artillery concentrations
(AGRA) 80
wherever possible at the corps level or that of the Army Group, Royal Artillery
Montgomery's emphasis on firepower resulted both from the prevalence of
traditional gunner doctrine within the British army and his appreciation that the
21st Army Group could utilize effectively the large number of guns available.
Undoubtedly the most effective arm within the 21st Army Group, the artillery
made a contribution to ultimate Allied victory only equaled by that of air power.
In conirast, the effectiveness of German artillery in Normandy proved poor,
93
The Set-Piece Battle
although by winter of 1944-45, the Westheer managed more effectively to
concentrate defensive artillery fire."1
In the constricted Normandy bridgehead, the 21st Army Group managed to
provide a massive scale of artillery fire support -typically 500-750 guns -for
its major operations.?2
A German combat report noted the "incredibly heavy"
Allied artillery fire and concluded that the Allies were "waging war regardless
of expense. "83
After August 1944, however, the army group typically could
provide fire support of between 300 and 450 guns for major operations, the
reduction caused by the extension of the army group's frontage.?4
Not until the
1056-gun Anglo-Canadian "Veritable" fire-plan of 8 February 1945 —the largest
and most sophisticated of the entire campaign —did the fire support the army
group provided surpass the Normandy peak? Montgomery's command adhered
rigidly to the principle that it would support any operation with the largest
amount of guns possible, and hence censured any artillery officer who "left even
a single gun idle that was in range or could be moved in range!'
The fundamental problem with this firepower-laden approach —particularly
if Montgomery employed strategic bombers in a direct support role —was that it
devastated the area over which the troops were to advance.
The resulting
cratered terrain hampered enormously the movement of motorized transport
along communication routes or across country.
While this weight of fire
facilitated the success of the initial break-in battle, the
ensuing devastation
restricted severely the tempo and momentum of the unfolding Allied attack and
allowed the Germans time to move up reserves to halt any further Allied
penetration of their tactical zone of defense.87
This devastation proved a particular problem for Allied forces because all
their divisions, including infantry, were motorized. In contrast, most German
infantry divisions remained predominantly horse-drawn throughout the Second
World
War.'8
Given this motorization
of Anglo-Canadian divisions,
offensive operations witnessed the movement of thousands of vehicles.
Such
heavy Allied use of available communication routes often churned those already
damaged by Allied fire support into impassable bogs-such as the morass
created in the first days of "Veritable. "89
Hence, even when these massive
Allied fire-plans broke initial enemy resistance, subsequently
assault troops
often could not advance rapidly enough to take full advantage of this success
and effect a significant penetration; by the time the attacking Allied juggernaut
had rolled forward. German reserves had often improvised another defensive
line in the rear.
The other main consequence of Allied reliance on massive firepower was
that it hampered attempts at maneuver warfare.
Many assaults undertaken by
the 21st Army Group remained obvious frontal blows, and the limited tactical
maneuver it attempted remained ponderous.
That some of the most impressive,
or potentially promising, Anglo-Canadian actions in the campaign involved rare
examples of tactical maneuver indicates the significance of the loss of the
potential fruits of this approach. In one such case, Dempsey switched the 7th
Armored Division's axis further west to exploit a gap in the German front,
which enabled it to advance on Villers Bocage on 12 June 1944.
Conversely,
