100
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
cost during 1939-44, also encouraged a cautious approach.
The worst Allied
tactical setbacks in Normandy, such as the Villers Bocage débâcle, and the
destruction of Worthington force in "Totalize," occurred when infantry or armor
advanced boldly without adequate support from other combat arms, especially
artillery. 124
These examples dull the gloss historians have attached to the
concept of audacious mobile warfare after the onslaught of the Blitzkrieg in
1939-42. Bold maneuver warfare was very risky, if conducted against an enemy
as tactically skilled as the German army, even if the latter was markedly inferior
in matériel. The Allied air commander-in-chief, Leigh Mallory, perceptively
observed on 27 June 1944 that Rommel was "building up" his reserve armor,
and "waiting for Montgomery to stick his neck out" so that he could counterat-
tack any exposed Allied flank 125
Not surprisingly, therefore, many command-
ers of all levels within the 21st Army Group conducted their operations in a
cautious fashion.
Third, Montgomery's concern to nurture troop morale and conserve man-
power also reinforced his naturally cautious operational
technique.
This
approach compared unfavorably with Patton's bold, high-tempo exploitation of
the initial success of Operation "Cobra" that demonstrated the great operational
benefits of audacity.
Yet Patton's success has obscured the considerable risks
involved. His success was as much the product of the impact of both the Allies'
previous two months of attrition and the timely collapse of German logistics, as
it was with Patton's bold generalship 26 But even in these circumstances, some
risk existed during "Cobra" that several American divisions might be smashed,
just as the Desert Rats were at Villers Bocage; any attempt at such operational
audacity earlier in the campaign courted disaster. Most significantly, though the
Americans could cope with the loss of two divisions, the 21st Army Group most
definitely could not afford any such loss.
It is clear, therefore, that Montgomery's caution in Northwest Europe can
only be understood in the light of his concerns over casualty conservation and
the maintenance of morale. Montgomery realized that the way he fought his
battles coincided with the best way, all things considered, to fulfill Britain's war
aims —attaining victory within a larger Allied effort without a massive butcher's
bill. Although the Montgomery method constituted a crude, cumbersome, and
cautious example of the art of war, it nevertheless represented an appropriate
way for him to achieve a reasonable, sustained performance from his troops.
These characteristics-the master plan, concentration, firepower-based attri-
tion, and caution -formed the main components of the set-piece battle approach
that epitomized Montgomery's operational style in this campaign. The utiliza-
tion of this approach by the 21st Army Group produced two interconnected
operational consequences that impacted on its conduct of the campaign: a dearth
of activity at the operational level, particularly through a lack of simultaneity;
and second, a failure to commit more than a modest proportion of available
combat power.
operational level of war.
First, the nature of the set-piece battle did little to encourage activity at the
The 21st Army Group conducted these largely
attritional operations in pursuit of limited, geographic objectives, and the direct
The Set-Piece Battle
101
contribution that success in many of these operations made to overall decisive
victory remained at best hazy.
Montgomery's utilization of the set-piece
approach also hampered the use of simultaneity in his operations; this in turn
restricted his capability to coordinate effectively tactical action to produce fully
integrated, synchronized activity at the operational level. For the use of such an
approach by the 21st Army Group virtually precluded both of its subordinate
armies undertaking full-scale operations at the same time. There were insuffi-
cient artillery guns within the army group to support simultaneous major attacks
by both armies on the lavish scale to which Anglo-Canadian forces had become
accustomed; the "Colossal Cracks" approach inadvertently institutionalized the
psychological belief that attacks always required the maximum possible fire
support if they were to succeed.
While the First Canadian Army undertook
"Veritable," for example, the Second (British) Army assumed a defensive
posture.
Similarly, Montgomery had to halt prematurely the Second (British)
Army's Operation "Constellation," its October 1944 attack on the German
salient west of the River Maas, in order to reinforce the First Canadian Army's
faltering operations to clear the Scheldt estuary and open up the vital port of
Once information reached both armies that major new operations were im-
minent, they both commenced a bargaining process in which they requested that
the army group allocate them extra resources, particularly artillery pieces and
ammunition quotas.
But even the copious artillery resources available within
the army group often proved insufficient to meet the full demands of each army,
because both generally requested a generous provision of guns for their next
task.
Not surprisingly, when the 21st Army Group allocated only moderate
resources to a subordinate army, the latter found it difficult to achieve its
objectives, just as the First Canadian Army did in the Scheldt.
The evidence
suggests that, in part, this was a problem of mind-set; the availability of only
modest fire support both restricted what commanders considered to be opera-
tionally possible, and eroded their usually marked determination to achieve their
objectives despite the considerable costs involved 128
The 21st Army Group also proved unable to sustain simultaneous major
operations by both its armies due to the existence of a similar bargaining process
over specialized vehicles such as flail tanks or Kangaroo armored personnel
carriers (APCs). After their "invention" by Simonds during "Totalize," the army
group raised two regiments of APCs, one Canadian and one British 129 At times,
both army's planning for major operations requested two APC regiments,
resulting in demand that outstripped supply 130
The 21st Army Group recog-
nized that at any given moment it only could support one full-scale army
operation to the scale that corps commanders expected and to which they had
grown accustomed.
In September 1944, Montgomery allocated the Second
(British) Army the copious resources it had requested to achieve his "Market-
Garden" plan, but merely awarded the First Canadian Army for its Scheldt
operations limited resources out of proportion to the ambitious objectives he had
ordered it to accomplish; consequently, the Canadian forces only managed to
advance slowly.
