162
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Army and earmarked for the D-Day assault. Montgomery drew encouragement
for his resistance to Crera's demands from his 18 May 1944 meeting with the
Canadian Prime Minister, Mackenzie King, who assured the British commander
that he would not allow political considerations to undermine operational ones."'
An arrangement where Crerar exercised the right of referral affronted Mont-
gomery's narrow military mind as an incorrect command organization; how
could Crerar, a subordinate, have a responsibility thatmand orged his superior,
Montgomery, in dealing direct with the Canadian Government concerning
troops outside's Crerar's command?42
As often before, however, Montgomery could not shift his thinking from its
narrow operational focus to contemplate the politico-military, Imperial, and
inter-Allied dimensions of military decision-making -failings that both Crerar
and Brooke recognized. 13
In the months preceding "Overlord," Montgomery
argued when denying Crerar's exercise of the right of referral that the Canadian
"would be treated by him as any other [subordinate) army commander. "4
Crerar rightly denounced this spurious assertion with the statement,
think, for a minute, that Monty assumes the same attitude to, and powers over,
Bradley .... as he does in respect to Dempsey." Crerar reasoned correctly that
the responsibility for exercising this right of referral should be his rather than
Stuarts, because only the senior Canadian operational commander within the
21st Army Group would "directly bear the result of any decisions" made on how
these forces were employed."S
Through defending his right to exercise this power of referral, Crerar also
sought to maintain his own power base within the Canadian army, particularly
against encroachment on his powers by Stuart at CMHQ. However, Crerar also
remained genuinely concerned to protect the constitutional position of the
Canadian army. Crerar, when defending Canadian interests, resolutely stood his
ground against the forceful Montgomery; whereas Stuart, in contrast, admitted
that he found it impossible to do so.
Indeed, Crerar consistently defended
Canadian army interests throughout the war. In early 1944 he systematically
chipped away at the reluctance of Leese, the Eighth Army commander, to group
all Canadian formations in Italy under their own national corps headquarters.
Montgomery's well-known egotism, pride, and dislike of not getting his own
way made him resent being stood up to in this manner by a commander like
Crerar whose Dominion status afforded protection against Montgomery'S
disapproval. 46
Montgomery did not tolerate dissent among his subordinate
commanders, and in autumn 1944 allowed O'Connor to be poached to become
an army commander in India after the latter had questioned his demand for the
summary dismissal of the American General Silvester. 7
Much of Montgom-
ery's bad feeling toward Crerar, therefore, was simply a result of pique, of
wounded vanity.
This simmering dispute with Montgomery in the months preceding
"Overlord" was finally resolved to Crerar's satisfaction after he discussed the
matter with Brooke on 10 June 1944. Crerar noted that Brooke, clearly annoyed
at Montgomery's inability to grasp the wider aspects of senior field command,
had responded that "notwithstanding anything Monty might say," Crerar "was
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
163
bound to be responsible to the Canadian government, in the last resort, for the
operational employment of all Canadian troops in the 21st Army Group. "48
Brooke's unwavering patronage of Montgomery throughout the war, therefore,
was not merely a blinkered one; Brooke was prepared to show his protégé the
red light when the latter overstepped the mark. 49
Although Crerar strove to establish in principle the constitutional relation-
ship between the British and Canadian armies, he did not believe that this
principle would actually
be required; this debate "remained academic and
theoretical. "so This is significant, because it was easy —as Montgomery did -to
interpret Crerar's determination to establish the letter of the law as an indication
that he remained only half-heartedly committed to military cooperation with the
British.
The great irony, however, was that nothing could be further from the
truth. For despite appearances, Crerar remained determined to cooperate fully
with the British. Crerar's determination to do so was illustrated in his May 1944
correspondence with senior Canadian officers over what scenarios would justify
the withdrawal of Canadian forces from their cooperation with the British.
Crerar's 19 May 1944 instructions from the Canadian Chief of the General Staff,
Lieutenant-General Murchie, stated that Canadian forces might be withdrawn
from cooperation with the British after consideration of the following: whether
these forces had been given a task that was not "a practicable operation of war,"
or one that "with the resources available" was not "capable of being carried out
with reasonable prospects of success," or one where "the extent of prospective
losses" did not match "the importance of the results prospectively to be
achieved."'! Crerar's utter conviction to cooperate fully was attested by his
response that on occasions "it may be necessary" for Canadian forces
attempt the seemingly 'impracticable'" for the benefit of the wider campaign. 52
One wonders if there were any British commanders who would have gone so far
as to state that they were prepared to attempt an operation that was clearly "not
on" on the grounds of its wider benefit for the campaign.
That Crerar and other senior Canadian officers in the theater remained com-
mitted to full cooperation, even when given tasks beyond their resources,
proved evident during the Scheldt operations; here Montgomery allocated them
a task in terrible sodden conditions that was beyond their resources.53 Unfortu-
nately, Crerar's constant defense of Canadian national interests obscured from
the British his real desire to cooperate fully, and hence served to undermine the
very Anglo-Canadian cooperation for which he strove.
The irony of this
situation was compounded by the fact that Crerar's defense of Canadian interests
remained largely unnecessary; the constitutional fallback positions for which he
fought were never actually needed in Northwest Europe. 34
This Canadian determination to cooperate fully was manifested frequently
on the battlefields of Europe, and typically the cooperation between the British
and Canadians forces in both Italy and Northwest Europe proved excellent.
This good cooperation resulted partly from the last four years of training
together in the United Kingdom, which had allowed both sides to adjust to each
other's idiosyncrasies and become comfortable in their cooperation.$6
It also
resulted from the fact that the First Canadian Army Headquarters was Anglo-
