90
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
become untidy, Montgomery ordered it to cease offensive action for forty-eight
hours "to sort itself out" before recommencing their attack.63
Though the British and American armies utilized similar operational tech-
niques in the theater, American doctrine did not display the same emphasis on
extreme concentration. Although both armies relied heavily on concentration in
the sense of massed aerial and artillery firepower, the Americans conducted
offensive operations on a broader front —a technique caricatured by Brooke as
"engaging the enemy along the whole front."64
In the American approach,
commanders conducted offensive action on a more regular basis rather than the
"start-stop-rebuild-start-stop" nature of the British approach.
In comparison
with Anglo-Canadian offensive operations in the theater, American ones
typically saw larger proportions of available combat power deployed forward
over a wider front with less-extensive echeloning in depth. Unlike Montgom-
ery, the Americans often launched their attacks after only quite modest logistical
build up and continued them "in spite of bad weather" that prevented the use of
their awesome tactical air power.s
Bradley contrasted Montgomery's crude
approach based on "dragg[ing] up everything he had for an all out" attack with
the American technique that both "constantly nibbled away" at key enemy
positions and "constantly kept him knocked off balance."66
Montgomery also emphasized keeping the enemy off-balance, but by using
feints and raids rather than by frequent major attacks.
Anglo-American
differences in offensive technique, however, did not revolve around simply the
issue of degree of concentration but also the semantics of what this principle
meant.
To American commanders, concentration meant "the simultaneous
effort of all possible forces, "67
whereas to British ones it meant deploying
massive force echeloned in depth on a narrow front.
Given that the Americans
deployed a higher proportion of their forces in the front line than did the British,
they consequently possessed fewer reserves.
This often resulted in American
troops, especially infantry, remaining in contact with the enemy for longer than
that typical of Anglo-Canadian operations. To Montgomery, such "continuous
fighting without relief" reflected poor "man-management" and undermined
troop morale.68
Given the more modest build-up program, often American
artillery not only could fire fewer rounds per day than that typical of an Anglo-
Canadian operation, but did so across a wider offensive frontage.
Whereas an
allocation of 200 rounds per gun per day was common in Anglo-Canadian
operations, American batteries often received an allotment of just 100 rounds.9
Montgomery tactlessly derided these American methods as a "futile doctrine"
and condemned the American's conduct of their November 1944 offensive
toward Cologne because it lacked sufficient concentration, attacked on too wide
an assault frontage, deployed inadequate artillery support, and held back too few
reserves.?"
Any comparison of the relevant merits or disadvantages of these national
operational styles has to tread carefully to avoid becoming embroiled in the
prejudices of inter-Allied rivalries.
Both approaches had advantages and
drawbacks, and the evidence from Northwest Europe does not demonstrate that
one was more effective than the other. Neither approach proved impressive
91
The Set-Piece Battle
given the natural tactical advantage enjoyed by the defense in 1944, as well as
the skill and determination of the Westheer. Neither technique achieved a major
penetration of the German defensive zone in Normandy in the seven weeks prior
to "Cobra," and neither avoided becoming bogged down in the mud of autumn
1944
Furthermore,
in
"Cobra," the most successful American attack in
Normandy,
"the despair of the Bocage deadlock" drove Bradley to adopt a plan
"uncharacteristic of the American army" in its "concentration of power on a
narrow front."?! That this successful American attack utilized the same extreme
concentration so typical of Montgomery's "Colossal Cracks," only complicates
any balanced comparison of the relative merits of these two approaches.
Several inherent drawbacks, however, existed in Montgomery's technique of
concentration along a narrow front. First, the narrowness of the penetration
restricted the scope for maneuver, which both denied the potential fruits of
Allied mobility and restricted actions to obvious frontal assaults.
Both com-
manders of the armored divisions involved in Operation "Totalize," for exam-
ple, believed that their frontages were too narrow and requested in vain for more
room to maneuver.
Equally, the limitation of the spearhead advance of
"Market-Garden" to just one road enabled the enemy to discern the position of
the decisive localities and redeploy their meager defensive forces accordingly.
The narrowness of Anglo-Canadian attack frontages, and hence penetrations,
also restricted the availability of axes of advance, which often hampered the
forward movement of artillery and logistic supplies, and resulted in congestion
like that experienced in
"Goodwood" and
"Veritable."
A narrow penetration
also placed substantial responsibility on flanking formations to maintain their
defensive positions against enemy pressure. The failure to secure the high
ground of the Rauray spur on the right (western) flank of the "Epsom" offensive
seriously hampered the successful development of this operation.
Furthermore,
Anglo-Canadian forces often found offensive momentum difficult to sustain as
unsuppressed enemy fire from the flanks could halt forward movement in the
center.73
Another flaw with concentrated Anglo-Canadian effort on a narrow frontage
was that it enabled the Germans to counterconcentrate available reinforcements
against the Allied penetration.
Consequently, Montgomery's operations were
sometimes a race to exploit initial break-in success before enemy reinforcements
restabilized the front. In "Veritable," once the 21st Army Group had staved-in
the German front with a massive fire-plan, its forces had to race to secure exits
from the restrictive terrain of the Reichswald forest onto the open Goch-Calcar
plain before the Germans brought up reinforcements.?*
Those commentators
who have extolled Montgomery's narrow-thrust strategy over Eisenhower's
broad-front one have rarely given due regard to the issue that extreme offensive
concentration facilitated enemy defensive concentration against it?5
The advantage of the American approach was that it ensured better opportu-
nities for maneuver and was often accompanied by more boldness and at times a
quicker tempo of operations, as typified by
"Grenade."
However, American
operations often lacked sufficient strength at any given point for penetration,
further dispersed force as the battle unfolded, and experienced declining combat
