Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
the foundation of Montgomery's physical control of operations.
This work then
explores the other key features —administration, air power, the initiative, and
balance. Finally, it examines seven other ancillary characteristics: grip, surprise,
flank protection, flexibility, cooperation, simplicity, and the assimilation of
combat lessons.
The interconnection between these various components lies behind the as-
sertion that historians can only understand fully the individual elements of
Montgomery's technique in the context of the totality of this approach.
The
assessment this study presents concerning the significance of each individual
aspect is based partly on the importance that Montgomery attached to it in his
writings. However, what is more important in this assessment is this author's
evaluation of how important each individual characteristic proved in relation to
both the entire "Colossal Cracks" approach and the other individual characteris-
tics of this approach. This author's assessment does not always concur with that
of Montgomery, but then the latter remained a dedicated practitioner not a
conceptual
military thinker.
This, together with his tendency to simplify
military problems to their essentials and his professional focus when conducting
active operations, meant that he never conceptualized systematically his own
methods.
Montgomery's operational technique involved massive set-piece battles
based on concentration of force, massed artillery firepower (supplemented by
aerial bombing when possible), and integrated use of tactical air power.
Montgomery
would only commence these set-piece battles after careful
planning, rehearsal, preparation, and massive concentration of resources.
He
conducted these battles cautiously and methodically, with great regard to the
logistical situation, gripping their development according to a previously
conceived master plan. Operationally, the Field Marshal sought to maintain the
initiative and remain balanced; respectively, to force the enemy merely to react
to his moves and to have his forces so deployed that any sudden enemy move
could be countered rapidly.
Through "alternate thrusts" —a series of limited
attacks in varying sectors of the front —Montgomery strove to force the enemy
to become unbalanced before he launched a decisive offensive.
"Colossal
Cracks" represented an attritional method based on matériel that eschewed
operational maneuver. Furthermore, the devastation inflicted on the battlefield
by concentrated firepower severely limited the opportunities
for tactical
mobility. The British army had disseminated these methods through its ranks
after Montgomery's successes in North Africa after October 1942; his January
1944 assumption of command merely reinforced the reliance on these tech-
niques within a 21st Army Group senior command that had already assimilated
many of these methods prior to his arrival.
Having examined Montgomery's operational methods, the second part of this
study examines the army commanders within the 21st Army Group.
This
analysis reflects the second subargument that this study presents, that historians
cannot understand fully how the 21st Army Group conducted this campaign
merely through a study of Montgomery.
The personal and institutional
relationships that existed between these senior commanders constituted a key
11
Introduction
element in this formation's conduct of the campaign. This study emphasizes the
role of personality in these relationships, because the following three factors
made this aspect significant: the distinction between the executive power
wielded by commanders and the advisory power of staffs; that the realities of
active operations in the field determined relationships between higher com-
mands rather than abstract rules; and that the War Office could not act as a
centralizing body enforcing abstract relationships on local situations.
Northwest Europe during 1944 45, Montgomery's subordinates understood
these realities, as Lieutenant-General Brian Horrocks, commander of the XXX
Corps, made clear: "The personalities concerned" and "their relationships with
each other" was of "immense significance" because "there did not, could not,
exist any sort of manual setting out in precise terms the roles" of organizations
"such as an army group, army or even a corps. "38
The distortion caused by the overemphasis on Montgomery within scholar-
ship on the campaign has prevented historians from appreciating the real
contribution made by Montgomery's subordinate army commanders, Henry
Crerar and Miles Dempsey. This study establishes a fuller appreciation of the
contribution made by these two commanders to the conduct of the campaign. In
particular, a measured reassessment of Dempsey's role is put forward.
suggests that Dempsey made a significant contribution to the campaign and,
hence, was not simply the cipher that scholars have portrayed him to be.
This
study commences the process that reverses Dempsey's decline into an unde-
served historical oblivion.
This study also examines the impact that these
relationships exerted on the extent to which Montgomery's operational methods
were shared at army level. This work uses the same eighteen-fold categoriza-
tion that was employed to analyze Montgomery's methods in this examination of
the approaches of his subordinate army commanders.
This analysis demon-
strates both that a consensus on operational technique existed between these
commanders and that Montgomery did not impose an alien doctrine on an army
group that already utilized his basic methods.
To reiterate, this study demonstrates that the manner in which Montgomery
and the 21st Army Group conducted the Northwest Europe campaign remained
more than competent.
"Colossal Cracks" represented an appropriate operational
technique given both British war aims and the capabilities of the 1944 British
and Canadian armies relative to that of the Westheer. However, there remained
serious drawbacks inherent in this crude operational technique, not least the
limitations on mobility and exploitation of success caused by the devastation
that massed firepower inflicted on the battlefield. However, all things consid-
cred, the advantages of "Colossal Cracks" outweighed the disadvantages. This
approach utilized the British army's strengths, limited German exploitation of
their own advantages, accurately reflected the limited personnel resources
available, and achieved British war aims.
"Colossal Cracks" undoubtedly
represented a winning method, even if not a flawless one; it was a double-edged
and rather fragile sword. Yet it had taken heroic efforts to get the British army
from its 1940 nadir to a point in 1944 where it could, using these methods, as
part of a larger Allied effort defeat without a bloodbath the highly efficient
