Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
that in 1944 Montgomery, despite operational flaws such as his inability to
master exploitation, was one of the most competent British generals in Europe.
One particular quality was his perceptive appreciation of the art of what was
practicable operationally in the longer term given the wider politico-strategic
situation facing him.
Fifth, this work argues that some works critical of Montgomery have not
appreciated the appropriateness of his methods to achieving British war aims
given the relative capabilities of the 1944 British and German armies; indeed,
some analyses have not grasped fully the essence of British war aims in
Northwest Europe. Though "Colossal Cracks" was crude and methodical, it was
still an appropriate way of achieving Britain's objectives given this balance of
relative capabilities.
These war aims did not seek simply to remove the Nazi
canker, but rather to obtain victory over Germany within a larger Allied effort
with tolerable casualties and yet, paradoxically, with a high military profile.
This high
profile would ensure Britain a strong influence in the political
reconstruction of postwar Europe; protection of this influence had contributed to
Britain's decision to go to war in 193925 To accomplish these specific war aims,
Montgomery correctly sought to nurture his limited, fragile resources through
an adequate, but sustained, combat performance that would, as part of a larger
Allied effort, slowly grind the enemy into submission by the inexorable logic of
an attritional war of industrial production, of matériel.
As Professor Michael
Howard observed, Montgomery's conduct of the campaign was "determined by
his perception of the limited capabilities" of his troops.
The 1939-45 British
army "was not very good" as "the British High Command was very aware," and
Montgomery "did not regard his troops as capable of any higher performance"
than a set-piece battle style of fighting?
In this context, Montgomery's
utilization
of such attritional, firepower-laden techniques represented
appropriate use of the resources available to him. The Allies rightly fought the
sort of war that gave them the best chance of eventual victory, irrespective of
how crude or mechanistic was this style of warfare. This campaign, therefore,
represents a military situation where warfare involving strong attritional
elements represented the most appropriate method; as such, this study serves to
counter the possible inference from modern British army doctrine that any
strategic or operational technique other than maneuver warfare must be
misguided.?7
Not only was the 21st Army Group unlikely to produce a magnificent com-
bat performance against the Germans, but such an achievement also was
unnecessary for the attainment of British war aims. The relatively unimpressive
combat performance of the 21st Army Group in Northwest Europe has
prompted some historians to criticize Montgomery's generalship.
Though an
element of this criticism is justified, much of it is excessive because it assumes
that the British army ought to have striven to compete tactically with the
Wehrmacht. The great strength of the 1939-45 German army lay at the tactical
level, and its forces typically produced fine tactical combat performances even
in highly unfavorable battlefield situations.
Yet it was neither necessary nor
Introduction
appropriate for the British forces, a civilian mass conscript army, to try to
compete with the more ideologically motivated, professional, and tactically
experienced enemy on the latter's terms.
"Far sighted" British commanders
"realized that they could never turn these wartime [conscript] soldiers into
professionals" in either "their own image" nor in that of the enemy.?8 In summer
1944, therefore, what the British army needed to do in Northwest Europe to
achieve victory was simply to do what it did best.
This meant that the 21st
Army Group had to fight a protracted series of set-piece battles based on
copious matériel, during which it would both sustain troop morale by avoiding
defeats and prevent excessive casualties.
Through this operational approach
Montgomery's forces would
grind the enemy down by attrition based on
massive firepower until the battlefield situation became so favorable that the
Allies could undertake mobile operations that would complete the defeat of the
German army in the West (the Westheer).
Hence, the Allies would achieve victory over the Westheer through crude
techniques and competent generalship at the operational and tactical levels
rather than through tactical excellence.
Moreover, the availability of massive
firepower to Montgomery's forces inadvertently created a tactical crutch that
inhibited their effective use of initiative.
This crutch limited the potential
improvement that more-realistic training might have had on the tactical
performance of these troops; "Colossal Cracks" was not immune from signifi-
cant inherent flaws.
The operational approach utilized by Montgomery and his senior subordi-
nates offered the 21st Army Group the best chance, as part of a larger Allied
effort, to achieve victory in the long term at reasonable cost in casualties.
Montgomery's task was not one of winning battles but of winning the entire
campaign.
That the Allies achieved victory mattered more than the manner in
which they accomplished this success.
Only in the sphere of maintaining its
high profile within the Allied camp did it matter to Britain how the campaign
had been won. But Britain could pursue its war aim of securing this high profile
in avenues other than the battlefield glory bought by the sacrifice of the bulk of
Britain's last field army. One such avenue was for Montgomery to remain as
Land Forces Commander after 1 September 1944, with authority over all Allied
troops in theater.
Any glory won by the troops (irrespective of nationality)
would reflect on the Land Forces Commander, and if Montgomery held this
position, this would benefit Britain and her postwar ambitions?"
Montgomery's methods also utilized appropriately the strengths of the Brit-
ish army, notably the artillery arm. His methodical, attritional approach limited
the opportunities for the Germans to exploit either their tactical strengths or
British weaknesses. By utilizing these methods, the 21st Army Group reduced
opportunities for the Germans to exercise their tactical initiative and speed of
reaction against exposed Allied troops who had advanced beyond the range of
the massive firepower they could summon down on an enemy counterattack.
Furthermore, "Colossal Cracks" ensured an adequate combat performance from
the Anglo-Canadian soldiers by continually nurturing the
latter's relatively
fragile morale. The senior commanders within the 21st Army Group maintained
