158
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
corps commander, like Horrocks, to get his own way at Crerar's expense in
planning the detailed corps battle.
Crerar's determination to tackle the tendency toward tactical overreliance on
artiery firepower also suggests that he was not simply an old fashioned gunner
general. On 5 August 1944, he admonished Canadian infantry to "drive on" just
by "use of their own weapons," criticized the idea that sustained infantry
advances were "impossible" without "colossal" artillery or aerial support, and
observed that the Germans had repeatedly disproved this notion. Hence, though
Crerar remained as wedded to firepower doctrine as any of the senior com-
manders in the 21st Army Group, he was not one of the most backward in terms
of his tactical ideas.
Crerar and the First Canadian Army displayed an enthusiasm for use of
aerial bombardment in direct support of land operations equal
to that of
Montgomery and Dempsey.
Such assistance was pivotal to the operational
plans for "Totalize," "Tractable," "Infatuate," and "Veritable."
The similar
stitude held at army group no doubt encouraged this enthusiasm within Cerar's
staff. The 21st Army Group was keen to allocate its subordinate armies as many
resources as possible, and usually initiated the first contacts with air commands
over potential use of bombers; this encouraged both its subordinate armies not
only to seek, but often to expect, the use of bombers in their operations.
In Normandy, another factor encouraged the First Canadian Army to seek
extensive use of aerial bombing: Crerar remained enthusiastic to use such
support because this was one tactical area that army could control as opposed to
corps. Typically, the authority of an army commander was required to success-
fully negotiate with senior Allied air commanders for the provision of strategic
bombing support. Crera's concerns at being outshone by the tactically more
capable
Simonds reinforced his determination to
utilize bomber support.
Arranging this support ensured that Crerar and his army headquarters retained a
key role in the operations of Simonds' II Canadian Corps toward Falaise.
This
remained the only practical way in which Crerar could compete with his
tactically more capable subordinate.!8
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ARMY GROUP AND THE FIRST
CANADIAN ARMY
A key factor determining the contribution made by each army command to
this campaign was its relationship with army group.
personalities and relationships of higher formation commanders
As has been observed, the
remained
crucial because executive power in headquarters was vested in the commander.
This personality element was particularly prominent within the
21st Army
Group because of the forcefulness of Montgomery's will and his resultant strong
influence on his subordinates.
Even though the current operational situation
overwhelmingly influenced the way in which the
army group treated its
subordinate armies, the relationship between Montgomery and his commanders
sometimes also exerted a major influence. In this relationship, the army group
constituted the dominant partner, because it allocated tasks and resources to
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
159
these army commands. Hence, the limits of what each army could achieve were
determined substantially by prior decisions at army group allocating tasks and
resources to these armies.
The evidence demonstrates that there existed significant differences in
Montgomery's relationship with Crerar and the First Canadian Army on the one
hand and with Dempsey and Second (British) Army on the other.
Of the two
armies, Second (British) Army enjoyed a more favorable relationship with army
group.
The role that the First Canadian Army played in the campaign was
determined principally by the Montgomery-Crerar relationship.
Though the
cooperation between the two remained generally good, serious rents ran through
the fabric of their relationship.
One source of tension resulted from Montgom-
ery's belief that Crerar was not up to the job of a field army command in such a
vital campaign.
This study now assesses the factors that lay behind the forma-
tion of this opinion.
Montgomery made clear his poor opinion of Crerar's abilities to those in
whom he confided. While there is no reason to doubt that Montgomery meant
what he said about Crerar, it should be remembered that the Field Marshal held
forceful opinions, which often he expressed in extreme language; regularly he
castigated as "useless" those who failed to impress him.
This should be
considered when Montgomery's opinions of his fellow commanders
examined.
In December 1943, Montgomery made clear to the CIGS his
negative appreciation of Crerar's ability. In July 1944 he reiterated this opinion,
and stated that Crerar "will be quite unfit to command an Army" because he was
"very prosy and stodgy."ª Crerar's activities as an army commander during the
Normandy campaign did little to alter Montgomery's poor opinion of his
abilities.
On 8 October 1944, while Crerar was on sick leave in England,
Colonel Ralston conferred with Montgomery and noted that the latter felt Crerar
to be "adequate but not a ball of fire," as an army commander, and certainly "not
in the same parish" as Simonds.20 Crerar, who became aware of Montgomery's
hostility long before the D-Day landings, also noted the continued decline of
their relationship as the Normandy battles unfolded.
On 21 August 1944,
Major-General Kitching, whom Simonds had just dismissed as the commander
of the 4th Canadian Armored Division, recalled Crerar comforting him with the
words "It may not be long before Montgomery tries to remove me. "2
Montgomery's poor opinion of Crerar resulted primarily from the fact that
they were very different sorts of soldiers.
Crerar did not fit Montgomery's
conception of what a field commander should be. Montgomery was a decisive,
inspirational, highly experienced officer dedicated to field command; Crerar
was a ponderous, uninspiring, administratively-focused general, who had never
commanded a large formation in the field. Crerar, an excellent staff officer, was
a skilled political player driven by "overweening ambition. "22
He had only
assumed command of the I Canadian Corps through a series of chance circum-
stances, and though he wished desperately to lead this corps in active operations
in Italy, events brought him back to England for "Overlord" before he could
fulfill this wish.?
Earlier he had rejected Montgomery's suggestion that he
