96
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
there existed a strong correlation between the scale of firepower employed and
casualties sustained in achieving a tactical objective. 105
The major problem
experienced by Allied commanders remained the translation of initial success
during break-in operations into a significant penetration of the enemy's defen-
sive zone.
Allied commanders, however, failed to adjust effectively the target discrimi-
nation of these massive fire-plans to deal with the depth of the German defen-
sive zone. These commanders only recognized slowly that the Germans merely
held lightly their forward defense zones, and hence these massive Anglo-
Canadian fire-plans continued to concentrate their efforts on the devastation of
what was merely a lightly defended enemy outpost line.
Consequently, the
rolling barrage sometimes only carried the advancing Allied infantry through
these devastated first localities right onto the scarcely damaged main German
position that was defended by now alerted troops who fielded intact their
powerful screen of antitank weapons.106
Anglo-Canadian gunner officers also
experienced major difficulties in redeploying forward hundreds of guns across
cratered terrain in the early phases of an assault so that the advancing spear-
heads remained within range of available fire support.
These failings explain
why the 21st Army Group achieved only a modest combat performance in this
campaign.
Brigadier Matthews-the Corps Commander, RA (CCRA) at Simonds' II
Canadian Corps -organized the most innovative Anglo-Canadian fire-plan of
the Normandy campaign for the 8 August "Totalize" attack. This was the only
fire-plan to get to grips fully with the depth of the German defense, through
incorporation of a second aerial-artillery strike against the second German
defensive line.
It proved ironic, therefore, that this creditable attempt by
Simonds and Matthews to address this flaw in Anglo-Canadian offensive
technique inadvertently led the Il Canadian Corps to let slip one of the best
opportunities of the entire Normandy campaign.
Tragically, the operational
pause Simonds built into his "Totalize" plan to permit this second aerial strike
bought the Germans sufficient time to shore up their front that -unbeknown to
Simonds —the initial Canadian night attack already had torn apart. 07 Only
slowly during the campaign did artillery commanders produce fire-plans of
increasing sophistication and target discrimination to deal effectively with the
German defense zone throughout its depth-a process that culminated in the
highly effective "Veritable" fire-plan. 108
ways.
Montgomery's firepower-based attritional style also proved effective in other
Even if British attacks did not successfully penetrate the German
defenses, the enemy was forced to expend many lives and much matériel
preventing Allied thrusts —resources the enemy could ill-afford to lose.
Partly
unsuccessful Allied operations, like "Goodwood," that nevertheless produced a
rough parity in relative casualty rates or even a slight disadvantage to the Allies,
still constituted long-term strategic successes despite being immediate tactical
failures. For the Allies could afford reasonable combat losses sustained over
time —especially equipment ones —better than the Germans could; this was the
inexorable logic of an attritional war of matériel. This approach, furthermore,
The Set-Piece Battle
97
it refected the realities of combat in the period after 1943. With both the
Aliedand German armed forces not completely mismatched in terms of combat
poner-broadly speaking, resources multiplied by effectiveness-and with the
Cemans in prepared defensive positions, battles had become attritional slogging
catches. The dashing days of Blitzkrieg had waned, because the opportunities
forsch mobile warfare could only be obtained after a period of hard attritional
iting that wore down significantly enemy cohesion and fighting power.
Ation based on concentrated firepower, however, represented a two-
died sword. In general terms it represented a most appropriate way for the
Bish amy to achieve victory over the Germans with tolerable casualties.
However, the drawbacks inherent in "Colossal Cracks" prevented the 21st Army
Gop from the achievement of more than an adequate operational performance
in Northwest Europe.
One major weakness in Anglo-Canadian operational
bhique was that its reliance on firepower tended to be self-reinforcing - it
came an increasing tactical crutch upon which other combat arms could lean.
The banch of the Major-General, RA (MGRA) at army group headquarters
incesis became concerned at the growing demands for fire support
requested by junior commanders for even minor raids.
A June 1944 report
roded that one corps had fired no less than twenty Victor targets, involving
a l us in a cops firing simultaneously, in just one day 09 At times during
"Talize an entire AGRA supported each of the two assault divisions,
adition the alter's organic arillery. * In another extreme example, no less
tan two field arillery regiments supported Operation "Flo," a single platoon
raid! Another MCRA renort dennunced the overuse of artillery in fire-plan
that often were "nothing more thou a tools answer to a target which he has
faled to hit with one gun."1
The availability of such an effective resource meant that as the campaign
paresed, the artillery became an increasing tactical crutch on which the other
ams within the 21st Army Group could lean.!"2
Anglo-Canadian armor, for
example. sometimes hung hack diving supporting fire to the infantry from hull
down positions in the rent in the handledge that the gunners could he relied or
to smash enemy resistance !13
Furthermore, the infantry also often halted and
called down artillery fire at the first sign of enemy
resistance,
rather than
attentine to fight their way forward using their own small-arms firepower. 114
Shove all Allied troons ralied arraccively on the success of artillery to defeat
Gene all, Are Ay itself. Consequently, a sionicicant imbalance arose in the
cooperation of all arms necessary
for
technique utilized by the 21st Army Group exerted inadvertent side effects that
domination of the tactically effective artillery
superior combat performance.
the operational
underminer the camhot nerfarmance of the forres emnloving these techniques.
Caution
Montgomery's oneratinent tanhnime was also characterized by its caution
and methodical nature.
operations and appreciated that it might take his forces time to fulfill his
He stressed the need for patience in the conduct of
