148
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
For the first few days of the Normandy campaign, Montgomery relied on de
Guingand to supervise the arrangements for tactical air support. The latter, who
had the necessary experience of air matters, headed the 21st Army Group Main
Headquarters back at Southwick near Portsmouth.
This arrangement initially
proved necessary as the bridgehead was insufficiently large for the Allies to
establish the headquarters of the Tactical Air Forces on French soil; as soon as
this had been accomplished, de Guingand handed over air support arrangements
"to the armies to control. "109
Similarly, in mid-June 1944, Montgomery sent
Brigadier Richardson, his BGS(Plans), who now had relatively little work to do
once the fighting had started, to act as a BGS(Air) at Dempsey's Second Army
headquarters.
According to Richardson, the lack of experienced staff officers
from the Mediterranean campaigns at the Second Army joint army/air head-
quarters— together with the "unhelpful influence" of the tactical air commander
"Mary" Coningham -had resulted in "co-operation [that] was ineffective.
Moreover, Dempsey not only shared his superiors appreciation of the power of
Allied tactical air forces on the battlefield, but concurred with the Field Marshal
that it was essential that land/air arrangements be directed at army level, and not
at lower commands 111
Dempsey shared the conservative operational outlook demonstrated by
Montgomery, for example, in his suspicion toward the British army's most
secret weapon, the Canal Defense Light (CDL) tank. 12 Dempsey also proved
reluctant to acquiesce to O'Connor's repeated demands for the introduction of
armored personnel carriers (APCs). In July 1944 O'Connor had requested that
surplus self-propelled artillery chassis be converted to APCs for "Goodwood,"
but Dempsey turned him down. Only later, some time after Simonds had
demonstrated the value of newly converted Canadian APCs during "Totalize,
and after consistent demands from O'Connor, did Dempsey agree to seek
Montgomery's permission to raise an APC regiment for the Second Army. 113
Dempsey's military outlook also shared that sense of superiority often typical
of the British officer in its suspicion of American military abilities. During the
late August 1944 advance to the Seine, Dempsey -in an interview with the
Daily Telegraph -blamed the Americans for delaying his advance by crossing
over into the British sector.
In reality, Montgomery had approved such a
maneuver, and it was he who had to apologize to Bradley for Dempsey's lack of
tact - an extremely ironic incident given that officers like de Guingand regularly
had to apologize to the Americans for Montgomery's tactless comments! The
frictions that existed between Dempsey and the Americans, however, were worn
down during the rest of the campaign by his prolonged close cooperation with
the First United States Army on his right flank.!14
DEMPSEY'S HANDLING OF THE SECOND (BRITISH) ARMY
This analysis now briefly assesses Dempsey's conduct of the Second Army.
Despite Montgomery's interference, Dempsey clearly proved a capable army
commander who often displayed "fingertip feel" for the battle, who intervened
when necessary, and who gripped his corps commanders during the break-in
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
149
phase of offensives.
Initially, however, Dempsey seems to have experienced
major problems adjusting to his new level of command.
His planning of the
western outflanking attack on Caen in conjunction with the airborne drop was
premature.
His choice of ground for "Goodwood" -though understandable
given the strategic context —was in tactical terms extremely flawed, because the
constricted front only permitted O'Connor to commit his armored divisions into
the assault one after the other.
This was a major factor in the failure of the
operation, as was the failure to deploy sufficient infantry to support adequately
the armor.
Dempsey's failure to appreciate these flaws constitutes a significant
error in his generalship. Indeed, Dempsey admitted in 1946 that "Goodwood"
was "not a very good operation tactically, but strategically it was a great
success, even though we did get a bloody nose. "lIS
In Normandy some dissatisfaction with the Second Army emanated from its
subordinate corps.
Dempsey's severest critic was Bucknall —notably after the
latter had been relieved of his command. Probably with a good degree of ill-
feeling, Bucknall appealed vigorously against his dismissal and criticized the
tasks the Second Army had set his corps. During the planning of "Bluecoat,"
Bucknall -after
"weeks of study" —presented sound tactical reasons why the
operation should be undertaken on different axes by just one corps instead of
two, but Dempsey rejected this. To Colonel Browne, Bucknall wrote bitterly on
17 August 44 that Dempsey's "Bluecoat" plan was "untidy in conception" as it
meant "launching my corps" across "difficult bocage country" on "a frontal
assault" of the "heavily defended" Mont Pinçon feature. Bucknall insisted that
his sacking was "grossly unfair" and then detailed what he believed to be
Dempsey's motivations for this decision. During "Epsom," "Goodwood," and
"Spring," Bucknall alleged, the Second Army "had launched formations badly to
attack and even under the heaviest heavy bomber support the attacks eventually
petered out untidily and expensively." He believed that "Dempsey could not
afford the shadow of a fourth check" and had sacked him as a "scape-goat" to
explain away the failure of the operation. 16
Although this is neither objective nor conclusive evidence of Dempsey's
failures, it illustrates poignantly both the frictions that existed between com-
manders at different levels in the command hierarchy and how their respective
command
functions influenced different appreciations of the operational
situation that faced them.
Despite this criticism, the evidence of the campaign
as a whole indicates that Dempsey proved a competent commander who, not
surprisingly, experienced initial difficulties as an inexperienced army com-
mander -difficulties that ultimately he went a long way toward mastering.
To conclude, while this examination has demonstrated that historians can
tackle the fallacy of Dempsey's historical obscurity, it also has revealed that a
precise assessment of Dempsey's contribution to the operational conduct of the
Northwest Europe campaign remains problematic.
Dempsey's role clearly was
more significant than the existing literature has indicated. Yet an assessment of
how significant his contribution was depends fundamentally on an analysis of
his role vis-à-vis Montgomery. Such an assessment, however, is obfuscated by
