32
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Rennie, managed to impose a strong grip on the division and restore much of its
morale in time for the autumn battles.
Another veteran division, the 7th Armored, also made "a very poor showing
in Normandy" according to Major-General Verney, who commanded the
division from August 1944.
Indeed he felt that both the 51st and 7th Armored
Divisions "did badly from the moment they landed in Normandy" and hence
"deserved the criticism they received. "69
The veteran 7th Armored demon-
strated the "bifurcation" of initial "dashing recklessness" that soon gave way to
"excessive caution" and a very sticky performance?" This caution resulted from
the division's reaction to both German tank superiority and the effectiveness of
enemy 88mm antitank guns." Dempsey viewed the reversal suffered by the
Desert Rats at Villers Bocage as a sign of this stickiness, and in late July 1944
he sacked several of the division's senior officers after a lethargic performance
during Operation "Bluecoat."72
The main problem with the veteran divisions was the short time, after they
had returned from Italy, spent in the United Kingdom prior to going to fight in
Normandy.
As Michael Carver's memoirs so poignantly illustrate, for some
soldiers the prospect of leaving the wives, loved ones, relatives, and close
friends with whom they had been so recently reunited after up to five years'
absence, proved too much to bear; in some cases the influence of wives and
sweethearts proved sufficiently strong to help turn heroes of the desert into
reluctant soldiers.??
After years of fighting, many veterans felt that they had
done their bit in the war, and that now it was someone else's turn to risk their
lives doing their duty for their country?^ The picture they saw of the relatively
safe existence of many troops based in the United Kingdom no doubt fueled
their resentment at this uneven division of the war's burden.
While Churchill
and his senior commanders sympathized, they recognized the operational
necessity of stiffening the majority of "green" troops with experienced sol-
diers.?S
Such troop resentment manifested itself in a serious AWOL situation
among these veteran divisions in the period just before the invasion, especially
in the 50th Division? Consequently, some veteran soldiers who had performed
superbly in the desert arrived in France determined to do just enough to do their
duty but also return from the war alive; they had become, in army parlance, very
"canny."77
Prolonged exposure to combat, Major-General Verney observed,
"does not make one more courageous. One becomes cunning, and from cunning
to cowardice is but a short step." The "canny" infantryman "who does not want
to have a go' can find opportunities to lie low at the critical moment," Verney
commented, and "the tank man can easily find fault with his engine."?8
In retrospect, it is easy to see that the British High Command could have
done more during spring 1944 when these divisions were in the United King-
dom to limit these morale problems. More extensive retraining in close country
tactics, stricter discipline, greater infusion of fresh recruits, and reallocation of
veterans as cadres to "green" divisions may have resulted in a better battle
performance in Normandy from son vey forces intended to provide the
backbone for the 21st Army Group?" The fact that by the end of 1944 the 50th
Division largely had recovered from its earlier problems under the inspired
The Maintenance of Morale
leadership of the "outstanding" Major-General D. A. H. Graham demonstrated
that these divisions were not beyond redemption. 80
The fact that these veteran divisions had suffered relatively modest casualty
rales in North Africa and Italy only served to exacerbate these morale problems;
"stock" of combat effectiveness.
surprising resilience of morale within German élite formations.
in prolonged hard fighting, had decimated several times over the best Waffen-SS
and German army panzer divisions may (paradoxically) explain why these
after periods in reserve, effectively they were new, fresh divisions, but ones held
together by tough veteran cadres, institutionalized professionalism, élan, and
harsh realistic training.
del elistic training. Hence, a primary group -or small unit-cohesion,
Hence, paradoxically, high German casualty rates,
seem to have a finite stock of morale, of combat performance, the high German
actually may have sustained German combat performance. Given that soldiers
casually rate meant that few men in a unit at a given time had been in combat
long enough to have exhausted this stock of courage. Clearly, the influences
on morale remain complex and often contradictory, and the process observed
may well have been counterbalanced by the adverse effects of the destruction of
primary groups.
Notwithstanding this, the existence of this process may be
highly significant in an examination of the morale of such a casualty-conscious
formation as the 21st Army Group. Indeed many inexperienced Allied and
German divisions, especially élite ones, displayed buoyant morale in their first
actions despite their inexperience, as the heroic resistance offered by the
following demonstrated: the previously untested youths of the 12-SS Panzer
Division Hitlerjugend; the recently formed, though superbly equipped, Panzer
The Division and the Britch 1at Airhome Division at Arnhem-Oosterbeek,
which had never before fought as a complete formation.?"
Morale problems also emerged in other divisions within Montgomery'S
command during the Normandy campaign.
The overcaution displayed by the
Tih Armored also represented a charge laid at the feet of the Guards Armored
Division. The Secretary of State for War, James Grigg, had warned de Guin-
gand that the Guards Armored Division might use such claims about the
inferiority of British armor as a pretext for "canniness. a
Curiously, though,
this was far from being the case ip the division's sister formation, the 6th Guards
Tank Brigade, which performed well throughout the campaign. Furthermore,
while the 43rd /Wessor Distion norformed well throughout virtually all of the
campaign, during Operation "Market-Garden" some of its exhausted troops
displayed a certain
incidence of feigned illniness
"canniness," and the division experienced an increased
Indeed, toward the end of the
Normandy
campaign, significant morale problems had emerged in as many as seven of the
21st Army Groun's total of cirteen divisions. in the worst scenario senior
commanders assessed just ni si decisions sis completely reliable for offensive
circumstances, senior commanders could not allow
