118
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
match the enemy rate of reinforcement. "22 The maintenance of adequate rates of
build-up relative to those of the enemy constituted a crucial factor in the Allied
success in Normandy. In this achievement, the Allies owed much to the huge
success of their aerial interdiction campaign prior to "Overlord. "2?
The administrative dimension so dominated Montgomery's operational
methods during the 1944 45 campaign that one critic described him as a
"general-manager" — rather than a general —who was "enslaved by logistics" in a
campaign dominated by matériel 24
With one exception, Montgomery never
undertook an operation when the administrative situation was not completely
satisfactory. The central issue in Montgomery's operational planning was the
scale of ammunition supply.
He would not commence an operation until his
forces had completed stockpiling a more than adequately large supply of
ammunition.
Though some historians have criticized this cautious, firepower-
laden, administratively dominated approach, this method constituted a crucial
factor in the eventual Allied attainment of victory.
In contrast, during the Second World War the German army consistently
neglected logistics in preference to their concentration on tactical excellence. It
is a chilling thought that the spectacular German triumphs of 1939-41 would
have been even more successful if the German army only had devoted the same
professionalism and efficiency to the logistical dimension as they did to the
tactical sphere. In Normandy the Germans once again focused on their skills at
the tactical level to the detriment of the strategic or onerational lovele and
neglected woefully the logistical dimension.
Indeed it is only recently that
historical research has demonstrated convincingly that the failings of the
German logistic system in Normandy made a far greater contribution to Allied
victory than previously had been believed.
In stark contrast, during the
Northwest Europe campaign, Montgomery oversaw, through generalship based
on both competence and a justified logistical orientation, the utilization of crude
tactics to produce an appropriate, if unimpressive, Anglo-Canadian operational
effort. Moreover, the fact that the development of modern warfare since 1945
has affirmed the ever-increasing dominance of logistics on military activities
vindicates Montgomery's great concern with the administrative dimension.?6
Several historians have suggested that Montgomery's operational method
remained too concerned with ensuring an excellent administrative situation
before launching operations.
The Field Marshal certainly let slip excellent
operational and tactical opportunities because he was not prepared to take
chances on logistical matters, as say Patton did. Montgomery's innate caution
and lack of awareness of exploitation were evident in his early military career,
because he omitted the latter subject in a tactical guide he drew up in 1924.7
During the 1939-45 war, a pattern, initiated at Alamein, emerged in Montgom-
ery's conduct of operations: He consistently failed to exploit fully successes he
had achieved. 28
Montgomery, however, fully recognized the fact sometimes overlooked by
historians that logistics constituted the foundation blocks for victory. Moreover,
in defense of Montgomery, the evidence indicates that whereas he was highly
concerned with the logistical dimension, his army group staff and subordinate
The Other Elements
119
staffs were even more concerned with such matters. The operational planning
process of the First Canadian army in its autumn 1944 operations to clear the
Scheldt estuary, for example, remained dominated by considerations of simple
weight of artillery shells.
Very occasionally, when Montgomery felt that the operational situation
absolutely required it, he was prepared to take risks and launch operations when
the administrative situation was barely adequate, as in Operation "Market-
Garden."
As an official report put it, this offensive "had to commence for
operational reasons at a time when the administrative resources were barely able
to support it. "30 Similarly, in Operation "Bluecoat," Montgomery also sacrificed
his usual regard for administrative safety to the operational requirements of the
moment.
Despite these exceptions, however, administrative issues dominated
Montgomery's handling of the 21st Army Group and reinforced his predilection
for a series of cautious, firmly controlled, firepower-laden, set-piece offensives.
Air Power
Another key component of Montgomery's firepower-reliant operational
technique was his emphasis on the use of air power.
Once the Allies had
achieved air superiority over a theater, the army could call upon air assets in
pursuit of the following five missions: tactical reconnaissance; ground and naval
fire direction; tactical air support, where fighter-bomber
aircraft directly
supported land operations; the use of strategic air assets —medium and heavy
bombers-in a direct role to support ground operations; and the use of both
tactical and strategic air assets for battlefield air interdiction. By 1944 Mont-
gomery had concluded that "experience in this war has shown that all modern
military operations are in fact combined army/air operations," and that air power
was "a battle winning factor of the first importance."31
Montgomery believed
that at the strategic level "it is necessary to win the air battle before embarking
on the ground battle "32 The experience of maneuver warfare over the subse-
quent fifty years has vindicated entirely this belief."
It was Montgomery's
Eighth Army in North Africa that first emulated the techniques of the German
Blitzkrieg through their development of intimate tactical cooperation between
the army and the Royal Air Force.
When Montgomery returned to Britain in
January 1944, the lack of effective cooperation that existed between the 21st
Army Group and the tactical air forces allocated to support it horrified him. His
guiding impulse and the experience of cooperation in the early stages of the
Normandy campaign quickly honed Allied air power into an awesome instru-
ment with which to support ground operations.
During the Northwest Europe campaign as a whole, the Allied tactical air
forces inflicted extremely heavy damage on German armor and motor transport
and severely disrupted German logistical resupply activities.
The dreaded
Allied fighter-bombers proved so effective that they compelled the enemy to
move its vehicles only at night and forced them to rely on bicycles as the
principal source of daytime mobility.* By Operation "Goodwood" the Allies
had all but perfected the cab-rank system whereby Allied fighter-bomber flights
