94
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
according to Kurt Meyer, commanding the 12-SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend,
the sluggish Canadian exploitation of the success achieved by its initial night-
time assault in "Totalize" during 7/8 August 1944 let slip one of the best
opportunities of the entire Normandy campaign.""
This utilization of massed firepower also reduced built-up areas, like Caen,
to rubble, and this inadvertently created excellent defensive positions where
even a few determined German soldiers could resist effectively, as when a mere
sixty Hitlerjugend soldiers held out in the ruins of Falaise for three days."! The
Germans soon adapted their defensive tactics and held urban areas just with
weak forces, and reinforced strongly these positions only after Allied saturation
bombing, which indicated an imminent attack. Horrocks later bitterly rued his
decision to let Allied bombers-even with bombs with a reduced cratering
effect -devastate Cleve during "Veritable," as the devastation aided more than
disrupted the motley German defenders and simply delayed forward movement
of Allied forces.
Montgomery appreciated the destructive effects of this
"Colossal Cracks" technique, and commented in June 1944 that "Montebourg
and Valognes have been liberated' in the best 21 Army Group style, i.e. they are
both completely destroyed!!"*2 Clearly, Montgomery believed that the advan-
tages of this firepower-laden, attritional approach outweighed its inherent
disadvantages.
Another drawback with this approach centered around the complexities
concerning the utilization of strategic bombers in a direct support role, particu-
larly the operational requirements of the aircraft and the difficulties of arranging
such strikes with Allied air commands.'3
During the early Normandy offen-
sives, these problems led the Allies to undertake such strategic air strikes several
hours before the ground forces attacked, as during the 8 July "Charnwood"
assault around Caen; but unfortunately this alerted the enemy to the imminence
of an attack. Above all, the complexity of such arrangements meant that Allied
commanders had to make key decisions early in the planning process, and once
made, these were not easily reversible. In "Totalize," it proved psychologically
impossible for the Allies to cancel the bombing at the last minute, due both to
the enormous effort made by the First Canadian Army staff to arrange the strike
and to the twenty-four hours' notice required by the air commands to cancel the
bombing runs; consequently, Simonds could not adjust his "Totalize" plan to
take account of last minute intelligence that the Germans had begun to redeploy
troops from the forward defense zone to their secondary one.?4
Kurt Meyer savaged this whole Anglo-Canadian approach, as exemplified
by "Totalize," as an egregious example of both "inflexible, time wasting
method" and "too much planning" that "transferred the initiative" from "leading
combat elements" to "timetable acrobats" at Corps headquarters.'5
Many
German reports criticized the rigid prior staff planning inherent in the Anglo-
Canadian approach but failed to show any appreciation of the ways in which this
operational method represented an appropriate utilization of Allied resources.?6
Montgomery was not overly concerned over the retarding effect this fire-
power-reliant method had on the tempo of operations, as his own approach was
slow and methodical.
To some extent this emphasis on increasing fire support
The Set-Piece Battle
95
proved self-defeating, because even if the fire-plan crushed enemy resistance,
the devastation that it caused prevented the Allies from the exploitation of any
success."7
However, other powerful considerations —ones that Meyer failed to
appreciate —justified Montgomery's methods.
Though this method was crude,
however, it enabled Allied troops to get onto their objectives with tolerable
casualties.
Montgomery not only never lost a single major battle with this
operational method from El Alamein onwards, but also secured —admittedly
modest —victories with tolerable casualties.
Assessing the effectiveness of artillery support proved complicated, as the
scientists attached to the 21st Army Group discovered in 1944.'8
Even with the
most massive artillery bombardments, the physical damage inflicted on the
enemy —the "lethal effect" —was not large in terms of equipment, and even more
limited with personnel.?"
Troops in well dug-in positions could sometimes
withstand the
most incredible scenes of devastation without suffering vast
casualties, even if the fire proved accurate. The lethal effect of artillery always
remained out of all proportion to the copious resources expended.
In contrast, the "moral effect" of artillery —its ability to stun, incapacitate, or
smash the morale of enemy troops-proved highly significant.
An accurate,
concentrated bombardment would temporarily stupefy enemy troops or
substantially reduce their morale, and even if the victims were seasoned élite
troops, the effect remained significant. British artillery, for example, hit so hard
the troops of the II-SS Panzer Korps as they prepared to counterattack the
British "Epsom" penetration, that even these fanatical troops could not manage
an attack for the rest of that day. 100 It was through this temporary stunning of
the enemy - "neutralization"— that artillery fire support enabled the infantry to
gain objectives with reasonable casualties.01
An accurate bombardment was
sufficient to neutralize even the best troops for a short while, so that if the
follow-up troops remained close behind the rolling barrage, the initial German
defensive crust could be penetrated with relatively light casualties.
Neutraliza-
tion was short-lived; and the better the troops, the shorter it lasted, so it was vital
that assault troops "leaned-into" the rolling barrage. 02
The bombardment of Bauchem during Operation "Clipper" on 20 December
1944 proved the most effective Anglo-Canadian artillery fire-plan of the
campaign. Uniquely, this bombardment alone secured the almost total collapse
of German resistance in this hamlet, and the assaulting infantry met virtually no
opposition. The bombardment was not only incredibly intense but sustained at
this enormous intensity for no less than four hours. The small scale of the target
permitted a vast expenditure of ammunition to be concentrated on one small
area. Despite the startling success of this bombardment, this formula was not
repeated because it was impracticable for the 21st Army Group to use with any
frequency such vast ammunition expenditures on extremely small targets.103
Even though most typical concentrations never achieved anything like this
impact, the use of massive firepower proved effective. The initial
"Goodwood," "Cobra," and "Veritable," for example,
suppressing German defensive fire and getting the
objectives with tolerable casualties. 104 Scientific r
