16
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
resources.
The most effective analysis of these issues to date is the work by
John English.
He not only uses detailed operational analysis to expose the
weaknesses of the Canadian army in Normandy, especially its senior command,
but weaves into this an explanation of these failings based on the neglect of the
interwar period.?3
This work continues in a parallel vein; rather than dwell on the failings of
the 21st Army Group, this work demonstrates that given both British war aims
and the weaknesses of its resources relative to those of the enemy, this forma-
tion adopted appropriate techniques. Montgomery's handling of the 21st Army
Group remained hampered by the limited tactical abilities and mercurial morale
of his "basically unmilitary" soldiers, the weaknesses of his staff officers, and
the poor performance of Allied matériel?4 "Colossal Cracks" involved getting
the best out of what resources were available, however unpromising these
military assets were.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
The first section of this analysis, chapters 2 to 5, examines Montgomery's
methods. Chapters 2 and 3 analyze the paramount influences on Montgomery's
operational approach —the maintenance of morale and casualty conservation.
Chapter 2 demonstrates the following three assertions: that serious morale
problems existed within the 21st Army Group during the campaign; that despite
this, Montgomery's forces occupied Germany with its morale fabric still intact
through using his operational methods; and last, that Montgomery's concern to
nurture the fragile morale of his troops affected significantly his conduct of the
campaign.
Chapter 3 examines the factors behind Montgomery's desire to
achieve victory with tolerable casualties; the nurture of troop morale, the
manpower shortage, the legacy of the slaughter in the 1914-18 Western Front
trenches, and the British war aims arising from the campaign's politico-Imperial
dimension. Chapters 4 and 5 examine the main characteristics of Montgomery's
"Colossal Cracks" operational technique. Chapter 4 investigates the fundamen-
tal facets of this approach-the master plan, concentration, attrition-based
firepower, caution, and alternate thrusts. Chapter 5 examines the other charac-
teristics of Montgomery's approach. This completes a comprehensive examina-
tion of his operational techniques in Northwest Europe.
The second part of the work, chapters 6 and 7, extends the analysis of the
21st Army Group beyond Montgomery to the army level of command. These
chapters analyze the role and contributions of Dempsey and the Second (British)
Army, and Cretar and the First Canadian Army, respectively. They explore the
techniques and abilities of these two commanders, their relationships with
Montgomery, and how these factors impacted on the conduct of the campaign.
Both chapters demonstrate the extent to which Montgomery's army commanders
shared his operational approach. These chapters also examine two subsidiary
issues: first, the frictions inherent in Anglo-Canadian military relations; second,
the tendency for higher commands to "overcontrol" —to impinge on the freedom
of activity -of subordinates.
Introduction
17
Having outlined what this analysis covers, something ought to be said on
what is omitted. Considerations of space have precluded analysis of six other
valid aspects of this vast subject. First, this work does not examine the period
1919-43, during which time emerged the factors that engendered the structural
weaknesses of the Second World War British army, weaknesses that led to the
development of "Colossal Cracks." Second, this study omits detailed discussion
of the 1944-45 inter-Allied theater strategic debates-scholars already have
lavished attention on this.
Third, though this work has extended analysis
beyond Montgomery to the army level, an exhaustive operational analysis also
needs to explore the corps, divisional, and even brigade levels.
Fourth, though
this study focuses on senior command echelons, on operations, and on large-unit
tactics, it scarcely touches the minor tactical level.?5
Fifth, although this work
demonstrates the impact of the manpower problem, it has not been possible here
to examine fully this issue. Last, this study does not compare the British and
Canadian armies with the American or German ones—a recent work that
compares tactical innovation within these four armies during Normandy ably
covers this issue. 76
Scholars, therefore, should regard this study as an island of knowledge that
should be related both to existing and future works.
For despite the enormous
extant literature on the Second World War, historians "have only begun to
understand an event of such magnitude."?? With this thought in mind, it is to a
fuller understanding of the manner in which Montgomery and the 21st Army
Group conducted the 1944 45 Northwest Europe campaign that this analysis
now turns.
NOTES
1. This study focuses only modestly on events after the March 1945 Allied crossing
of the Rhine, when the German army ceased to oppose effectively Montgomery's forces.
2. For convenience, this work refers to Montgomery in the text as "the Field Mar-
shal," even though he only attained this rank on 1 Sept 44, and as BLM in notes.
3. Generals Omar N. Bradley and Jacob L. Devers respectively commanded the Ist
(later retitled 12th) and 6th U.S. Army Groups.
4. Public Record Office Thenceforth PRO1, WO205/174, Conference Minutes
[henceforth Conf Mins], 24 May
44; WO171/103, (War Diary, General Staff
(Operations) Branch, HQ, 21st Army Group, May 1944) (WD G(Ops) 21AG May 44)1,
Memorandum [Memo), de Guingand to Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary
Forces [SHAEF], 30 May 44.
5. On the linked issues of command and theater strategy, see (for example) G. E.
Patrick Murray, "Eisenhower and Montgomery, Broad Front versus Single Thrust: The
Historiography of the Debate Over Strategy and Command, Aug 44 to April 45," Ph.D.
Diss, Temple Univ., 1991 henceforth "Historiography"); this has now been published as
Eisenhower versus Montgomer The Costonogs Debate (New York: Praeger, 1996).
See also N. Gelb, Tke and Monry: GeneColininar (london: Constable, 1994), 345-53,
374-77.
6. J. J. B. Mackenzie and Brian Holden Reid, eds., The British Army and the
