82
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Dempsey, Montgomery regularly told him, "There's no need to tell Ike."? This
deception has caused historians to debate the real aims of "Goodwood" ever
since. Indeed, perhaps the only officers who knew Montgomery's real inten-
tions were Major-General de Guingand and Brigadier Belchem, respectively the
21st Army Group's Chief of Staff and Brigadier, General Staff (Operations).
Interpretation of Montgomery's aims is also complicated because his stated
intentions often remained vague. His orders for "Goodwood," for instance, did
not explicitly state that a breakthrough was intended, though the comments on
possible exploitation were sufficiently explicit to permit him to take the credit if
VIll Corps achieved a significant advance! This hedging-your-bets approach
to the intended results of operations was apparent at other times in the cam-
paign, and was characterized by his use in orders of informal, nonmilitary terms,
such as to "crack about" and to "find the form."l" Montgomery remained too
aware of the vagaries of the battlefield to nail his flag to any one predicted
outcome of an operation.
This attitude also reflected both his operational
flexibility and his belief that defeating the enemy was more important than
capturing ground; for example, Montgomery stated that Operation "Bluecoat,"
the late July drive on Vire, would "have no geographical objective" but would
instead continue the Second Army "poliey" of engaging "the main enemy force"
while First US Army advanced 20
Montgomery, despite his assertions to the contrary, was often flexible in his
conduct of the campaign. After D-Day, Montgomery did not feel bound by the
indications he had made to the Air Chiefs in the pre-invasion planning that his
forces would capture swiftly the enemy airfields south of Caen."
When Kit
Dawnay, his military assistant, arrived in Normandy, he soon realized that
Montgomery "did not care a damn about those airfields, as long as he could
draw all the German armor onto that [eastern] side and give a chance for the
[American] right swing to break out. "22
Montgomery later admitted that "it
became impossible to meet" this earlier promise without altering "the whole
strategy of the battle," which he "was not prepared to do."23
Montgomery's
flexibility compounded the misunderstanding of his intentions already fostered
among senior Allied commanders by his imprecision and rhetoric.
Interpretation of Montgomery's intentions is further complicated by the
increasingly distorted view with which Montgomery looked back on the war.
Montgomery's recollections increasingly exaggerated his successful generalship
and the subordination of events to his grand design. Montgomery strove in his
postwar accounts to demonstrate the patently false suggestion that virtually
everything that happened in the campaign went precisely according to plan.
Montgomery's chief intelligence officer, Brigadier Bill Williams, commented
that Montgomery's "idea of fairness and truth" would "sometimes chill me
inside. "26 Unfortunately, this characteristic not only made Montgomery enemies
and obscured the real issues of the campaign, but it also obfuscated appreciation
of his actual achievements in Northwest Europe.
Gradually over the subsequent years, many of the campaign's senior partici-
pants also increasingly viewed the events of 1944-45 in a distorted manner.
This innocent distortion —which was often connected with perceived injustices
The Set-Piece Battle
83
suffered at the time —explains the prevalence of postwar controversies between
these senior officers.
In de Guingand's mind, for instance, germinated the
story that he had saved Montgomery from the sack in October 1944, and
Belchem's determination to defend Montgomery's Normandy master plan led to
gradual alterations in his version of events.?8
These methodological problems reinforce the confusions in the subsequent
historical debates that resulted from inter-Allied frictions.
Consequently, it is
unlikely that historians will reach a definitive solution to the campaign's more
contentious issues, such as Montgomery's theater strategy in Normandy, the real
objective of "Goodwood," the single thrust/broad front controversy, and the
relationship between Montgomery and
Dempsey.
These methodological
considerations must be borne in mind during an examination of Montgomery's
operational approach, but they can be surmounted if the available evidence is
used carefully and related to what is known about the campaign as a whole.
CATEGORIZATION OF MONTGOMERY'S OPERATIONAL APPROACH
Categorization of the aspects that comprised Montgomery's operational
technique is problematic due to the connections that exist between these
characteristics. The principle of concentration, for example, was inextricably
associated with that of economy of force and security, while Montgomery's
conception of grip was as much a part of his concept of leadership as of his
operational approach.2 Similarly, his emphasis on balance not only also related
to the principles of concentration, economy of force, security, and grip, but also
reflected his emphases on caution, the minimization of casualties, and the
nurture of morale.
While historians should bear in mind the complexities of
these interconnections, the purposes of analysis require that this study break
down Montgomery's overall operational technique into its constituent elements.
In 1945, Montgomery defined eight principles of modern war that consti-
tuted the "essentials of success."
These included four aspects that only had
become important in this war-air power, administration, the initiative, and
morale —together with four "old stagers" -surprise, concentration, cooperation,
and simplicity.30 Although the classification presented in this study is based in
part on Montgomery's writings, it does not just follow slavishly these views.
Rather, it reflects an interpretation of the significance of these characteristics as
illustrated not just by Montgomery's writings but also by his conduct of the
campaign.
Consequently, in this study, the operational approach used by
Montgomery in Northwest Europe is analyzed in terms of the following eleven
fundamental, interconnected characteristics: the maintenance of morale and
casualty conservation; the master plan, concentration, firepower-based attrition,
and caution —these four being the key components of the set-piece battle; the
complementary technique of alternate thrusts; plus the initiative, balance,
administration, and air power.
Associated with these eleven fundamental
characteristics were seven other, ancillary, facets: grip, surprise, flank protec-
tion, flexibility, cooperation, simplicity, and the assimilation of combat lessons.
This chapter examines the first five of these —the master plan, concentration,
