36
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
meager total of sixteen divisions represented the key to the production of such a
performance. And above all, the Field Marshal proved "uncommonly skilled" at
maintaining the morale of his troops.103
Montgomery, while recognizing the relative morale fragility of the British
army against the determined Germans, nevertheless understood that the British
army of 1944 could defeat the cream of the Wehrmacht if —but only if —it was
properly trained, fully rehearsed, truly motivated, carefully led, and backed by
copious matériel. In late March 1944, Montgomery stated that if you had troops
who were enthusiastic, tough, well trained, and properly equipped, then "there is
nothing you cannot achieve.
1104 It is significant to note here that British morale
fragility was not merely a factor in the genesis of a firepower-laden approach
based on matériel, but unfortunately also was reinforced by the attritional
approach Montgomery developed to manage these morale weaknesses. Though
Montgomery's "Colossal Cracks" technique, termed Matérielschlacht by the
Germans, helped to nurture morale by avoiding the imposition of extreme
demands on British troops, the very existence of a "huge weight of firepower"
influenced most soldiers to believe that "they possessed the means to dispense
with anything resembling personal fanaticism on the battlefield. "105 Hence, not
only was the "Colossal Cracks" approach a product of, and an appropriate
response to, Montgomery's concerns over the maintenance of Allied troop
morale, it (paradoxically) also perpetuated to some extent the very morale
fragility behind its evolution.
double-edged sword.
Montgomery's method, inevitably, remained a
Montgomery made clear his position on the maintenance of morale immedi-
ately upon assuming command of the "Overlord" forces in early January 1944.
He instructed, when laying down to his immediate subordinates his
"battle
doctrine" for the theater, that "particular attention must be paid to fighting spirit
and morale. "106 He then began "his morale campaign" to raise the fighting spirit
of the 21st Army Group while it remained in the United Kingdom so that it
would cross the Channel in the highest spirits.l07
In the months before D-Day,
once the Allies had finalized the basic "Overlord" plan, Montgomery gave
morale-enhancing addresses to every formation within the 21st Army Group.
Whatever his real thoughts on the prospects of success, he gave these addresses
bristling with supreme confidence, striving to convince the troops not only that
he knew that they would win, but also that they believed that they would win l08
These morale-boosting efforts proved highly effective in raising the morale of
the troops, so that by 6 June 1944 Montgomery had accomplished his aim of
sending "them into this party seeing red. ""
Surprisingly, Brooke's diary indicates that his usually trenchant mind failed
to appreciate the significance of these measures; because Montgomery was
"wandering around visiting troops and failing to get down to basic facts," the
CIGS would have to "kick his back side again!!"' A "Brookie blasting" was
the only censure Montgomery would accept because the CIGS was the one
officer in the British army that the arrogant Montgomery truly respected.!
Brooke's comments about his own positive image projection confirm the
correctness of Montgomery's morale-boosting approach: "The hardest part of
37
The Maintenance of Morale
bearing such responsibility is pretending that you are absolutely confident of
success when you are really torn to shreds with doubts and misgivings! But
when once decisions are taken ... what is required is to breathe the confidence
of success into all of those around you. "112 Hence, even Brooke, Montgomery's
staunch patron, misunderstood some aspects of the latter's morale-enhancing
actions. Certainly, Montgomery had got carried away in talking to railwaymen
and dockers, but this does not refute the validity of his work with the troops.!13
Brooke's view indicates that although his strategic genius made him irreplace-
able as CIGS, he probably was not the best choice to command "Overlord" in
the field.!14
The methods Montgomery adopted throughout his Second World War bat-
tles reflected these morale-maintenance needs.
Moreover, his methods in
Northwest Europe particularly reflected these concerns, because the existence of
a manpower shortage had greatly increased their significance.
Montgomery
appreciated that the key to high morale was success; in order to preserve morale,
Montgomery ensured that any operation he launched would enjoy the best
chances of success possible.
He would, therefore, only launch attacks after
careful preparation, and after concentration of a large numerical advantage in
matériel. His approach ensured that he never lost a battle, even if in this process
he let slip potential (but risky) opportunities to win major engagements, and
hence ended up with an indecisive result.
Montgomery encapsulated his
"Colossal Cracks" approach, and illustrated the significance of the maintenance
of morale in its genesis, when he observed that "to get" high morale he avoided
"any failures" by limiting "the scope of any operation to that which can be done
successfully." Moreover, he remained determined not to "launch the operation
until I am ready." after which he "hit hard, and quickly. "is
Some cynics have dismissed Montgomery's cautious approach as being
largely designed to secure his own reputation, and his overweening egotism
rendered him vulnerable to such criticism.
In 1943 Crerar, for instance, jibed
that "Monty's definition of an army with good morale is an army commanded by
Monty. "116'
In April 1943, Eisenhower encapsulated such suspicions of Mont-
gomery's motives in a letter to General George Marshall, the American army
Chief of Staff. His first impressions of Montgomery were that though he was
"unquestionably able," he was "so proud of his successes to date that he will
never willingly make a single move" until he had concentrated enough resources
to make him "absolutely certain of success."117
Unlike Montgomery, such critics seem to have failed to appreciate that the
morale of a commander's troops remained inextricably linked to his reputation,
and that a commander's confidence formed a central part of this morale-boosting
process. This duality allowed the Field Marshal, at one and the same moment,
to both serve his personal vanity and be utterly professional by exaggerating this
confidence for the benefit of his troops. Indeed, appreciation of this dichotomy
facilitates a full comprehension of the Field Marshal's conduct of battle.
Examination of the evidence refutes the suggestion that Montgomery's opera-
tional methods were designed primarily to satisfy his own personal ambitions;
