62
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
troops to their deaths.
Nevertheless, during 1939-45, many of these senior
British officers remained determined to avoid a repetition of the terrible
slaughter of the infantry of the Great War.
Their approach sought to achieve
operational objectives while avoiding unnecessarily large casualties as much as
possible.
To Montgomery and his senior subordinates the infantry of the 21st
Army Group did not constitute mere cannon fodder, even though, like most
campaigns, the majority of casualties inevitably fell on the infantry.
Conse-
quently, in Northwest Europe Montgomery refused to waste the lives of his men
by continuing with offensive operations that stood little chance of success.
According to Richard O'Brien, one of Montgomery's personal Liaison Offi-
cers at army group tactical headquarters, the Field Marshal had been "horrified
by the loss of life" incurred during the Great War and remained "determined not
to repeat the mistakes made by the First War generals."
O'Brien felt that
Montgomery's desire "to lose as few men as possible" constituted the "main
explanation of the caution he showed in preparation for his battles. "51 Similarly,
Grigg thought it "absurd" to describe Montgomery "as timid" simply because
"he was determined not to subject his troops to anything like the carnage of the
Somme or Passchendaele. '52
The Political Dimension
Britain's political objectives during the Second World War constitute the
fourth motivation behind Montgomery's desire to avoid heavy casualties in
Northwest Europe. By 1943 senior British military commanders, Montgomery
included, were acutely aware that if the British army suffered devastating
damage during the process of defeating successfully the Germans, this would
diminish British Imperial influence on the postwar world and especially postwar
Europe. For it simply was not enough for the British Empire to have won the
war —it had to win the peace as well. 53
Brooke's enthusiasm that Montgomery should command the 21st Army
Group, and all Allied forces in the theater, reflected his recognition both of
Montgomery's operational abilities, and of the fact that the Field Marshal shared
his viewpoint on Britain's role in the world.* Brooke realized that the forceful
Montgomery represented the best commander to pursue British aims in North-
west Europe.
Many of Montgomery's actions in the campaign, especially his
protracted argument with Eisenhower over theater strategy and the command
setup, reflected his determination "to maintain the course of the campaign" on
"lines most suitable to Britain."ss Montgomery displayed a marked Clausewitz-
ian influence when he stated in his Memoirs that "war is a political instrument"
and that "it was of no avail to win the war strategically if we lost it politically.
While Montgomery's own personal pride also remained very much at stake
on the command issue, so too was his ability to protect the interests of the
British army within the campaign. Montgomery's overweening vanity has led
historians to underestimate the influence of British aims on his behavior.
While
Montgomery stressed the need for full operational cooperation between the
Casualty Conservation
63
Allies in order to defeat the enemy, he also sought (somewhat contradictorily) to
protect British interests within the wider Allied effort in the theater.
Montgomery's pursuit of British interests in Northwest Europe begs consid-
eration of whether he received any formal instructions from the British govern-
ment concerning his conduct of the campaign.
There is no evidence to support
the existence of such instructions.
However, given that these instructions would
have been highly controversial in the context of inter-Allied cooperation, it
seems certain that Churchill or Grigg would have issued them privately and
verbally.
Moreover, in all probability, no such instructions were necessary
because Churchill, Brooke, and Montgomery shared a common British view-
point. It is inconceivable that somebody in as senior a position within the
British army as Montgomery, and someone so close to Brooke, would not have
been fully aware of the wider politico-strategic agenda of the British govern-
ment.S7
Moreover, Montgomery's behavior in the 1939-45 War prior to
Normandy displayed that he shared fully the arrogant Imperial outlook of the
British élite.
To name but one example of many, Montgomery persistently
treated the Canadian General "Harry" Crerar in a supercilious manner.
Despite being a self-professed apolitical general, Montgomery's behavior
suggests that correctly he remained concerned by the wider politico-Imperial
dimension of the campaign. In May 1944 Field Marshal Jan Smuts, the South
African President, influenced Montgomery in urging him to "speak out" when
"the war was nearly over. "58 Montgomery's notes of their conversation demon-
strate that both men remained acutely aware of Britain's perspective on the
grand strategic or international political dimensions of the war.
"Smuts is
worried that we may lose the peace," Montgomery recorded. The South African
argued that even though "Britain, with American aid, won the Great War," after
1918, the "tired" British nation "stood back" and allowed "France to take first
place in Europe," and this precipitated "the present war." In Smuts' view, once
the Allies had defeated Nazi Germany, Britain had to "remain strong" so as to
"stand firm as the corner stone of the new structure" of Europe.
Smuts argued, Britain's victory in 1918 remained chimerical, because in the
process of securing military victory, she had failed to preserve the influential
political role in Europe that had been part of the reasons for going to war in the
first place. In 1944, with two superpowers emerging rapidly, history seemed to
be repeating itself.
This was the political context that sat consistently at the
back of Montgomery's mind during the 1944-45 campaign.
In Northwest Europe, the vital theater for the Western Allies during the
Second World War in Europe, the link between the 21st Army Group and
Britain's international standing remained clear.
Churchill was extremely
conscious of the connection between the dwindling forces fielded by the 21st
Army Group and the decreasing international influence exerted by Britain.
The
rising influence exerted by America, an ally of Britain that was by "no means
friendly to the British Empire," only served to increase Churchill' sense of
unease.50
As early as November 1943 the Prime Minister had stated that he
"should like to be able to tell" the Americans, that "we will match you man for
man and gun for gun" in Normandy, because this would "maintain our right to
