164
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Canadian in composition. After the dispatch of the I Canadian Corps to Italy,
manpower constraints meant that the First Canadian Army's continued existence
remained practicable only as a hybrid Anglo-Canadian entity. As a result, and
in order to improve cooperation, both Governments agreed prior to "Overlord"
that up to 50 percent of the army's staff appointments could be filled by Brilish
officers. In practice, however, the actual figure did not rise above 15 percent,
and all the senior appointments remained in Canadian hands.5
At times, however, there
existed considerable tensions in the Anglo-
Canadian relationship.
There was some validity to Canadian accusations that
the British sometimes displayed an attitude of "colonial" superiority toward their
Dominion allies58 Leese's criticisms of Lieutenant-General Burns in Italy, and
his suggestion that the latter's I Canadian Corps be disbanded, prompted an
unusually bitter complaint from Crerar to Stuart that "the Englishman's tradi-
tional belief in the superiority of the Englishman" meant that "no Canadian or
American" commander, unless they possessed "phenomenal qualities," was
"ever rated as high as an equivalent Britisher. IS? British commanders found the
existence of Canadian higher formations, with their corresponding national
requirements, a military inconvenience that limited British operational flexibil-
rey equally, Canadian defense of theit military autonomy was fueled by fears
that the British would use Canadian forces piecemeal as they had been in the
1941 War Office Exercise "Victor."61
In the light of these factors, it is pertinent here to consider whether Mont-
gomery's judgment on Crerar was fair. In general, the Field Marshal's judgment
on military appointments was considered highly by his colleagues.
Crucially,
many commanders recognized Montgomery's judgments as being relatively
objective in that he placed greater emphasis on ability to do the job than on the
regimental traditions and interests, or on the patronage system of "the old boy
network" that pervaded the British army.
Montgomery's formation of his
opinions, however, had serious weaknesses: He made judgments quickly, and
once made, little changed them; he had several fixations such as weeding out
elderly commanders; he rarely gave officers a second chance if they initially
failed to live up to his expectations; and he trusted only those whom he had
taught and whose careers he had himself nurtured.
Given these factors,
Montgomery clearly was not immune to making mistakes with appointments.
Not surprisingly, therefore, there was no truly objective voice assessing the
abilities of senior commanders in the British army during the last eighteen
months of the Second World War.
Was Montgomery's opinion that Crerar possessed limited operational abili-
ties a fair assessment? Notwithstanding the fact that Montgomery's dislike of
Crerar stemmed from the politico-military disputes previously discussed, his
opinion on Crerar's operational abilities was broadly correct, if slightly exagger-
ated; the political disputes probably reinforced Montgomery's valid operational
suspicions of Crerar. The Field Marshal, however, believed these two aspects to
be inextricably interconnected.
Montgomery judged that Crerar's national
approach impinged on his capability to make objective operational decisions.
Crerar's operational handling of the First Canadian Army was at best merely
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
165
competent —but what else could be expected from a commander who had not
commanded a large formation in the field? It is Crerar's handling of the First
Canadian Army in Northwest Europe that this study now assesses.
From December 1941 until October 1943 Crerar was de facto commander of
the I Canadian Corps in the United Kingdom under the then Lieutenant-General
Montgomery's Southeastern Command.
The most striking aspect of the
correspondence between Crerar and Montgomery during this period is the extent
to which the Canadian parroted Montgomery's advice when issuing his own
policy guides.62
Many of these stand out for their banality rather than their
incisiveness.
Moreover, when Montgomery gave his opinion on some matter,
notably appointments, Crerar frequently replied that this advice merely con-
firmed his own opinions on the subject; this was stated so regularly that one
becomes skeptical of the veracity of these responses.63
An examination of this
correspondence reveals that the flow of operational ideas was primarily one
way —from Montgomery to Crerar -despite the latter's efforts at the time to play
up his contribution to this debate."4
Crerar's operational abilities in this campaign remained limited firstly be-
cause he rejected Montgomery's quite correct maxim that operational command
in war was a "full time job for one man. "5 Crerar was not, indeed could not be,
dedicated full time to operational matters, because he also had administrative
responsibilities as the senior Canadian officer overseas.
Throughout the latter
half of the war, Crerar sought to maintain a firm grip on this administrative
authority, zealously fending off the encroachments of Stuart's CMHQ in
London.
For Crerar's administrative role was the power base behind his
Canadian army career, particularly his grip on appointments that enabled him to
act as a "kingmaker. "66
Crerar could not be a dedicated operational commander,
and it is hard to imagine how any field commander who was also senior
Canadian officer overseas could be dedicated holly to operations, unless (like
Simonds) he was prepared substantially to sacrifice Canadian interests in favor
of Allied operational requirements.67 It was again ironic that Crerar, despite his
willingness to cooperate, failed to see the adverse impact his administrative
position had on the strict operational aspects of this cooperation.
That Crerar was not a full-time operational commander is revealed by an
analysis of the nonoperational matters with which he dealt during the campaign.
Although Crerar did delegate some of his administrative responsibilities to
Stuart once the First Canadian Army became operational in France, Crerar
retained extensive commitments on general Canadian army matters while
commanding the First Canadian Army in the field. In the month of August
1944, during Operations "Totalize" and "Tractable," Crerar received, dealt with,
or issued fifteen pieces of substantial correspondence on non-First Canadian
Army operational matters; this figure excludes his work on general appointment
issues. In September 1944, during Operations to open up the channel ports and
the Scheldt, Crerar dealt with twenty-nine such pieces of correspondence.
For
perspective in June 1944, before the First Canadian Army became operational in
the field, Crerar dealt with fifty such communications. Crerar's administrative
commitments remained onerous even during the burden of commanding an
