122
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
predilection to overcontrol subordinates is a recurring theme in the remainder of
this analysis.
In addition to Montgomery's tendency to overcontrol his army
subordinates, the techniques inherent in "Colossal Cracks" also served to limit
the contributions made by these two army commanders.
The nature of this
operational approach meant that most attacks remained single corps affairs, and
this reduced the relative role of army and increased that of corps. This fact may
explain in part why the campaign's historical literature often portrays these army
commanders as mere ciphers.
Flank Protection
Maintaining the security of the flanks exposed by offensive action formed
another ancillary facet of Montgomery's operational technique.
This aspect
reflected Montgomery's emphases on caution, sustaining morale, balance,
security, and tidiness. His great concern over the security of flanks reflected his
healthy regard for German tactical capabilities. His determination to keep the
flanks of his advancing forces secure denied the Germans opportunities to take
advantage of Allied audacity to inflict local defeats. In Normandy, Montgom-
ery's concern over flank protection was evident in his emphasis on maintaining
the security of the vulnerable eastern flank.
The Allies remained greatly
concerned throughout June and July 1944, as they established a lodgment area,
that a German armored counterattack would roll up the bridgehead from this
flank, or at least interrupt the Allied logistic build-up over the beaches. It was
no coincidence that Montgomery entrusted Crocker, one of his most experi-
enced and capable armored corps commanders, to defend this vital flank.
most of the Normandy campaign, Montgomery deployed Crocker's corps in
defensive positions, and consequently the position of the front on that flank
scarcely changed as the campaign unfolded elsewhere.
Indeed, as late as mid-
August, when the German front was in the process of collapse, Montgomery
continued to issue orders that stressed the need to keep this eastern flank, now
extended as far south as Falaise, firm and solid.
The manner in which Montgomery and his senior subordinates developed
offensive operations also reflected his concern with flank protection.
Some-
times the existence of natural obstacles that advancing Anglo-Canadian could
use to protect their flanks influenced Montgomery's selection of the areas over
which he would launch major operations. Use of such obstacles facilitated both
concentration and tidiness, as well as minimized the threat posed by possible
German counterattacks on the flanks.
In a classic example of this concern,
Simonds' "Totalize" offensive utilized the Laize River to screen its right
(western) flank from German countermoves.16
Montgomery remained concerned about substantial German counterattacks
on the flanks of Anglo-Canadian penetrations throughout the 1944-45 cam-
paign. This fear prompted him in late June 1944 to halt the "Epsom" attack.
Similarly, he canceled the October 1944 "Gatwick" offensive because the
American 7th Armored Division had been unable to clear the enemy-held Venlo
salient on the southern flank of the offensive. If this salient remained in enemy
The Other Elements
123
hands, the attacking forces would have to advance with two exposed flanks to
the north and south. The most notorious occasion, however, when Montgomery
abandoned his concern with flank protection was during the "Market-Garden"
offensive, which represented the antithesis of a typical Montgomery operation.
This unique operation demonstrated that in certain circumstances Montgomery
was prepared to abandon flank protection in favor of potentially significant
operational gains.
The failure of the operation, and the German success at
cutting XXX Corps' corridor of advance both demonstrated the risks Anglo-
Canadian forces courted when Montgomery abandoned his innate caution and
his emphasis on flank security +7
Surprise
In Northwest Europe, Montgomery also placed great emphasis on the tacti-
cal achievement of that standard military principle, surprise, which he believed
was "always possible and must always be sought. "48 The attainment of surprise
represented one motive behind his utilization of the alternate thrusts approach
discussed in the previous chapter. Montgomery hoped that by attacking first in
one sector and drawing-off enemy forces, this would facilitate the success of a
surprise attack in another sector that would consequently face weakened
opposition.
To achieve tactical surprise, Montgomery placed strong emphasis
on the use of deception techniques within the operations that the 21st Army
Group undertook.49*
Anglo-Canadian forces widely used deception methods in
Normandy, albeit not always with marked success.
Montgomery's employment
of deception techniques improved gradually during the campaign culminating in
"Veritable," the greatest success story using such methods.
In this operation,
Allied use of the most stringent and sophisticated security and deception
arrangements ensured that the Germans remained virtually unaware of the
concentration of 250,000 Anglo-Canadian troops in the Groesbeek-Nijmegen
area su
There seems to have been an element of revenge in the Allied deception
effort prior to the "Veritable" offensive: It represented a deliberate response to
the successful German deception scheme, "Wacht am Rhein," used in their
December 1944 Ardennes counteroffensive.
Flexibility
Though Montgomery's preference for a master plan and tight control of
operations suppressed operational flexibility, he still emphasized flexibility of
force structure within his operational methods. This form of flexibility consti-
tuted another adjunct of concentration, because "true concentration implies the
power of flexibility."
Indeed, Montgomery believed that the relationship
between the two was "the vital key to effective operations. "1
This form of
flexibility manifested itself in Montgomery's policy of avoiding fixed corps
compositions, separate armored and infantry corps, and distinct armored/tank
formations.
Instead, all corps staffs had to be proficient at handling any type of
formations Hasta, exible corps composition facilitated Montgomery's desire
