186
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
approach; such critics have failed to relate these aspects to the rest of the factors
that comprised his operational methods.
Too often historians have criticized
Montgomery's caution, for instance, without adequate consideration of how this
aspect related to all the other components of his operational approach, but
especially to his morale and casualty concerns.
Within the body of historical literature written on the campaign, there still is
lacking a wholly adequate comprehensive examination of the manner in which
Montgomery and the 21st Army Group conducted the campaign.
This absence
has resulted from six interconnected causes: that historians have focused
excessively both on Montgomery's personality, especially his flaws, and on his
significance within the campaign; that to date this body of literature has lacked a
systematic examination of the various aspects of Montgomery's operational
approach; that scholars have overemphasized theater strategic issues and
eration to the operational level; that historians have given insufficient consid-
eration to the real situation facing the 1944 British army; that scholars have not
fully appreciated the appropriateness of Montgomery's methods to achieving
British politico-Imperial war aims; and that historians have criticized Montgom-
or personally both for operational techniques shared by his subordinates and
for failures as attributable to these subordinates as to himself.
This analysis has established a fuller picture of the manner in which the 21st
Army Group conducted this campaign by examining the two most senior
command levels within this formation and the relationships that existed between
them. This study has argued that historians cannot achieve a full understanding
of the activities of the 21st Army Group by focusing solely on Montgomery, as
so much of the campaign's historical literature has done.
Historians only can
obtain such an understanding by analyzing this formation's two most senior
command levels and the interconnections that existed between them.
particular 21st Army Group style for conducting the campaign emerged both
from the methods of these commanders and from the interactions between them.
The excessive focus on Montgomery has been misleading because this has
reinforced the belief that he was the prime impulse on events.
Although
Montgomery's role remained crucial, his subordinate army commanders also
made key contributions to the manner in which the 21st Army Group handled
the campaign.
This analysis also has demonstrated that by winter 1943-44 Montgomery's
subordinates at army level had already assimilated the basic techniques of the
"Colossal Cracks" approach, and to some extent had done so independently of
Montgomery's influence.
The British army's doctrinal development during
1941-44, based on the experiences of combat in North Africa, had developed
along similar lines to that of Montgomery.
After he assumed command of the
21st Army Group, both Montgomery's desire for grip and his predilection for
such methods reinforced powerfully the extent of consensus concerning
operational technique that already existed within this formation.
Montgomery did not impose an alien doctrine on this formation.
Hence,
This study also has demonstrated that the maintenance of morale and casu-
alty conservation constituted the paramount influences on the manner in which
Conclusions
187
Montgomery and the 21st Army Group conducted this campaign. Furthermore,
this analysis has illustrated that the campaign's historical literature to date has
given insufficient consideration to these two interconnected concerns.
This
work has argued further that it is impossible for historians to fully comprehend
the performance of Anglo-Canadian forces in Northwest Europe
without
appreciation of these factors.
The constant need for senior commanders within
the 21st Army Group to nurture the relatively fragile morale of their conscript
soldiers strongly influenced their utilization of a cautious, firepower-laden,
attritional operational approach. These commanders could only expect so much
sacrificial heroism from Britain's civilian, mass-conscript forces.
Moreover,
given wider inter-Allied considerations, the fact that the 21st Army Group could
field just a modest number of divisions alongside an ever-growing American
force made it essential for Montgomery to keep all his formations fit for combat
in the long term; he had to get the best out of his limited manpower resources.
The best way for senior commanders within the 21st Army Group to get the best
out of their civilian troops despite the terrible demands of combat was to
allocate them the maximum possible level of support in terms of machines -that
is, of matériel. Indeed, Montgomery rightly recognized that, despite massive
Allied numerical superiority in matériel, the key to the eventual defeat of the
Westheer was to nurture the relatively fragile morale of the conscript soldiers
fielded by the 21st Army Group into an adequate, but sustained, combat
performance. What really mattered in Britain's contribution to the Allied defeat
of the Westheer was how effectively in the long-term these civilian troops used
this mass of machines.
The necessity for the 21st Army Group to avoid excessive casualties in the
campaign strongly influenced its reliance on massive firepower.
Casualty
conservation proved essential for Montgomery because the 1944 British army
was suffering from a chronic manpower shortage, particularly in the case of rifle
infantry reinforcements.
Moreover, Britain's most senior commanders of the
Second World War had been profoundly moved by the slaughter of the Great
War and remained determined to avoid this scale of blood-letting during the
1939-45 conflict.
The casualty- and morale-conscious senior commanders
within the 21st Army Group sought to sustain the fighting power and integrity
of their formation —a force which constituted Britain's last uncommitted field
army —until this force had defeated the enemy. In this manner Britain would
secure her politico-Imperial war objectives.
These aims sought a high military
profile for Britain's limited -and diminishing-forces within a larger Allied
effort that eventually would defeat the enemy without incurring a bloodbath of
the last of Britain's fit young men. If the British army defeated the enemy in
such a manner, this would ensure a prominent British influence on the emerging
postwar political structure of Europe. This objective had been a major motiva-
tion that reinforced Britain's decision to go to war in September 1939 to defeat
the continuing Nazi aggression in Europe.
Much of historians' criticism of Montgomery and the 21st Army Group has
focused on the relatively poor combat performance of Anglo-Canadian forces,
despite their marked numerical superiority in matériel, in comparison with the
