98
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
strategic plan for Normandy. Montgomery's cautious approach led him only to
launch an offensive after his command had planned carefully and established
fully the administrative foundations, and concentrated such numerical superior-
ity, so as to maximize the prospects of success.
This caution had been the
hallmark of the Montgomery method even before El Alamein, and it led to the
"concentrate-start-stop-rebuild-start" rhythm so characteristic of the way in
which the 21st Army Group conducted this campaign; but this caution also
infuriated both senior American commanders and British air force commanders
like Coningham and Tedder!15 In Normandy, this caution led Montgomery to
postpone operations on many occasions because he believed that there was
insufficient artillery fire support deployed or because bad weather prevented his
forces utilizing the awesome power of Allied tactical air forces.
Typically, any
small disadvantage to his troops proved sufficient for Montgomery to postpone
an operation. The Field Marshal, for example, canceled "Epsom" several times
due to the combination of bad weather and the delays in build-up caused by the
storm of mid-June 1944.
Montgomery's caution over the commencement of offensive action, how-
ever, did not always overwhelm other operational considerations. At times, if
Montgomery thought the operational situation demanded it, he was prepared to
order operations to commence at short notice at the expense of his typical
standards of preparation and build-up. In Operation "Bluecoat," Montgomery
demanded a start time that permitted just forty-eight hours for planning, and
even though only two divisions had managed to deploy in time, he ordered the
attack to commence with the admonition that the other divisions be "thrown into
the battle as they arrive. "116 This haste reflected his desire to prevent German
redeployment away from the British sector to block the progress of the Ameri-
can "Cobra" offensive.
Similarly, Montgomery launched the uncharacteristi-
cally bold "Market-Garden" offensive at a time when logistical build-up was
only marginally sufficient to support such an operation. Though the motivations
behind this operation are complex, one factor was Montgomery's appreciation
that this was the last opportunity, with the Westheer in rout, for the British army
to win the war in 1944 with one last mighty blow.
A second characteristic of Montgomery's caution was that he was not pre-
pared to take risks in seeking a decisive breakthrough, in pushing a penetration
deep, or in exploiting success 117
This caution had allowed Rommel's Afrika
Korps to escape destruction during its retreat after El Alamein.
In Normandy,
Montgomery sent Kit Dawnay to the War Office before "Goodwood" to clarify
his intentions during this operation: "Having broken out in country southeast of
Coen," Montgomery had "no intention of rushing madly eastwards," which
Muld extend and hence weaken the security of Second Army's flank!18
Montgomery's request to O'Connor during "Goodwood" that he maintain both
"thrustfulness" from the armor and the security of this last he mank left the
corps commander caught between two stools; the shortage of infantry that
resulted from not taking risks with the security of this flank contributed to the
failure of the attack. Even on 11 August 1944, with the German front close to
The Set-Piece Battle
99
collapse, Montgomery remained as concerned to hold a "secure" eastern flank as
to exploit the imminent German disintegration.!19
Montgomery was correct to be concerned over this flank because, as he
appreciated, a successful German attack in that area could seize the high ground
that dominated the eastern beaches. During June and July 1944, senior Anglo-
Canadian commanders in Normandy
"always" experienced
"real anxiety"
because the consequences of mistakes "could be catastrophic. "120 Montgomery's
concern, however, was not justified given the battlefield situation of mid-
August. His ingrained caution often rendered him unwilling to take risks almost
to the exclusion of other tactical considerations, such as the opportunities his
caution was letting slip away.
Even after the decimation of the Westheer in the Falaise pocket, Montgom-
ery's concern with the security of the eastern flank slowed his pursuit of the
beleaguered enemy back to the Seine, so that once again he failed to capitalize
on an excellent opportunity to destroy disorganized, retreating enemy forces.
One has to concur with Thompson that Montgomery remained loathe to let
develop fluid operations, as such a situation would not allow him to conduct
operations in his accustomed manner, with both careful preparation and firm
control; his orderly command style could not rise to meet the needs of the fluid,
impromptu battle, and this failing excludes him from the ranks of the "great
captains" of history. 121
In many ways, though, Montgomery's cautious approach was operationally
appropriate. His caution ensured that the 21st Army Group did not present the
enemy with "any opportunity" to deal it an unsettling blow. 22 Moreover, this
caution reflected Montgomery's determination to nurture the morale of his
troops. He believed that it was only through continued Allied success, and the
avoidance of even minor setbacks and local enemy successes, that his formation
could sustain reasonable morale within its civilian soldiers.
Much of historians'
criticism of Montgomery has focused on the caution he displayed in Normandy,
and this has some validity because at times he was overcautious.!23 Yet often
these critics have overstated this criticism, largely because they have assessed
this aspect in isolation to the other aspects of his operational technique;
historians can only fully comprehend Montgomery's caution in the context of
his complete operational approach.
Although his caution represented in part a
long-established, integral part of his natural approach to battle, in Northwest
Europe it also reflected his appreciation of the following three issues: the
realities of the set-piece battle; German tactical effectiveness; and the need to
both nurture troop morale and conserve manpower. In this respect, Montgom-
ery's approach re morade broadly in line with how British army operational
doctrine had developed between 1939 and 1944.
First, the nature of the set-piece battle reinforced the natural caution and
methodical style Montgomery that always possessed.
The frequent passing-
through of units, and the reliance on both elaborate artillery fire-plans and the
movement forward of the guns during an advance, engendered a ponderous
operational style that made difficult the exploitation of fleeting opportunities.
Second, Allied recognition of German tactical abilities, learned at such heavy
