166
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
army in vitally important active operations. In stark contrast, Dempsey had no
such commitments, not even formal appointment responsibilities, which were
dominated by
Montgomery.?º
Consequently,
according to
Bill Williams,
Montgomery "correctly" felt that Crerar was "more of a Quartermaster-General
than a Field Commander."71
Crerar's operational judgment and decisions also proved not always com-
pletely sound. Evidence for this may be discerned by comparing his views on
the recommendations made by the G(Plans) section at the First Canadian Army
with those of Simonds. It is widely accepted that Simonds was one of the most
effective corps commanders in Northwest Europe, who possessed penetrating
operational judgment. If Crerar and Simonds disagreed on the merit of these
G(Plans) recommendations, one might conclude that Crerar's decisions on
practicalities - rather than the generalities-lacked the perceptive grasp that
Simonds displayed.
Crera's First Canadian Army G(Plans) section drew up
appreciations of imminent and future operations to help the army commander
formulate his plans.
Headed by Lieutenant-Colonel Pangman, this G(Plans)
section produced a prolific amount of work in Northwest Europe.
However, on
at least two occasions Simonds -when his oninion had heen reamested h
Crerar-savagely criticized recommendations made by Pangman that Crerar
previously had endorsed. First, in September 1944, during the planning phase
of operations to clear the Scheldt estuary, Simonds produced a bitterly critical
appreciation that represented "one of the most striking and original tactical
statements of the campaign."2 In it Simonds savaged Pangman's assumption
that the Canadian forces could liberate the Preslens pocket the German held
southern bank of the Scheldi estuary, without meeting any significant enemy
resistance??
The second occasion concerned the plans drawn up between November 1944
and January 1945 for an intended future attack, code-named "Siesta," an
operation that the campaign's historical literature has all but ignored.
The plan
for "Siesta" involved a single divisional attack from the eastern flank of the
"Island" - the area between Arnhem and Nijmegen bordered by the rivers Neder
Rijn in the north and Waal in the south and by the Pannerden Canal in the east.
The objective of "Siesta" was to advance the Allied eastern flank to the line of
the Pannerden Canal thus securing a frontage that could be more economically
held and that, by securing the lock gates, prevented the enemy from deliberately
flooding the "Sland." Terrain conditions and other operational requirements
meant that the Canadians postponed the operations several times and ultimately
decided that it should be canceled?
Initially, in late November, Crerar had informed Montgomery that Canadian
troops had to complete "Siesta" before "Veritable" could "be prepared. "s
was an erroneous judgment, as was subsequently demonstrated by the success of
"Veritable" in February 1945 despite the fact that "Siesta" had not been
undertaken! By January 1945, with the preparations for "Veritable" almost
complete, Pangman presented another appreciation of "Siesta" that recom-
mended that the operation be carried out before or during "Veritable," and
Crerar accepted this advice. Simonds rejected Pangman's argument that "Siesta"
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
167
afforded significant flank protection to "Veritable." Simonds also contradicted
Pangman by
stating that the enemy's deliberate
flooding of the
"Island"
benefited the Canadian defense as much as that of the Germans.
Simonds
concluded that it was only necessary to undertake "Siesta" in the spring when
dry terrain made the threat of German attack both significant and imminent.
Although Crerar previously had recognized this point, he still concluded that
"Siesta" should be carried out immediately to coincide with "Veritable." At a
conference on 22 January 1945 Horrocks concurred with Simonds' view, and
consequently Crerar scrapped the project.
Simonds' position, when compared
with that of Crerar and Pangman, is convincing:
He rightly believed that
"Siesta" constituted an unnecessary diversion that did not facilitate the real
business in hand, Operation "Veritable. "76
In contrast to the First Canadian Army, there is no extant documentation that
confirms the existence of a G(Plans) section at Second (British) Army, despite
Montgomery's recommendation on 31 January 1944 that each army should have
one?"
This makes the question of why Pangman was so prolific more interest-
ing.
Lieutenant-Colonel Anderson, a close friend of Pangman, felt at the time
that the latter anticipated
future operations
and prepared appreciations in
advance in case Crerar required them, and the existing documentation suggests
that this was often the case?" However, at other times Pangman's appreciations
were drawn up on the direct orders of either Crerar or his army Chief of Staff,
Brigadier Churchill Mann."
This suggests that Crerar relied heavily on these
G(Plans) appreciations in forming his opinions and decisions.
This fits the often
stated view that Crerar (unlike Simonds) did not conceive his own plans but
relied on his staff to do so. 0
Crerar's operational decision-making also was complicated by his defense of
Canadian national interest, and this caused Montgomery great concern. Crerar
remained determined to keep Canadian formations under their national com-
mand —an inconvenience for Montgomery in his efforts to maintain balanced
dispositions. After the war, Montgomery complained that when the Il Canadian
Corps had become widely stretched in the early Scheldt operations, Crerar
proved reluctant to transfer the 2nd Canadian Division on its far flank to the
adjacent I (British) Corps; in contrast, Simonds recognized this operational need
immediately 81 Crerar also proved reluctant initially to have the British XXX
Corps spearhead the "Veritable" attack, even though its future role in the Rhine
crossing meant that it had to be deployed on the southern sector of Crerar's
frontage, which constituted the only sensible axis of advance for "Veritable."
Indeed, Crerar only abandoned his policy of "keeping Canadian formations
together" on 16 January 1945, and instead allowed them for the first time to "be
moved
to meet op[erational] requirements, irrespective of any 'national'
aspects. "82
At times Crerar also displayed a less-than-perfect grasp of the operational
context in which Canadian operations were undertaken.
For instance, in late
November 1944 Montgomery first broached the subject of an operation akin to
the canceled early October "Gatwick" offensive. This plan involved an attack
from the Nijmegen bridgehead towards the southeast, and this eventually
