170
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Montgomery more critical of Crerar. The Canadian attributed the fact that his
superior lately had been "pretty trying" to Montgomery's loss of overall control
of land forces and his promotion to Field Marshal, which both "accentuated" his
"mental disturbance [sic]."99
As Montgomery had long held adverse views of
Crerar in private, it is likely that this disagreement merely prompted him to be
less restrained in stating his opinions to Brooke. This quarrel did not cause the
rift between these two commanders but triggered the long-standing underlying
tension that existed between them.
Crerar's handling of the first part of the Scheldt operations again demon-
strated his ponderous style.
This period witnessed a protracted series of
planning conferences that achieved little on the ground 100 Moreover, Dempsey
felt that Crerar's forces undertook sluggishly the essential preliminaries to these
Scheldt operations, the clearance of the channel ports.101
Given the modest
German garrison at Le Havre, the British hoped that the Canadians would avoid
repeating the methodical style of operation that David Strangeways reported
they had utilized at Rouen. According to de Guingand, after Strangeways had
reached a Canadian brigade that claimed to be unable to advance due to stiff
position, he "got tired of waiting and drove" into Rouen without meeting?
single German! 10:
There was an understandable lack of enthusiasm within
Cretar's Army for the impending operations in the Scheldt, which clearly would
be a dismal slog through appalling conditions of mud and flooding in a strategic
backwater.
arcal cha legar appeared unable to inspire his army to rise fully to this
In contrast, the arrival of the
"gung-ho" Simonds as
acting army commander on 26 September (due to Crerar's illness) changed all
this; his immediate impact was like "a breath of fresh air."104
On 22 October 1944, Crerar -now recovered from his illness —informed
Simonds that he would reassume command on the last day of that month.
However, on 24 October Brooke, in compliance with Montgomery's request,
asked Cerar not to return from sick leave until atter simonds had completed the
Scheldt operations.
The pretext was that Montgomery did not want the
disturbance that would result from a change of command in the middle of a
particular set of operations.
However, the real reason was that Montgomery
simply wanted to keep Crerar away and give Simonds his head. 105
Charles
Foulkes, promoted to acting commander of the Il Canadian Corps in Simonds'
place, later told Stacey that he recollected Montgomery telling him that Crerar
would not be returning! Crerar recognized the personal slight, yet neverthe-
less on 25 October acquiesced to the British request. 107
The nature of Crerar's resumption of command was as surprising as the ab-
sen e of attention to this event in the campaigns litas as surprising as teredi-
bly, although Crerar returned to army headquarters on 7 November 1944-the
date given in the historical literature as his resumption of command — he did not
take command of the First Canadian Army for a further two days; for no less
than forty-eight hours Crerar had to watch Simonds, his erstwhile —and again
soon to be -subordinate, perform Crerar's own responsibilities! Why this was
so remains shrouded in uncertainty.108
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
171
One must be careful, however, not to exaggerate Crerar's operational fail-
ings.
On the whole his command of the First Canadian Army in Northwest
Europe was competent -perhaps more so than some had expected.
Montgom-
ery recognized back in 1942 that Crerar had his merits, praising his handling of
the troops under his command during several exercises.
Equally, there is
evidence to support Crerar's assertion during the "Overlord" planning that it was
he who drew Montgomery's attention to the threat of a German counterattack
against the eastern flank of the Normandy bridgehead 109
Moreover, Crerar
supervised the preparations for "Veritable" capably, even if the presence of
corps commanders as able as Simonds and Horrocks helped ensure that potential
mistakes were kept to a minimum.!10
Crerar also deserves some credit both for his emphasis on achieving surprise
by abandoning preliminary bombardment, and on maintaining the momentum of
Allied penetrations.
While it is undeniable these were the broad parameters
within which Simonds drew up his
"Totalize" plan, Crerar went too far in
claiming the credit for the innovative approach used in this operation; this was
manifestly the product of Simonds' fertile mind.
This claim echoed Crerar's
1942 assertions that Montgomery's advice merely confirmed the opinions he
already had reached. It also mirrored his exaggerated claims that the success of
"Overlord" was due largely to training exercises like "Pirate" that utilized the
lessons learned by the Canadian sacrifice at Dieppe'!
However, Crerar's
exaggerated claims should not distract attention from his real contributions to
the campaign.
Crerar's emphasis on surprise resulted partially from his credit-
able determination to study both German views of Allied techniques and the
tactics the enemy developed to counter them. 12 Though Montgomery was a
didactic General who placed great weight on assimilating the lessons of combat
experience, in this campaign he appears to have given relatively little attention
to German tactical views.113
On balance, Crerar's conduct of the First Canadian Army in Northwest
Europe was competent, rather than poor; he was probably "a better general than
Montgomery was prepared to admit. "114 Brooke's profession before "Overlord"
that he had "full confidence" in Crerar was proved correct.'5 Furthermore,
Crerar's weaknesses did not exert a great impact on the campaign, for his
subordinate corps commanders -Crocker and Simonds -remained very capable.
Major-General Vokes believed that though Crerar lacked field command
experience, he made "quite a successful Army commander" because he acted
merely as "chairman of the board" by holding his experienced subordinates on a
loose rein.116
Prior to "Overlord," however, Crerar was the only realistic choice for com-
mand.
In operational terms he was an improvement on McNaughton who,
though a genius at administration, was a poor field commander-as Exercise
"Spartan" showed —who neglected training for the impending Second Front."7
Consequently, in late 1943 Brooke, abetted by Ralston, engineered the demise
of McNaughton for the sake of the success of the D-Day invasion.!18 In the
vacuum formed by McNaughton's departure there was no Canadian officer
matching Crerar's stature, and his only serious rival -Simonds -was too
