PART II
WAR ORGANIZATION
CHAPTER IV-MOBILIZATION DIRECTORATE
During the war the organization of the Mobilization Directorate underwent
various changes :-
1939 (October).
Director (Major-General)
Deputy Director (Brigadier)
Mob. I
Mob. 2
Mob. 3
(Mobilization)
(Man-power)
(Progress and statistics)
Assistant Adjutant-General Deputy Assistant Adjutant-
Deputy Assistant Adjutant-
Deputy Assistant Adjutant-
General
Staff Captain
Deputy Assistant Adjutant-
Rei da oficer
Staff Captain
Deputy At slant Adjutant- Retired Oficer
Staff Captain
undo. Die " or ker Read Mobilitan to enior- General), later
Mobilization" (Major-General)
Deputy
Director of Recruiting and Mobilization (Brigadier)
Deputy Director and Inspector of Mobilization (Brigadier)
A.C:, (ob,)
Mob. 2
(Releases and deferments)
Deputy Assistan Adjutant- Assistay Adiant Clutant
Deputy Assistant Adjutant-
Deputy As coret Adjutant-
Staff Captain
Depete Assistant Adjutant-
Staff Captain
Staff Cantain
Staff Captain
(Tradesmen-
Mob. Territorial
Anti-Aircraft
and Coastal Defence)
Staff Captain
rapidly clearing un their difficulties in mobilization or re-mobilization
His duties are shown at Appendix A.
The duties of the other Deputy Director did not include mobilization.
(ii) The net effect of the reorganization of branches was the re-granting of military
status as staff captains to two retired officers and addition of one staff captain to deal
with the comb-out of tradesmen (Mob. 4).
* Adjutant-General's representative at meetings of General Staff Planning
Committee.
WO277/26
NO 27/18
1941.
Director of Recruiting and Mobilization (Major-General)
Deputy Director of Recruiting and Mobilization (Brigadier)
Deputy Director and Inspector of Mobilization (Brigadier)
(Mob.)
(Releases and Deferments) (Demobilizatio, planning)
Degeneras comediutant Aputy Asian A Curanal Assist A divan A Cutenal
Deputy Assistant Ádjutant-
General (Overseas)
Staff Captain
Staff Captain
Aste fit was the dior Demob Artion adian -Comoral and to Deputy
Organization remained as in out but the senior Deputv Assistant Adiutant.
General in A.G.5 (Mob.) was upgraded to Assistant Adjutant-General, the branch
being organized as under :-
Deputy Director and Inspector of Mobilization
(Mobiles on of unis
Assistant Adjutant-General
Deputy Assistant Adjutant-General
(Completion of (unit doRciencies)
Staff Captain
Adjutant-General (B).
Organization and establishment
A. G.5 (Mob.) remained the same.
1944-45. As for 1943.
Locations
In 1939 the Director of Mobilization's office was situated in the War
Office in Whitehall.
In 1940 both the Director of Organization and the
Director of Recruiting, under whose direction the mobilization branch
successively served, were located at Hobart House.
In 1942 the Director
of Recruiting and Mobilization was located in Curzon Street House ;
and
later as Director of Recruiting and Demobilization in 1943 at Hyde Park
Gate, and in 1944 at Chesham Place (as Director of Demobilization). The
mobilization branch, by virtue of the necessity for its close daily contacts
with S.D. (Staff Duties) branches, remained in the main building in Whitehall
throughout the war.
With the exception of S.D. branches, all branches with which A.G.5
(Mob.) had to maintain close daily contact on mobilization
matters were
located in different War Office buildings, e.g. Personnel Branches at Hobart
House and (during 1941-42) at Cheltenham; Equipment Branches at Curzon
Street House and at Metropole Buildings; Vehicle Branches at Metropole
Buildings and at Q.M.G. House.
