It was found necessary, therefore, for one second grade staff officer to be
charged with this responsibility at all times.
It is specially important that
this officer should be changed as seldom as possible,
since personal touch
with War Office branches, ordnance depots and local Royal Army Ordnance
Corps and Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers officers is a considerable
factor in the smooth working of the mobilization machine.
(iii) This second grade staff officer should have " Mobilization" as his
priority subject, to which all other subjects must be subordinated.
He should be allowed transport whenever available to enable him to
visit important or difficult units in the command during their mobilization.
He should invariably accompany the Inspector of Mobilization or other senior
officers from the War Office visiting mobilizing units.
(iv) A third grade staff officer to assist and understudy the second grade
officer was also found to be essential to cover sickness, leave or periods of
officiating in a higher appointment in the absence of the permanent
incumbent.
Command Ordnance Depots
(v) The system which was gradually developed during the war of expanding
the work of Command Depots to enable them to issue as many uncontrolled
stores as possible to mobilizing units was not altogether successful, owing to
continued shortages of many items.
The effect of this shortage was that, after some delay in checking lists with
Army Form G10g8 or other authorization, available items were assembled
for issue to units, and non-availabilities were listed and demanded from
Central Ordnance Depots, sometimes several depots being involved for
Thus the undoubted advantages of indenting upon and drawing from
Command Depots, which were in most cases considerably closer to units than
were Central Ordnance Depots, were largely offset by the subsequent
delays which occurred (in Command Depots) before deficiency lists of
non-availabilities could reach Central Depots.
To be completely successful, such a system demands a full complement of
stores, so that issues made from Command Depots can be practically 100 per
cent. non-controlled stores, which can be immediately replenished from
Central Ordnance Depots before stocks at Command Depots are unduly
depleted by further issues to mobilizing units.
This requires most careful
pre-vision and the earliest possible notice of forthcoming mobilizations in the
In point of fact, it was often found necessary to short-circuit
Command Ordnance Depots and revert to the original system whereby all
indents for non-controlled stores were sent direct to Central Ordnance Depots
for supply.
WO27T
28
WO217
1 Ф
CHAPTER VII-MOBILIZATION CENTRES
ORGANIZATION
General Centres
The importance of mobilization, which is reasonably well appreciated in
peace-time,
is apt to be lost sight of in war, after the initial activities of
general mobilization have been completed.
the situation which then prevails is somewhat different.
As already indicated at Part I,
Numerous units of
various types, which do not normally exist in peace-time, have to be raised
ab initio and prepared, generally at short notice, for service.
Such units
may include anything from the H.Q. L. of C. of an army and its sub-units to
a mobile bath unit.
Financial reasons and the dependence upon highly secret plans, not divulged
till the latest moment, preclude the formation of such new units until very
shortly before they are actually required.
The formation of a unit is in itself a complicated business, comprising the
medical inspection, equipment, immediate training and welding together into
a single entity of numbers of officers and other ranks, posted in from various
A newly-appointed commanding officer, possibly with no previous experi-
ence of command and with an inexperienced staff, finds himself confronted
with a sufficiently difficult task, when left to his own devices.
to these difficulties are added simultaneously the problems of mobilization,
the commanding officer and his staff, particularly on the quartermaster's side,
will certainly need constant advice and assistance.
It has already been pointed out in Chapter VI above that headquarters of
commands were inadequately staffed to give the full required assistance to
units during their period of mobilization.
war, but man-power considerations precluded any material increase of static
Other measures for assisting mobilizing units
The Command Mobilization Centre at Aldershot, which had been
instituted before the war for the purpose of mobilizing the numerous
units in the command required to be raised on general mobilization, was
taken over under War Office control in 1940 as a place of mobilization for
any newly-forming, or otherwise difficult, unit.
Later the Anti-Aircraft
Training Centre at Southend was adapted as a Mobilization Centre for
Anti-Aircraft units, but owing to its dangerous situation from enemy air-
bombing and its unsatisfactory location from the point of view of movement
of units to ports of embarkation, this centre had to be moved in 1942 to Leeds.
Considerable difficulty was experienced in obtaining adequate staffs for
Only officers and other ranks unfit for service in the field were
allowed to be utilized for this purpose, and when upgraded medically they
were transferred to more active employment.
notice, were a serious handicap, and difficulties and delays in finding replace-
ments added greatly to the problems of the commandants and their staffs,
who were required to work very long and irregular hours by the nature of
Units, or drafts to complete units, arrived at all hours of the
