Similarly, major changes during the actual period of mobilization can only
be justified in cases of extreme urgency.
If was found more satisfactory in
such cases
to complete mobilization on existing scales and to make the
necesary adjustments later, the date for completion of mobilization being
postponed for this purpose.
D.-A further problem affecting changes of War Establishments, etc.,
arose during this phase, vis., their application after completion of a unit's
mobilization.
The original intention was that no changes should be allowed, but as the
mobilization of First Army covered a period of some months, changes were
advocated by branches as a result of lessons learnt, recommendations from
General Officers Commanding-in-Chief, etc.
The standing instructions contained in " Unit Mobilization (War) " were
to the effect that mobilized units would automatically adopt a new War
Establishment, and its relative Army Form Grog8, unless orders were issued
To cover this situation it was decided that all new War Establishments
(published in typescript form) should contain the injunction
implemented without orders from the War Office."
had been mobilized on a different War Establishment, it had no authority on
which to implement a new War Establishment, without further orders.*
It was thus necessary for each case to be examined by the General Staff
(S.D.), and where implementation of a new War Establishment was desired
instructions had to be issued to commands and units concerned and also to
Central Ordnance Depots and Vehicle Reserve Depots to give effect to the
Clearly the best means of carrying this out was by amendment to the
original Mobilization Urgent Memorandum on which the unit concerned was
mobilized, but with the Mobilization branch working at full pressure, and
frequently long overtime, this additional task added considerably to their
It was found by experience during this phase that the question of establish-
ments, scales of equipment, etc., must be thoroughly explored before a unit's
mobilization and that, after a decision had been reached in regard to these,
no change should be authorized, except in very rare cases and for very
Personnel
A.- In the earlier part of this phase when units were being mobilized
without any immediate prospect of despatch overseas, errors or omisions in
the posting of personnel could be notified in good time and no serious resuls
Owing to the losses in France and disorganization after Dunkirk, com:
previous standards, and there were numerous complaints.
These had to be
carefully sorted out to discover which wous compled as being duc to bud
WO217
Moreover, in the case of men posted from active units, commanding officers
no doubt acted on the principle that " charity begins at home" and were
loath to part with good men to the detriment of their own unit, in case
mobilization orders were received for the unit after they had parted with
considerable numbers of their best men.
Unfortunately there was no finality to amendments and additions to the
Order of Battle of the Expeditionary Force, and War Office branches were
unable to give Record Offices a firm list of units not to be mobilized which
could safely be depleted by drafting men to mobilizing units.
It was found necessary more than once to impress upon commanding officers
ordered to supply drafts or individuals to mobilizing units the importance of
posting always the very best available men.
It is also important to remember that a unit once mobilized might be diverted
to some fresh plan of immediate urgency, requiring early despatch of the
unit overseas.
The principle of " first come, first served"
should therefore
be observed in the posting of personnel to mobilizing units.
B.-The divergence of opinion between medical officers referred to at
Chapter XI, Lesson C (Personnel) was again very marked.
Shortage of man-power dictated that every available man should be
utilized, yet the percentage of rejections by receiving units was very high, and
it was impracticable within a limited time (and with the shortage of medical
officers) to arrange for immediate medical boards to be held to resolve each
case, in which there was a divergence of opinion between two medical
It was usually found necessary therefore to accept the opinion of the
medical officer of the mobilizing unit and replace the individuals rejected.
This resulted in much extra work for all concerned and also considerable
delay in the completion of units.
The lesson derived was that medical categories must be elastic so as to be
capable of application to the particular duties in which the individual con-
cerned can be employed, e.g. batmen, drivers,
cooks, telephone orderlies,
etc., should be categorized individually and suitably to their respective tasks.
C. The problem of equipping individuals and drafts despatched to
mobilizing units was still very acute.
Personal equipment was in short supply and many non-active units were
equipped with leather or old pattern accoutrements.
It was a common
occurrence for personnel to arrive at mobilizing units shortly before the date
ordered for completion of mobilization, deficient of articles of clothing, boots,
etc., and with wrong pattern equipment and rifles.
This threw considerable
extra work upon the quartermaster's department both in units and in the
offices of the local Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services, who were
already fully employed with their normal mobilization duties.
Each case had to be investigated and where the supplying unit was found to
be at fault, disciplinary action was taken through headquarters of the command
concerned.
