- 35 -
preparing to
depart once more
the many and
was undrportant
Hence
out of
Doy,
no the suppl point for all unite
assisted by our
Op1.Hay had sustained a broken
SUITIGHt was the sone of our replendarment at 1030 les armi
Genrel Hospital at SULINGEN.
of a motor ayole astudent on the nigela journay, and vas nove tucked up in a
sunshine wore on,
carpleted by the najority during
and the nost inmediate duties having
on the wooded encampant during
an invonted silence descended.
had slamed and
tent-flaps haa
tie afternoon important duty of recoveride.
the doors of mobile boudoirs
sleep was in the process of being carcied out.
That was the form, the drill in
The cools had soarcely called the faitliful to tu
proclaime that tine Recoe Group had been called forth once more.
ed there would be un more until the next
tro to rested on tenterhooke e eden day.
wen an eruption of dust
though the more optimistic declar
In a sense they were right
or rather to vehicles,
Coy was moving out at the
had been the last Coy to move
During daylight moves we
the first to nove we started in the dark.
thus arriving in the dark,
and now that we werg
This move was to KROGE - an obscure hamlet set on
We seemed to loser in either case.
axemplified by the Lichten Moor,
the edge of heath country
and but a short distance from the HAMBURG-
HANOVER Autobahn about nine miles South-west of SOIlAU.
The joumey was a fast one by recent standards since the distance of thirty.
five miles was covered by 0530 hrs when we pulled into KROGE.
But to say that
it had been a snooth one would be a mis-statement since the road had been exten-
sively cratered especially round by bridges which vere, of course, usually
Our road lay through REtiM here, under the false dawn of a search-
we crossed the R-Aller, a tributary of the larger Weser.
bringing of the fast flowing river had been,
as always, vell and truly done.
To is generally only the larger briüges, such as those over the Rhino and Maas
which are publicised, but these lesser bridges are equally as important,
often far more difficult in proportion, sinco tho strength of a chain is that
of its weakest link, and so it is of course,
with roads.
Turning north over
the bridgo we looled back over the bleak sandy hoath and saw the winking lights
of tho convoy snaking into the distance like those of a popular seaside resort
the Light of dawn bringing
and DOREvARL were passed in rapid, suocession, with
FALLINGBOSTEL? the fields and woods into sharper relief as ve turned
left in the latter place.
The road varied between the brick rubble of the
aratered seotions, rough stone setts, and smooth gleaning macadem, but always
shaded by the laco-like millinery of
silver birch and linden.
KROGE lay in a shallow valley in this now undulating country,
and a collecti:
of farm buildings of pleasing deep-eaved architanture set amiast flowering tree:
and the shooting corn, made a picture of restful peace until our vehicles.
charged in and by their blend of khali made it one of var.
The Supply Point oponed shop at 0800 hrs,
and all units, eart from the
listant samin Area, roported with their faithful consistency as though they
had found a grocer who held daily bargein solas and, once registered, would
not give him up.
Here again io found the now foniliar posse of Russian and Polish, and Frenc
ex-POW and forced workers standing about vetching the sights of their libor-
ating Allies at work,
A mingling of Russian and Polish gils enriched the
local population of this INo Fratting" land.
At about midmorning it gave two Russion ex-POWs much satisfaction to
report that throe arned. SS men including an officer lurked hereabouts.
a very high-ranking motorised (two jeeps) patrol that set forth in search of
this desperate band, but on retum it looked a bit cressfallen since the
mackerel had proved to be but two miserable civilian-dressed sprats which
squirmed measily in the fast-hauled net.
But the alloged officor had elude
us with tho dortioss of an eel, the heel!
vener
ocument
25284
