Deny hiat
Гозлох silos1)
el sortere
as with the scent of
ali unita (excopt Aduin Aroa
rations
44eza at 0800
brotth of trinid or a
FISCAN 170B, today, Place enhanced by the fine day without a
fresh green and blossom
of Spring bursting forth on
Croes and ahruba.
The war seemed far i.
minty mid it soria diffioult to beltove
that but three days pret lous
Ceman paratroopers had bean
in this farm,
him a bitter and
blighted youth.
Merile the Division was pushing on for BRaVEN, where in company
with
for this great German port and u-goat base.
a conadest as tho busart fate", thus expected a tough light
13/12 AFR
Whilst striking advances were now being made
on the central
and southern sectors of the Western Front engulfing HANOVER;
BRUNSWICK,
and a scare of othar large German towns,
our Division wes
meeting fanatical resistance
and continuous donolitions on the
rpad to BREMET.
But slowly the enemy was being ground dova and caol
ay useful arances vere made and daily we expected to be ordered to
nove toward since already ve were nearly 40 miles behind our advanced
On both days the supply Point was hold as on the 10th in the
conparatively speaking,
a mainten-
weeks there had not bein much opportunity to givo attention to the main-
tonance of vehicles.
But whilst a lull in the speod of operations
gives some respite. to the transport platoons,
provided they are not
transferred to do third line work or
Corps, it does not mean that the
Coy as a inole enjoys a general holiday.
Just the roverse in feot.
During continuous movement of the Coy other work was necessarily
held up and a lull merely means that an opportunity to make up leo-wey
on such work is presented.
It will be obvious that Workshops, for instance,
are ablo to cairy
out the hoavier repairs turing frequent moves, since the unloading and
and setting up of the necossary equirment, takes considersole time, quite
apart from the period required to strip down the larger components to
prepare for work to be done to them.
Boots are always wearing out, and clothing does not get smarter ti
wear - hence a "restful" period means a flux of work for the cobblers
and the tailor.
The dark intricacies of Ary administration continue to weave new
patterns,
entailing additional returns, correspondence and often general
reorganization as a result.
livery nenber of the unit is a potential
source of work therefore to Coupay Office which is not, as some might
think, just a pleasant comfortable place in which to janglu away a day
under the benevolent protection of the Company officers.
During the
nours of 0300 to 0700, it is true that it usually is as calm and sereno
as a summer night on the river anjoying the atmosphere as of willows
dipping into cloar cool water, but thereafter it can become at any manent
convulsed into spasmodic or prolonged contortion.
A bad early moming
Liver can do much to disturb the serenity of life for a start, sending
a bustle through the misty norning air.
The staccato percussion of an
"Orderly Room" nay prelude a fanfere of strident notes, calling first
upon one or the other, or even all! Ensuing movements encompass mail,
consored and unconsored, coming and going; leave with its multitudinous
dircotives and anxious onquiries; pay, with allotments, runittancas,
income tax, crodits, pronotions and reversions; postings, Pickfords,
Pythons and all the other snakes in the grass.
These are but the usual
seotions to which must be added the operational items of maps, nessages
moves, and last but unfortunately by no neans last, the telephone
25284
vomer
