PHASE TY
27
1 AFR
In Britein BurBA
were arravinE
wes Buster
om this.
we bredictante
The
of a Bren gun
for the supply
afternoon
the dist
they said that
some bedreggled civilions one
BOCHOIN
they were Italien pod sore
be expeated with the
the collooting place for
a matter for some conjecture as to
Germieury -
population of Ger
How easy
changed overnight
is it for the
Lans begate prisoners of
rughing
as the
fortunes of Germany's
waters of despairi
pillars of ill-gained might are caug
At 1630 hrs Came the order for the Coy to move -
to BIGBURGEN
through liberated Duton territory, anâ in the place of the
the German
again the whiling feces
civilians to which we had lately
dul] anquiescente
become accustoned we satr
and orange be-decked
with a waving not of people gathered at every road
clothes of
the now happy Dutal
- the
sorambling for chocolate and the men looking hopefully for cigarottes.
GROHNLO was passed in the dork,
childrei
new location in fernyards and surrounding roads.
and shortly afterwards the Coy entered ita
2 APR
It seemed very work at 0700 hrs as the vehicles moved out to
Supply Point near our location,
the
but this was because of the change
to DBST (or Zone IB! time as ve knew it in the Army), during the night and
the dull rain-laden clouds of the morning.
Such news as we had of the Division's advance was that it was making
good progress towards the much-bombed DORTUND-EMS Canal, and BREEN.
Having issued one aby's compo rations at the Sup Pt.
Column proceeded to fums to draw the deficiency thus -ute.
our Replenishment
Late
in
the
day our officer strongth was returned to normal by the arrival of lieut.
Gordon RASC to take the place of lieut Stokes posted earlier last month.
Here was an old frlend whom we had known at THORNTON-LE DATE and whom we
were glad to welcome back.
This time he come more neavily burdened since
in addition to his second "pip!" he now had our "A" Platuun ta shepherd.
The location was compact consisting of farmyaras and the appropriato
The local populace vas glad to see us,
and we hoped that
although it was again an expensive time for cigarettes and chocolate,
the
welcome given us was more than "oupboard love",
We were now in a more
Northern part of Holland and the district was fairly well stocked with
1008.
Some of the people there had come from other parts of Northern
Holland less fortunately situated fron the point of food - one woman spoke
of having walked all the way from AMSTHRDAM - a journey which had taken
her a month to complete..
However, from the longing eyes cast in the
direction of the cookhouses it was clear that these people had been suffer-
ing considerable privation.
Despite this, after only three weels in
Gernany, it was good to be able to speak,
it only for the many in the
language of signs, to civilians once again.
By the disappearance of the Recce Group in its habitual headlong dash
down the road, we realised that our stay was to be a short one.
the members of the Recce Group had been admirers of the Shell advertise-
ment in peacetime days,
but whether or not that had been the case, this
little party headed by the Humber and followed by a jeep and several motor
cycles always noved as though the Hounds of Hell were at its heels, and
those in the rear had the greatest diffioulty in maintaining the necessary
norantu that probably thoso behind eriod Backf" in rupt to those in
In reversal of the quotation from "Horatius one could not help
front crying "Forward!"
But as it happened ve were to stay put for the night, and were to move
at, an early hour the following morning.
AFR
At 0600 hrs the Forward Supply Point column moved out to ENSCHEDE -
large Dutch town now groatly excited, for they had been liberated only
o previous day.
me Coy noved at 0630 is in heavy rain, but as due preparations had been
lo the night before all vehicles left the location without much aiffieulty
old Arabic saying "The dogs bark, but the caravan noves on" would seem
Zy appropriate to such an event.
pasche
TUN-
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
