A few miles South of GR. MECKRISEN a bridge carried our embanked road over
a stretch of the BREMEN-HAMBURG Autobahn,
the autobahnen and this was to be,
of course, heard much about
the first view of one.
c cut a catch a to thy la gianti nai gae road having doublo
line
traffic capacity.
The surface was good and. looked to be of bitten,
and.
from its glassy sheen it looked as though nuch tracked traffic had used it re-
cently though there was, at the time, not a single vehiole in sight on either
the long sweeping stretches visible from
It was quite true that
at this particular spot the Autobahn was no better, as some were heard to rer eik
than parts of the Gt.Norti,
Gt.west or other arterial roads in Britain put tho
great value of these autobanen lay, not so much in the quality of their con-
struction,
as in their corplete independonce of axisting road systems.
By pass-
ing all major tons it must have bean possible to move about the country at
high speed in pre-wer years with a dogred of safety unimown in our islands.
It is trite to remark that they were constructed primarily out of military
considerations;
that at the very, phase of the war when these
fine roads would have enabled defensive armies to be switched rapidly from one
threatened front to another,
the Reich possessed neither the oil nor the trans-
port to utilise them to moro then a fraction of their capacity.
Nevertheless,
oftor the hundreds of miles of indifferent side roads which, ie
had used for our offensive, ve could not help but look upon the autobahnon wit
envy.
On the eve of the fair month of May we found the Division withdraw from
offensive action and relieved by an infantry division, and it looked very nuch
being rapidly carved up.
Runours of an offer of Unconditional surrender were rife,
and it was, at least,
fact that in one last effort to split the Allies the genial Hirmler had offered
to surrender to Britain and Anerica to the exclusion of Russia,
this had been refused, but the eyes of the world were centred oin the journeys
of a certain Count Bernadotte of the Swedish Diplonatio Servico wao vas at this
time canying a portfolio of most interesting diounents.. Certainly the end was
very near.
At the sane time Coy Office was very busy checking the Age and service Groups
of all personnel in the Coy - a pleasant duty this, signifying as it die an
mortant step towards our retum to "civvy strcot".
in the carly days of the
war it had been a common adage of the now Any to deen an old soldier a number
of uncomplinentary characters, but not so now, for long service neant a nigh
place in the queue for the return home.
12AY The month opened with the news that Hitler and Mussoling vere dead!
This news, nich would have been classed as stupendous in the carlier
days of the war now left us quite cold, since the war had reached a stage now
were the lives of these two undesirables could have little or no bearing on
the course of the war in Europe..
Bigger and more important news was that of
the Unconditional surrender of all Goran forces in Italy and parts.
of Austria
to Field Marshal Alexander.
This force totalling a nillion men of all arns
and some of the best roamining to the Relad, had by their at provided concrete
evidence of the dissolution of Germany.
Even bigger news was expected, hourly
for it this stage of affairs anything could happen.
So far as our Division was concerned operations were totally unspectaoular.
Having neared the ond of the peninsular between the weser and the tibe we had
become what the Gerans might have called & "pockot division". Resistance"
was scattered and was provided by polyglot units of Marines, ss, and Hitler
jugend "scholars" - snall of body and equally small of mind.
it seened, as
though our mission under 12 Corps was completed, for today to returnea to our
alrost native 30 corps.
the morning nine of our lorrtes retured from detachment to 704 doy,
an in te supply point at 0900 his and the roplentshment from BASSOld curing
the morning, completed the Coy's military operations for the day.
Compo and.
Is rations were still being issued - parhaps soon all would be receiving
fresh rations!
inter breakfast Sgt.Dean and a posse of 1B' Platoon men were sent off
hood.
to SHADE to mount guard over wine stocks discovered in the neighbour-
These consistel of some 20,000 stiles of port, sheury ete which wero
to be sorted and distributed throughout the Division - some hovever on ropay-
mont since some was of private stock and not wehrmacht property.
That a pity
vene
ocument 25284
