32 -
Thich will lend its votos sit too Millingly to dry varth-hile crescendo
of the ganeral hello.
13 AFR
1 Trily 300t & rexrottablo note
was sounded eerly in the morn-
Fidenate of Ens
death
Érestlent Roosevelt;
an item of news which drew a crowd round each of the now, many radios
in
ase
#izroughout the
of the Replenishent Columa to ENSCHLIDE
even though Diy no had reporteals
dom frat a great heigit
to as the sin teached to penetra
Taken totally marces the viotin struggled under his all-enveloping alaw.
There were many octins and goings to and from
the erstwhile parade
ground - sote arriving under
inutes after the sands of tie
a Dador assorted and fumblod kit some
had run
What dignity was noir conferred upon the humble accessories of milit
arg entistence!
blacking
had now become
objects of dismay and even terror
to
hold aloft
in
their left,
or
was it right,
handl Holders of Ointment,
anti-gas,
No. 2 vere spurned in lavour
of those possessing the "lucky
blue" N8.5.
therein contained were,
albeit stoutly
ienied in the affeated quarter,
that the objects in
question had been
orried from none other than the "g" himself for this sudden contingency
In the evening,
whilst
the Mobile Cinena Section was erecting its
apparatus for a film show in an extremely odorous barn
(which gave suit
able atmosphere to the Western bring shown),
, W/shops Platoon had the
pleasure of exhibiting
the glories of its individial kits.
The 14th April was a quiet,
uneventful day and differed, only fron the
provious two or three in that a Forward Supply Point vas hold at BERGE,
a village some twenty or so miles along the road to BRaiNT-
Admin units was held in the Coy location whore the usual fresh rations
were issued.
It now appeared very likely that the Joy would move forward on the
morrow, for the Recce Group had been told to hold themselves in readiness
to move off at 0700 hrs in the morning.
two more film shows were given during the evening, the film being
"Meet the People" and the auditoriun was, as on the previous evening,
barn adjoining the Burgomasterts house.
watch a filn in the company of oows and one large disconsolate bull.
On this next nove the milm unit was to travel in our convoy; this
was a new practice, making our colum nore "cosmopolitan" than over as
we now had Signals, RAOG, and RE as well as our own vehicles.
At 1800 hrs a further Supply Point for Admin units was held whereby
the rations which would have been issued on the following day for oon-
sumption on the hext were issued in advance because of the impending
move;
PHASI XVII =
"HER PHINVOTE AND OLFIRS
15 AIR The Recce Group swirled out of the far gates at 0730 hrs.
It
was now the custon for Sgt.Watson to travel forward with this
Group as he acted as interpreter for the 0C in arranging billets in new
areas, and making such sajustments with the civilian population as was
necessary. Often it was politio to remove the civilians fron certain
buildings and areas required for the Coy's use.
In these areas there
were very few English-speaking peopla and thus his services becane inval-
uable.
A Forward Supply Point had been seat on to BAKUM, south of CLOPPIN-
BURG, just after breakfast in order to open there at 1000 hrs, with pack
rations in issue for the forvard units.
At 1100 hrs the Coy moved out to the new location which proved to be
aIso in BAKUM. The mute lay via snall villages,
which purely for acad-
omic interest were Essen, Beverne, and Berge, but these were so small as
not to be shorm on any but large-scale naps. BAKUM was but a for milos
veel War
Museun
ocument 25284
