flak bursts.
Soveral Stirlings wore
to crash on their roturn
jouney,
and several, pilots and
airboro RASO supply tien reported to the
Coy for
night's sleep
and transport to rear areas.
A heavy
RAP
Transport
Carinaud and the ist British
Airborne Division for
the gallont
stand
that was being made at AnTHEM.
US Dakotas continued to drop supplies to the Miericon paratroops near
the
doy location,
abortive ate agent to on
increased scale
those doys and many
"Gronadier"
and Grave Briages were made.
Enemy
jet-propellod aircraft were heurd but
were most aifficult to pick out
with the open eye,
British Terpost fighters were now making their appear
ance over
the area
and several
đc.
fights wero witnossed.
But,
late of
the weather was poor
and it seemed as though the
to reach the MENHEM Bridge
sealed,
despite most detemined efforts
in strength.
By now a lorge number of Germon
prisoners had been collected and were
assembled ready to transport back
should becone open
to
BOURG
TROPOLD as soon as the road
again.
This
tronsport
together with the necessary
escorts for the prisoners was supplied
by
224 Coy and its two sister Coys.
Furthermore,
the outting of the road had meant the cassation of both in-
ward and outward mil for he whole force
in the NIJMEGEN arca,
and. when
finally the road was opened and the APO came up,
the accumulation of mail
was sorted and sent book, togother with the prisoners.
one vehicle carry-
ing prisonors wos hit by a Gortion mortax,
killing tho driver as well as
some of the prisoners.
Ivi. Baird was wounded at this time and was sent
back
to "Blighty" to recover:
He later rojoined the Coy.
PHASE VII - "GLIDERS"
23 SHe
During
the norning Coy HQ was noved out of the opon fiells into
an
orohard a littlo further up the road towards GRAVE. But this was by no
moans the important event of the day.
At about 1700 hrs a tenuous sky-train of Dakotas towing gliders was
seon approaching fron the South-west and it was with sone surprise that
we saw the gliders dotached over the
low over the fiolas and heügos
location and to come circling down
to cono to rost in the fields all round
our far.
They proved to bo an inerican brigade of ruinforcaonts, and from tho
defansive/offonsivo positions they took up on du-planing showed that they
nistook us for enomy troops at first.
Later they said that they had been
told that they would be landing in enory hold territory, and thus had not
expected British troops to be so far forvard.
They were cheerfu ly tol
that there wore nore further forward; and arter unloading their jeeps
and anti-tank guns in a viry short spaco of time they were to be seon
narching away to their appointed rondoz-vous - laving thoir gliders
scattered by the score like giant thrysalis ovor the flat Dutch fiolas.
Conposite Platoon had now discovered a bettor bulk-breaking placo in
this locality; whilst supplios were still being drawn fron oss.
During this period tho volicles which had transported the
prisonors to BOURG LEOPOID had linked up with our Workshops Platoon,
and had returnod, with Adnin Area colum, loadod with supplies. The
road was now finally open, the flanking fornations having now completed
their difficult task of clearing the country to sone dopth on eithen
side of the road, but thoirs had not becn a rapid or comfortable joumey
sinco they had been 54 hours in making the journey as against our oarlior
27, and thoy spoky of tho large nuber of destroyed "soft" vohicles lying
at the side of the roads in the VEGHEL scotor.
But the fooling of isolation was gone.
The nowspapers from howe brought up by tho APO showed that the
Division had "hit the nows", and the work of the RASC during the recent
operation had been vory favourably commentad upon.
Everyono folt good
about that, for there are few who are innuno fron the fueling of pride
at "seeing their none in the papor".
A Goran train had bour liscovored on a siding at NIJMEGEN and tho
news guidily tavallod.
It was not surprising therefore that several
usoful oddments fron tho train found thuir way into the doy's possession..
On the ovoning of the 26th enony aircraft droppud flares overhead
and it sconed as though some boribs would follow suit since it had been
difficult to canouflago the vehicles in such open country.
However,
it appoared that the Hun was looking for tho GRAVE bridgo and on seoing
tho black and whito stripos on the adjacont gliders realised his mistako
for, after dropping two bonbs a little way off and dropped flares over
vener
