PRELUDE
-....
Darn it still to hours way and it is dark and wet under tine
beeches of the long tristing drive sloping down from
the main roail to
the 11s11.
Soones for a film about tho.
Sudanese war had been made here they
but this is a
Inter war which has already lasted nearly fiva years.
Through the stillness cohes, a roaring sound.
It is coming from
a Nissen hut under the troes Where a light
A white-clad
What is this?
A cookhouse?
And cooking so early?
Now lights have appeared in otner huts,
and voices - gruff sleepy
voicos - float through the dam June noming ax.
in the valley this time.
That would be the Hall.
Diin figures can now be seen running about with
shoulders - the camp is astir!
Ah! These noisy fellows must be NCOs - must be
oarly yet for Sergoduts! The tiny clang of ness-tins proclains
anticipation of the efforts of the lark-like cook.
Let's move down to the Hall. - perhaps the sano is happening there.
But it is quito a way don the hill and wo aro in time to see heavily
I-don figures making for vehicles standing like green ghosts with
whito-starlike eyes under the fresh-green trees.
Carry my kit over to your "aggon."
yesterday evening were not good for his liver.
Starter motors whirr, engines splutter and settle to a roar in the
warming-up process.
To the acoompaniment of shouted orders these khali-
olad figures are forming up in threes and shortly disperse to the waiting
A car roars past, and a North Country accent piorces the general hun
of activity.
Doors slam, engines "rev" and the car noves off up the
hill lolloved by the vehicles from under the trees.
Slavly they pass round the comer towards the Parl gates - one, two,
tree, four - count is lost as motorcycles roar past.
The last vehicle
isappears through the snoke from the charcoal-bumers' fires, the sounds
row fainter and finally silence reigns as the dawn struggles through the
ning rain.
The cook raturns fron the doorway of the cookhouse to his fire.
Ily good luck to than" says he, thoughtfully and slowly stiring the
ridge.
"And who wore thes, and where were they off to?" asies our enquiring
d.
ntis,
"That was the first part of 221 Coy - off to Franco" mumbles the cool
as if in answer to our thoughts ..
