- 16 -
the nable of November it appeared as though
this
ad beoome more ox less statio for the Winter:
at tre get we too slott
ently wet and all ground apart
fron the netalled roads was more or
Leas
waterlogged,
Altoguther a rather dreary diatriot at this season of the
to the Division,
and by the third weele of the
month it was moving out and the Canadians were coming in.
FIASS IX - "FRONTLIRS"
this cold wet day the Coy
moved out of KRISPORT to travel South via
in Belgium on the West bank
Weal-Phine -
aifferent names for the same geographloel
a little confusing at first - it was mainly
* oase of "when in Rome
Going as Rome doeg" - we should not have to be
careful of our international etiquette when we reached. Germany.
DILSIN had boon liberated by the
Americana several, weeks before,
the first British troops to enter the
place, and during our
tha Coy beoame very populer with the Dilsonalse who did us many kindnesses.
This
was
the first time that
the whole of the Coy was to be billetted in
private
that was fully appreciatod.
The
thent on the village was shattered, and many
windows
by a heavy artillory barraga put down by largo-calibre British
guns on German positions East
the Meuse some 5 or 6 miles away.
and it appears that the building had
previously been a meeting place
Coy to Waited hot col member as the "Armeo Blancha -
since
at all hours of the day and night they would arrive for instructions.
They
event
in the village and during off-duty hours
slept happily in
some of the "o"'a blanicets.
supplies were being drawn fron the Md at EYSDEN - a large colliery
Just to the West of the MAESHYCK-MAASTRICHT main road - which was also
site of the Mobile Bath mit.
If the Coy had boen Carter Paterson's it could not have recoived more
requests for transport from small traders in the vicinity, for Belgium
in common with all the other liberated territories had beon almost entirely
denuded of transport by the enemy, and such railways as were working were
naturally being used to capacity for military purposes by the Allies.
Heath Robinson contrartions as romained on the road were as pathetio as thoy
were Laughable to BRUSSELS - he was passed on to aivil Affairs who doubtloso
Ono little man was particularly anxious to transport 10
refered him to somobody elsel
Division had lost n!
time in sotting up a very comprehensive Divisional
Club in GLEEN on tho athor side of the river,
and on attending the very good
shows that they put on there it came as a shock on the first cocasion to
hear the Dutch national anthom played at the conclusion of the performance
as one is not in the habit of going into another country for an evening's
ontertainment.
Wo Inglish with our ingrained insularity are inclined,
to regard the arossing of a frontier in much the same light
th a man once tune in a train, but in practico io found it was
not so - an oxperieno: which should be benoticial to the "man-in-the-street»s:
outlook on the post-war turopean scene.
At this time the majority of the Division was on the other side of the
river, some boing in Holland and some in Cornany, for here at the neck
of the "Maastricht Appendix" the three countries wore very closoly related,
and with the louse bring in flood the availability of the BERG Bridgo for
traffie becane nore and moro doubtful each day, and many varethe occasions
when our coluns travolling to the forward Supply Point hold daily in o
had to make a considerablo detour by way of the bridges at MAASTRICHT.
although the BBP was woll situated in school buildings in DILSaN tho
transport diffioulties caused by the fast-flowing Meuso constituted e
large fly in the Sur ply ointreut.
24 NOV Thus on the noming of 2, Nov the Coy was ordered to move across
the Meuse (which no. ' became the Mass onco more!) and the Juliena Canol
(the bridgo over th. ls high-dyked waterway being Inown as the "Double-Dutck.
and took up its quertors in the Fertilizer Factory of the Dutch State
Mines near GELEEN.
These industrial plants were not fully working since
the Gormans in their rotreat had taken away with them a vital link fro
the productive oyoilo of the factory - a small quantity of platinun used.
as a catylist in to chenical reactions required for the manufacture of
this important ito: n in Dutch agriculturo. At the moment the comprossion
and storage of nit: rogen was the chief activity here.
есип
