- 19 -
The crossial and re-crossing of frontiers,
with the accompanying
was a headache
to that. shadowy
"Bao-Rool Boy"
tine
Field Cashier,
and
Large
staff of one.
it often
happened that parts of the Division vould
Like the man on the
Take the ten nothe si But
diretoulties he seamed to surmount
the doy accounts also.
in currenay complicated
Hrench and Belgian
to be resolved ultimately
and later Geruan Marles 2130;
reds into a begue to an englisin bank.
Then the Coy had originally passed
out of France into Belgium the
accounts were
triumphantly closed some
that Frence and her
two weeks later, with the knowledge
vere finisned with so far as the doy was
ations.
anossed it wat therefter the per
the process of frontier hopping caused complio-
requirements on many
occasions,
that the Coy would be paid in Dutch our
rency
and
later it would move into Belgium and be pooren
than church mice
as a result.
This was probably the nysterious
cause of "Dortor" Joll's remarkable
loss of hair in recent weeks,
and his persistent irritability in dealing
with his unfortunate
The dispositions of the coy in WILDEREN were to be only temporary,
for the noment Coy IQ was ensconced in the front room of a small house in
very cramped conditions;
Platoon had some farm buildings
their BRP
whilst "A" and "B" Platoons were soon settled in
many private houses
roads.
They
were to stay thus for several weeks during which time the
personnel of
these platoons nade many good friends.
Workshops had unloaded very little of
their equipment anticipating,
rightly so, a shift to better accommodation.
22 DIC HQ, Composite,
and Worlishops Platoons moved into the large LEAU
some three miles to
the West.
A large mill in the
town provided excell-
ent accommodation for the BBP, and an adequate traffic route existed round
the nill for drawing units.
Composite and IIQ Platoons were billetted in
a nunnery where they were shown many kindnesses by the Mother Superior and
Sisters; others were billetted in private houses in the town.
Coy HQ was
situated down by the railway station in a forner Guest House - this was
also the site of the Officers' Mess.
At first sight this building appeared
to have a very convenient central heating system,
but on closer inspection
it was found to be more central than heating since the boiler possessed
an irreparable crack.
The Coy was now well spread out but being comfortably accormodated and
adequately connected by telephone by the never-resting Cox and Howell, it
settled down fpr Christnas and Winter with a capital "w".
We were now just within the belt of the enemy's forward diversionary
operations which consisted of the dropping of soldiers, agents and sabot-
eurs by parachute well beyond the flanks of his Western Offensive.
agents, though dressed often in American uniforms were quickly rounded up,
and many on being questioned admitted to having no set plan to carry out.
However these parachutists were being continually reported in the vicinity
and the Coy maintained strong guards and road blocks on all the roads in
its "sphere of influence".
Apart from one or two searching patrols sent out
by lamin HQ no incidents occurred.
In the neighbouring town of SI.TROND
however, a nunber of these people were rounded up by the Americans,
and
one worning our supply vehicles on their way to draw from the BSD at
THSSZNDARLOC neat DIlOT sai a German entaier calmly wallcing down one of
the busy streets, to be taken a few minutes later by the Americans.
A cold spell of unbroken frost was quick to descend a day or so after
our arrival in THAU and we, lile the rost of western Hurope, were to
experience one of the coldest winters for many years.
It made one realise
the trials and tribulations of the indefatigable infantry fighting Rundst.
offensive to a standstill in the Ardennes further South.
But Christmas was at hand, and it always having been the policy of the
Coy, whilst in England, to provide a big communal Christinas dinner for all
personnel, it was determined that this record should not be broken.
Hence arrangements were made with the Anericans in ST. TROND for the
taking over of a large hall in their area for Christmas Day in which to
hold the dinner.
Accordingly, Capt.Bed ord with a legion of helpers
sallied forth to get things organized. As a result, when the Coy arrived
at the hall on Christmas Day it found a ver good dinner ready for serving
usechn
mpene
ocument 25284
