6 122
The
Осту
Rep lohl stiment
afternoon tolled
otherwise
everyone seened. a
1ttle
sxprised at
sinos they had
expeated a udghty lash forwra;
but the Division was
beting considerable
ras stinging
the
emerty hard,
This was really all to
good since
the Allied object was primaily
the destriction or
the German
samed fordes rather than
conquest of territory,
and the Parachute formations
opposing
were losing hewily in the hopeles strune immedlate
at home of
giving British fomations
publialty
had brought
the Division bafore the eyes
friends on
many oocasions
and enabled them to follo with nore
than usual accuract
our present route.
During the woning "Batt's Cafel provided the unit with a Whist matre
in a marquee specially erected for
furniture transport-
ed from a German atore in ITCHDHORN.
the purpose, usht that perhaps wo might
It was thought
nove the next day.
7 AFR
0300 hrs saw the BBP resomoling Covent Garden once again with all
not beat a tet teles other then Admin, drawing in to
the Supply Point.
Also in the wide dry farmyara as workshops, who with all the rocent
moves delaving the
complation of the larger repair
jobs, were making an
early start in
the hope of catching up with some of their arrears of works
The
hun of dynemos and lathes, the clanis of metal and the olant of spanners
mingled with the roar of engines being.
tested were familiar enough sounds.
workshops were al ays busy since the shorter life of war-times engines and
transport equipment neaded continuous nursing
to maintain the best possible
standard of efticlency:
and the use of leaded petrol kept
the valve-grinders
particularly busy.
Those generators and chargers acquired at ENSCHEDH
were still not working
to perfection apparently since they still attracted
a smol] knot of tinkering fitters and electricians.
The humping of paoks on the Supply Point had hardly ceased when the
Replenishment Column arrived from ISSIBURG with more paces for all units
a ther
"than Admin who wore to anjoy the privilege and comparative luxury of
fresh rations by their issue on the following day's Point.
By afternoon the cold air of the wonds had been warmed by the bright
sun sending a lifo-bursting light through the shaded groves, and many of
the lads were to be seen busy about domostic activities. Equipment was
boing cleared, the "malls" ware bains washed to a soldior"a what the
jobs of painting on vohscles and tents ere being completed.
woods were quiet and no wind stirred the green-tipped branches - nor were
there yet any inhabitants of the bird boxes which seuned to, hang from every
trunk.
A Forvard Supply Point was sent out at C800 hrs to SUDIOHNE - a few
miles short of LiNe, and the Point for raining units followed in the
BBB an hour later.
Mail was distributed at 0900 hrs and with it the neispapers from
home dated ith April bearing long columns on the Division's operations in
breaking out or the Rhine briagchead - the "Daily Mail" even going so for
as to print a life-sized "Hye" shoulder flash on its front page.
been accustomed to a complete blackout on individual formation's perfora-
ances in the newspapers and on the BBC the new departure of giving such
comparatively detailed inforation was nost surprising, ana one coula al-
most imagine that sif James Grigs in a formal sutting of red tape had
bariced "Go the whole kos,
blow the gaff, let all' now be revealod!"
But it was heartening that this should be possible since it showed
perhaps betier than anything else that the enemy was now in no position
to bonofit his nilitary dispositions fron such definite information.
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
