- 41 -
the Coy location in HOLLMTBECK Tas a
trifle more built-up than of late, but
although doy HQ could boast of a school, host of the accormodation was still fom -
ou by far buildings of this nigay aprioultural disurict.
6 MAY The Supply Point for oll units was hold in the doy location at 0900 rs.
Replenishment of bread only was made from BiSSA since a reduction of oco
dayto holding in second lihe was being effected.
The Div sion had established a Thoatre in STADa weere a concert party
who styled themsolves "The Io? liners" gavel two snolis each day for three successive
days.
te recoived, a snall daily allocation for these snows.
The twenty-odd milur
journey to STADE was quite a plesant one though over very bad roads and numersua
Baileys.
The ton itself had not been damaged since the Burglaster had surront-
ood the town loy telephune to our Division, and the sight of such a town filte
vita civilians (ant plenty of prisoners and ex-prisoners) was as recreational r
the show itself,
The Mobile Bath unit was also situated in this town,
so all
told we had quite a number of vehicles plying daily between our location and the
town.
The evening of the oth was narred by an unfortunate accident just near the
Joy location when a jeep containing an officer and two suldiers were blown up bi
a mine.
0p1. Joll, the chief unit medico,
hastened to the scene and rendered
First aid before the Medicol Officer arrived.
It was still dangerous to travôl.
far from the beaten track since odd mines tere dotted all over the countryside.
"wore true and that vir Churchill would be speaking on the horrow.
In the eve.t,
it was stated definitely that the following day would be "victory in burepo Desi
or Vul-Day as it was sloganised.
This was excellent news and ve were naturally
very pleased.
But somehow it came as an anti-climax - perhaps it was because
we had been expecting this news for so long.
Firstly thero had been tho sun-
render in Italy and then in in burope - all only a week or lass ago, and taus ta
neis of final complete lnconditional Surrender cane just as a nattei of fact.
It was not at all as we had expectod it, but that is so foten the way, anticip-
ation forms a large part of the event itsvlf.
work was going on norally.
luring the evening "B" platoon lett
conlete to carry out a big detail in the conveyance of Naval personnel frot.
VERDEN to OUXHAVEN.
Also we heard that our final rendezvous was to be in the
- CUXHAVEN area at OINENDORF.
The Division was already noving thither and we
- empected to follow suit on the 96h.
Our job, and a big ono, would bo to take
over an eney food dump and feed therefron the complete 7th German Parachute
Division which had lad awwn (albeit very unillingly) their ams in that region.
The Geran ex-troops would be using horse-dram transport, and Gernan civilian
labour would be utilised; this was welcone since now te were to revert to a Coup-
osite do and woul be dealing in petrol ant aummition as well as supplier, and
there would be amle worl to keep thase Gennans busy.
PASE XX -E DAN"
We hot eten tened tia ather a Quisling, bus it must be anitted that it.
_d its bust for VI Day, for the historio uth May was bathed in day-long sun,
not a cloud in the sisy, and not a breath of wind noved through the trees.
Дле
Jay horonised with our spirits, for despite the war against tepan, it was as
though a great ugly burdon had been lifted fron the world.
/part fion the impeccable weather and the inner rejoicing within ovary heart
this day vas not punket by any external dirfurenco from cy of the thruo hundred
and thirty-odd days
hich had passed sinco "n" Day the previous June. The Suppla
Point end noplenisiant continuod, as did all the other hundred-and-one jobs in
the Coy.
The Regimental Policeman stoud as inexpressivoly as ever at his post,
the sanitory man continued with his thanicless and unthankod tasks, the fitters
out-
rel of.
need to mention it by name, for it was Demobilization.
None were, under any
misepprehansion as to the speud of their reluaso, for this tine contrary to
orla Var I, complete arrangenents hind been madle and 211 knew more of lusa whore
they stood.
It was the Age and service Group now which mattered above all
things.
Tho fathur of all within the doy in this important matter was
Driver most Foster - he warrants his nong in full - with the glorious Group
iber of 9, N0.9 vas always associated vith spoody release in the Amar aguayl
Musec
ocument 25284
