The following noming doy li9 noved
SO ATOR Of S2.D2TIS MATSOLOTIES,
everal miles further forwerd t
in thp
b witndrew to fomer praitions lat
vorle of a clamoal natito sinco
Ino formira location lad proval alost imposaible fo
25-p0s suns were putting over a continum
of TIRE.
samage - firing tron a fou indred paris to the rear - on the enery ac
Te haa beaton the guna to it, 8o
to
speak.
vere not to rejoin the Coy until the nade
behind in
the SATEiT location
Fron
hove.
the ViRS area were strading along the roads,
Large numbors of reite
pitiful bundles of bodding ana salvaged possessiona.
together with their
5 AUG The dos moved again todar - this tine to a forner anary Ho in st
DELIS MAISOLCITIES, Whore it was again jodnod by Workshops.
Platoons were mier canvas in sunsund
opon fiold.
orchards, witir the BBP
in an
The Supply Point was hold dail in the Coy location.
A
lorge mber of eno. stragglors vas reported to be in a big wood near
and on receiving a roport ira: a civilian that several more
Germans ha?
been seen making thoir way into the wood, a searching patrol under Lie
Cocquerel and OSy Sutior was organisod and sallied forth.
Horrevor,
tils proved an abonturo astarpt because of the graat size of the mood
anl the small numbers of the search
party,
went in the next lay and mde a roal job of it.
Iwo companies of infantry
An enany, motor-cole
found near the Coy location Was rendered sorviceable again and the Pos
Corporal was to be seen careering triumphantly about his businoss at
helm,
Meanwhile,
the let round the large Gorman forces in the FATATe
ARGHIVIAN pocket was being draw tighter,
and many were the opinions a
prossed by unit amichair critios regarding the possible military con-
ances of such a state of affairs.
They vere soon to find out by fact.
On one such day as this Due-Louis, a DR on Composite strengta tho
been detached to 153 Fi Regt RA for sone weeks,
turned up with a tale
woe and not a little shaken.
His woa, as causod primarily by the loss
of lis money and sone porsonal affoots, and socondly by the destructio:
his notor-aycle.
The circunstances were that on 3 Aug whilst with 153
in a forard section IT of vind a colum of half-tracks and se guns whic..
he was accorpanying were baily anbusted by enemy Panthers. His motor
cycle, from waich he had te porarily lotached himself,
bacare very closui
associated with an 88 mn sholl. and emerged mich the worse for this
involuntam encounter.
10 AUG Through the hilly wooded country of the Bocage the coy moved t
the afternoon to a ne.. location in an orchard and open fields borderin
the Rivor VIRD nOar MABANDIRRE, 2004t 3 miles North of VIRE.
The
beautiful weathur, combined mith the pleasant surroundings, mado out
stay here a happy one.
It was perfectl, quiet from an enemy point of
viow, and in spita of the large anount ou work which the doy vas doins
in the way of Divisional servicos, many were able to tole advantage oi
the fine weather and besport themselves on occasion in the river. Ene
Coy was not ablo to enjoy exclus-ve ocoupational nights here since ve
ore sharing our location with an Andy Dos RASC (which as it happened
was undor the cormand of Major Stewant no was well-imow to the Oor)
which was feeding the guns of 8 AGRA.
supplies were being drain fron
BIVY BOCAGE with the Supply Point in the open fields by the river.
This was the native lani of Calvados,
a fiory spirit which the for o
distilled in plenty. Thoy vere in the habit of inviting ou lads to a
dainli, who, ignorant at first of its potentialities, were inocised for
six before they realised it.
About this tito there cane into operation a portablo shower bath for
the uso of tho Oor, concoived in the ninds of the fitters attached ta
HQ Platoon.
This proved a great success and a boon to the unit as e
inole.
with that pride would Aanin HQ be infored that the Coy woule
not need the Mobilebath allocation in view of the Coy using "privato
facilities". During tis hot dusty weather, bathing becane a mattor of
even greater impontance than usual and many fors of individual ingenuit.
directed to a sinilar end vero in evidence.
Another rather extraordiner
affair was a petrol and oil cooker produced for the use of the Officers
Moss. As a result of hearty effortg of sue of the Con's hiddon resur
of carpenters, the less was now situated in a sectional structure which
gave both nobility and comfort,
In due course its walls becano adorned
rich largo-size coricatures of the Mess MenDers by ost sutter.
Pila shows fore provided in and noor the Coy location by Aks - the
chief films being "Story Weather" and "Randon Harvest",
It was just
the reverse of a "randon" harvest that was being gathured from the "Tol
The LADO
