- 38 -
So far as the licquers, were concerned - these
included Martell Brandy, and
D. O.M. Benedictine - a linited distribution vas made.
sucli an event is a good
instance of the change in values which circunstances of war can effect.
Here
was a bottle of Benedictine - a trivial thing by its untaxed Continental status -
which in Britain before the war was one
luxtries of life to which the
average working man night aspire but seldon achieve.
He would ragard it as
something special,
one of the hidden and perhaps
lofty enjoyments of life,
which
in his mind he would associate with great moments - his wedding feast perhaps or
a very special Christis party, bui not in any case a thing to bo talen lightl
anidst widespread destruction and appaling socicl
conditions a bottle, or a portion of it,
falls right into his hands.
Divorced.
fron its usual env conment of gleaning silver, polished nahogany,
and scintill-
ating glass, it is drunk fron a tin mug, whilst sitting on a bale of straw
surrounded by refugees, diseased children,
and the stench of concentrated hunsi
ity.
for all its cheapness of gain,
which will have tasted better aid
given more satisfaction, this, or that precious flask-size bottle sipped lux-
uriously on Christmas Day or aniast the congratulations of gathered frienus?
26 APR This quiet day opened with replonishment fron SOtRAU at 0830 hrs tolle -
ed at 0900 hrs by the Supply Point in the BBP.
Whatever was happenins,
supplies like the show, must go on - that was our job whatever the
other trimings might be, that was why we were there.
But even so, at times,
especially like the present.
there were nore vehicles engaged on other deteilis
he Division and Corps than there were on actual supply work,
The pace seemed to have slaciened however, and no longer dia ve feel that a
nove was likely at any noment.
The urgency with which the Reece Group had
left at 1130 hrs to seck a location just North of the BREWIN-HAMBURG Autoba'n
was belied by later information which said thore would be no nove for two days;
and in any case the new location was no more than fifteen miles away - "mere
chicken feed, hardly worth it!" some said.
During the afteroon the Mobile Film Unit arrived, and with it reels of
Abbott and Costello who, for no apparent reason,
Harem, and a more graceful "Belita" forning the subject of "Lady, let's
Dance".
Thank you very much, we should very much have liked to do so.
opl i/c Belita was rather a disillusioned man, for in his capacity he came
ard up against individual thought wherever he went,
an's neat was very much another man's poison, and he was ready to receive-
anything from bouquets to brick bats from his audiences, and he could never be
sure which it would be.
rades since they had done much to entertain us from Normandy to Germany.
often wondered what the "Tommy" of the last var would have thought of the con-
ditions such as we knew, but as cach generation must find its own happiness?
perhaps they were as happy in improvising for thanselves as vere we in gulping
down the canned products of our time.
27 - 30 APR During this period replenisment fron the Fid at SOlfAU ocourred.
each morning at 0830 hrs, with compo and
HER being drawn on each
occasion and also ou each morning the Supply Point for all mits vas held in
the Coy location, at 0900 lors.
But ilst conditions within the Coy migit have remained fairly quiet at
this ting the vehicles attached to 704 Coy were covering a great nileage and
their drivers were getting little rest.
The journey fron the Divisional area
down to the UK railhead at GuNNe was a long one of approximately 280 miles
over indifferent roads. Each trip took neerly 24 hours, so our drivers were
more or less living on the job.
The result was that drivers and vehicles had
to be changed friquently.
So it was that whilst six three-torners returned fron
704 cor on 27th, nire vere sent back there on the following day.
At this two,
however, the route was altered and leave personnel for the uk were travelling
via. OSWABRUCK.
We heard too, that the railey was being extended fron GINaP
to UNSTER and possibly later to OSABRUCK.
That would be a welcome innovation
since leave personnel were now leaving the unit four days prior to their sailing
date, and that coupled with the increased leave allotments now being received,
was placing an appreciablo strain on unit nan-power.
Not that anyone would
have dreaned of complaining of that for the cause was of the best.
During the afternoon of 28th the Coy moved out from WISTERVESHDE and travelled
North for about 20 miles to the new location recced two days previously at
GR.MECKEISZN, This was, as usual, a snall village consisting of scatterod
ferms, and the Coy layout was very much the sane as countloss others in Germary,
emal War
Musecun
ocument 25284
