- 36
Bosides tids iplendid sonteement tila recording of the arrival of tino
coplenisent doltm fron the not distent pub as salmoal is matter of-foot
indoeu.
But no would hure expected that dring
provido a remarkable surprise, in the
the night
the HQ, guard shoula
capture of a Certian Todt worker who was
indiscreet enough to
tread the beat of the guard?
the rapter-like challenge
of Dur. Parlett pieroed the blackness of the nigit and the inapsacied hiker
stuttered his
domine Toply, ond, as we should have said, "was wheeled in a
bit sherpish".
20 AFR
The despatch of thas person,
a Tere lad of airteen on o, as delayed
through the
operational nocessities of Sgt. Jenidnts slender ataffed
coolihouse - a large pile of ingoeled potatoes!
It was all very well taking
those prisoners but their disposal was alwaya a diffioult matter - a large
bunch of thirty or nore would
Have been easy enough but no-one was really
interested in odd ones and tuos.
we saw the Sgt.liojor this noring.
That was nothing terribly exciting
of course,
but on reflection we roalised that we
hadn't seen him for days.
He was heard to murble something about their being a lot of Yanks in BRUSSElS.
He looked ver tired we thouglit - but of course it had been a long Journey.
On
this day and the folloing
the weather was cold and wet,
with frequent
hail showers - it seens that the April of western Germany is as contrary as
that of Britain.
If fact,
the weather tre had experienced during
the
previous six months on the
Continent all led come to the concrusion that
Britain's weather was not the queer oddity
that we had always boen led to
believe.
Naturally enough,
when the British had visited the
Continent before
the war
and few probably had
it had usually been during the hotght of sier it had been an except.
seen tliose countries inder wintry conditions.
Perhaps
ionally cold and wet winter but there vere none in the coy who would forget
rain and mud of Holland for instance.
So it was that apart from the weather,
to found the countryside for it
the cointside with which we had been chiefly concerned so far having seen no
large arman town - very similar to that of our native land with the rich groon
of its fields and the gontle undulations of the terrain.
We missed however,
the hedgerows which not in Britain would be full of strange surprises and
nesting birds.
Hero we found the fields large and unfenoed, and woods oxten-
sive and connon as opposed to the parl-like scenery we had grown to know at
home.
what German civilians there were, and they were chiefly omen, seemed
also to possess nan characteristics of our own people.
But our newspapers
vere currently showing photographs and articlos on the ghastly discoveries
and shocking sights of the concentration camps of which those of BEISIN and
BUCHAWAID were but two examples.
Here it would seem that beasts, perhaps
homosesual perverts, and not mon had hold unfettered control, but these devils
were Germans and were but the Hyde manifestation of this double-faced nation.
The wor was going very well and we were full of hopes of an early finish.
The russians had launched their great offensive ained at BIRIT! and the East
bank of the R.Elbe - and an early link-up with the Americans on these part-
icular fronts was expected.
Meanwhile our Division had out the BREWHY-HAMBULG
Autobahn and was pressing inco tha peninsular betireen those two great ports
ất the head of which stood CUxHAVEN.
Patchy opposition was being met main].
fron scattered enemy battle groups of Parachute troops, SS.
and Marines with
resistance hardening with closer proxinity to the to ports.
Tine area here
was fairly thick with desorters and strasglers, and little parties of these
were to continue to give themselves up to the Coy during tho
o days to follow.
Sometimes they cane of their own volition, sonetimes infomation from Alliec
ex-POW would lead a small armed party from the Coy to a hideout and a fev
more bedraggled disillusioned Germans rould troop in.
Here they would be
searched and then taken off to a Cage.
On 22 April Capt. Vinden going forwer
accorpanied by on annoured car, to reace a position for a Powerd Supple Po
reaped 19 prisoners whom he hondod over to the Northumberland Fusiliers :
thus had to carry these Nordio babies,
On 21st a Horward Supply Point for units of 5th Gas Ble had been held co
he SOLTAU-VISSRLOVIDE road about three miles west of the former place, where
ie usual one day's compo was issued.
Replenishment was being made from the
© at SOLTAU, now noved un from SUTNGhN.
War Maxenn
mpena
ocumen
25284
