soon a siolely melt of ita rotting ears
It was hate that
Coy Office made
in the starte Stoogest ce the
spirits never
boose more
and.
Taged no matter
no mean task,
the
time sypplying
The "chore-horse"
electrio current
vas constructed
to vardous points
Tater a series of batteries
to provide
120 volt current for lights wile the "ohore-horse"
was being rested,
The narron tracks soross
the
fields
bacate widened and powdered under
the
constant passalto of
wheel
and track,
vehiole like a red clouds
and
the
sun deded dust followed every
Only ex-sighth Aruy
mett
aid not complain of the
aust - they felt at home again.
Portinately, at this tire
the
doy Canteen
(colloquially referred to as "Billy Battle
or "Batt's Cafel) situated in a
large harquee received the first issuo of
bottled ingliah beer (that
"Reput-
ed Quart"
which,
in faot,
was only
1* pintal) But
the dust was also a zeal
source of danger to vehicle engines,
and strangent orders were
issued regard-
ing
the care and maintenance of air filters.
the air was usustly, clear,
and
the luftwarfe
made sporadio attacks
on
the
bridgehead, which resulted in spirited dog fights with our land-based
Spite Corps a otisen in a tet a tre which ahowered shell splanters.
the Hun was partioularly fond of straffing the hedgerows.
into the
location, necessitating the constant availability of "tin hats".
In addition to
tho usual duties of the Coy, cerpouters and fitters were
busied with the consiruction of trailers and what were officially termed
"mobile offices".
Pack rations vere in issue and the BBP was an open field.
Supplies were
being dran still from the BSD at SOMARVIEU, honce the longest part of the
"grocert& round" was negotiating the BACUX Bypass, and the over inoreasing
congestion of the roads.
Whilst in this location the doy was joined by several pèrmanent detachmente
As the coy was now working on a "'conmodity" basis a mall force of supply
Clerks and Issuers was attached fron 310 coy and this eased the burden of
Composite Platoon considerable.
More so was this additional strength
appreciated later in the year when the issue of fresh rations to part or
the whole of the Division was made becana a fregiteni occurrence.
Next to arrive wero the postmen - or more correctly the Postal Section RE,
under the imperturbable Sgt Hennessey.
Here as a welcome addition indeed!
Henceforth 22, Coy could be sure of getting its mail quickly and before anyone
else in the Division for that matter.
The Postal Order, Department was to
becone suddenly popular in the later days of Belgium and Holland - and it
also formed a miniature Bureau de Change when individuals hela a surplus of
one currency whilst in a country to nich that currency did not apply.
Many
hundreds of Postal orders were issued for the PRI A/o during the wecks before
Chrismas when the account was being built up to stand forthcoming empenses.
Then there were the three Signallers forming the crew of the Sup col, Set
working on the Adhin net which accompanied all Harvard Supply Points and
rendered very efficient service.
They had periods, of course, when they were
to write, but on
not exuatly Dust those occasions othere livins a uglass house"-lilo
as evidenced by the remakable number of letters they managoc.
existence (not to be confused with the Aldershot ostablisiment!) were not
thenselves in a position to throw stonds.
A section of Admin ONP were then attached.
for the pupose of ruoting the
Supply Point circuits and the control of traffic using them.
And then, as though all were envious of 224 Coris mode of life, the RAOC
were next to send their representatives in the form of sst.Sinden and his
mormy men, to man the ADOS Dump, which like the other detachments, was to
cling to us Illie a muscla to a rod:.
spearins of muscles, there mas later
a PI. Instruator personified by Sat. str Morton, wino appeared on occasions
like a bolt fron the blue, though on the whole he remained fairly quiescent.
Meanwhile, Messrs-Stanhope and Mill datached as DRs to 21st Anti-Manl
Regt, were having sone exciting emperdences in their mortar-ridden part of
the front and brought back muy lurid stories of a horvilic nature. Durs.
Porter and Cox with Div HQ had sinilar stories they told.
16 JUL
Today the Coy Rouidue Party under the conmand of Capt.Fuggle
arrived fron the beacnes, having spent the last thres weeks in the
luxuries of BRIGHTON and HOVE.
simultaneously, the Coy detaciment to the
Corposite Coy operating with 32 Gis 3de returned to the fold - their independ-
end role having been cormleted.
on the morrow the Coy was to move,
However, their halt vas but a krief one since
