- 6 -
1 tha VALATSE pockot at this tire, dust over the hills to the Basti
2.. WE ATtOr sOvereI Vests of wondering then the Division's tum for a
spectaolar role would cone, the shape of things to come
(Narta
Today the Coy noved a considerable distance to LATGIE
and at last the mustrophobian atosphere of the Bocage
Cos Id was situted in the fard of a badly draged fam, with the platoons
in the hono
the swin road tovards VIRE American engineers
vore rebuins a stel alter ago ach would shortly be carying rail-
Bore supplies from CHECURG (hich with CAN was to remain our only major
port for nong weoks to cone) in the wake of the advancing armies.
Doad and decrying cattle were again logion,
and civilians now returning in
10ll mrbers to their shattered homes were to be seen burying then.
Excellent ushrooms wore found in profusion
in the fields higher up the
slope fron the location, and wilst
individual harvests tore nade, and
"Official" expedition undor Capt. Strangets enthusiastic guidance gathered.
enough for the Mess to make the prov bial Horn of Plenty lock all Indeed.
e infomed his helpers on mumerous occasions that they were "lucky people"
but the award of the such covetod "Strange Star" was not made as expectedi
Whilst in this location temporary transport arrangements were brought into
orfect within the Division.
In order. to free Divisional RASC transport so
that it coula assist with the "leap-frogging" of tho IMO from BAYBUX to
LiSaUX, unit first line transport under Capts. Curtis and Hall was used to
At this period, the traffio on the roas was so intense that arrangements
bad to be node with the Anericans for the shoring of our maintenance routes,
and traffia was specially regulated in order to avoid confusion and delay.
Al] those were sure signs of the grant loap forvard that was to be opectei
ao. that the orong was withdrawing in over-increasins disorder through the
mouth of the FATAISE GaD-
Daily our Typhoons and fighter-bobers could be
seen fljing in to the front to execute their deauly work.
The heavy fighting
at CAN and the brilliant right-hook of the Americans fron AVRACIES were now
Fielding massive returns.
PEASE IV "THROUGH TIE GAP, OVER HUE SETE, AD FAR AVAT!.
39/30 AUG The chase as on:
Our Division was in hot pursuit of the re-
treating ith iny over the ground where F.M.Romel had reportedly
met his death at the hands oi Spittires of the RAF.
For the next three weeks
the coy was ti be almost continuously on the nove, and for the drivers of the
two transport platoons that were still with the Coy there was to be little rest.
But it was work into which all entered with great heart, and work done it
zest is never arduous. On the norning of 30 Aug the Coy moved out in the first
rain for seteral weeles.
Light was brealing as our colun passed through FLERS
maling good speed eastwards.
Trecks of enemy tanks and transport lined the
rod, and every major cross-roads was a scene of chaos as a result of
desperate reanguard action.
Every railuay station was a mortuar, of French
rolling-stock, every town and village a mass of ribble and wrecked hones.
Im.
pocasional fields the charred wreckage of a luftwaffe fighter forned the
pave of another of Goering's hopes to sten the power. of our air supremacy.
Crossing the R.Eure the column clined the escarpment forning the eastern
hinterland to harbour for the night in the grounds of a spacious convent in
the village of MERCY near HOUTBEC COCIREL - an island of firm ground in a
sea of mud.
The Forward Supply Point had been held in the roads noarby
oarlier in the day, since our supply vehicles had been sent forward early that
on this day a distance of 55 miles had been coverca. .
31 AUG At about L900 has on this sumy noming the loy moved out on to the
road down to the sEiNE..
The road and fields on the gentle slope down.
to he river and the town of vERNON where the bridge was, were pock-marked with
shell craters bearing evidance of the desperate attempts of the enchy to dony
the river to us.
The town itself as badly inocked about and the road and
nail bridges had been blown, and now in their places were our Bailey bridges.
The one carrying the road rested on pontoons, whilst another rather precarious-
Iooking pridge stretchel across the naked buttresses of the former railway
bridge high above the river.
After travelling a listance of 40 niles the Coy harboured for the night in
the village of MOULNOOURT between GISORS and GASNHY. The location was by no
moans an ideal one since being on the side of a hill, acdess for the véhicles
was sonewnat difficult and the OC's jeep saw much heavy work that afternoon
toning the leen threo-tonners over the steepor stretches of the lane leading
