- 30. -
At about
1500 hrs the whine of Bedford
ngines indicated the return
of the Replenishment Colum
with pack
rations and
E certain, amount ce
troth (NEAtH FOR MINiN mIts) SrO ISSEBUnG mery they had loaded at
1130 hrs.
By now the
ex move
the Redos
tore off
happenea he were not destined to go to
But
that
location;
our destination
the this cann
the 7th Arm
outred Division
was fignting its var forward on our right flank;
OUTE
progress might be slover than was our
wont,
but
Division was spoil-
ing
the
appeer ence of
the 1st Paradimte
important
than mere territorial gain,
since
In Le waS not becoming increase
ingly evident that while any wehracht groups
fortations rematned
in my sort of organized being, there could be no hope of the cassation
of hostilities in gurope;
nor, on the other hand,
did it seem likely
thet there now remained
in Germany any
group on
persons,
other than
powerful. enough to
be capable
guing
for Unconditional
Surrender
i resentative, of the fermen nation, General
Bisonhower had declared as much in a rucent broadcast.
9 AFR
The Forward Supply Point was held today at 0800 hrs
just to
the Hast of LINGI, followed an hour later by another Point in the BaP
for Admin wits.
y now the IMe had been established at ENSCHiDE resulting in a ve
much shorter journey for our vehicles going down for replenishment at
mi daay.
At noon also a great swirl of dustand roar of exhausts indicated
Recce Group had shot off once more - to come to rest in TANGHIT
some 6 miles NE of LINGEN.
Back with the doy vehicles were being loaded once more, and this
time it was not to be in vain.
But it seemed that another shortage
of
Could it have been
vater had occurred, the cloth factory in NORDHOFN?
indicating sonething of interost in the vicinity.
Meanwhile representatives fron the platoons had stayed behind in
LANGHaT in possession of the new location for it suemod. that in such
dases the arbitrar rule of possession being nine points of the law
fully applied and such acquisitions were jealously guarded until the
arrival of the full coy strength made it impreghable against infronge
ment by other "nobs".
The route to-LANGIT was quite straight-forward despite the varying
"Heart" and "Spade" signs erected by Corps - for a route on
It lay through NORDHORN, and the noro battle scarred LIGHT, for it was
at this latter place that bitter fighting hai occurred for the crossing
of the DORTMUND MIS Canal.
This Canal, at LINGHN, had all the appear
ance of a river - an impression enhanced by the fact that on either
side of the pontoon briage the vaterway curved sharply,
our vido aperience or Dutch Canals, associatod then with a weight
monotony.
Along the route there were many blown bridges (the enemy had made
good use of demolitions) now replaced by the ubiquitous Baileys.
Shattered timber paulls indicated the exit of many improvised road
blocks - reviving memorios of our on islund defence schenes of 1940/1.
The approaches to the new bridges had, by force of circumstances, bean
hastily constructed from any available materials - mostly brick rubble -
and the subsequent heavy and constant traffic had reduced these to
powdery ruts which had to be taken very slowly. There were some civ
ilians in the toms - some were to be seen marshalled under arned guard
ready to be marched aray to a "screened personnel" or "displaced persons"
collecting point.
10 APR
The Coy had moved out at 0030 hrs and arrived at LANGEN just
before dawn, the distance being anout 23 miles.
A large
farmyard now accommodated the Coy and the layout was practically ident-
ical with the former one. The farn belonged to the Burgomaster, a
co-operative individual who had lived in COLOGNE diring the British
Occupation last time, and having had to British Sergeants billotted on
ocument 25284
niEd
