These seemed to be
As repladement we received uSS. Teste:
already be
signs of the re org
trosh from long
in T. AFRICA.
location
Then on
and repleni spent nade from GOch.
of the Division's
the day that the newspapers
pect
7-0-0, Major General Allen Adair Winited the Doy.
the test.
ZHASE XIV - "OVER THE RENTE THIRT LEN US GO!*
23 MAR
The blow wes struckl
Infantry crossed the Rhine during
by morning for bridgeheads had been won
the night under a brilliant noon
1st Airborne Army,
between ENHRICH and WISET.
and the areas
dropped well gast
British epio at forftor it was lented that infantry of the ground forces had
inoluding veterans of the "D"
and shortly
of the Rhine
in the BOCHOTT
effeoted a solid
of this,
the men of
23 Mar had presented a great spectacle of
but heard more.
Location on their way to
commence the
heard to be followed by a thunderous artillery barrage
many hours, whilst the crossings of the river began.
aircraft flying hurriedly over
The enemy's anxiety was betrayed by single
Pf a dutt vitrating puer the hest bank of the river dropping occasional
Lares:
oor view was
and even stooping to machine gunning the Coy location - of which a
taken!
Throughout 2, Mar the clear sky humed with Allied aircraft of all types
from heavy bombers,
transport with their attendant gliders, fighters and
fighter-bombers, down to the humble Auster Cub spotter which fussed around
continuously.
all was quiet in the Coy area - the Div back by the Maas,
quiescent as
Otherwise though gathering all its strength for a great leap into the
black heart of Germany - when the order shoula come.
Rations in issue had
always in the past,
been a good indication at times like
these of the shape of
things to
Pack rations which had heen scheduled for issue on 25 Mar
were
not issued as expected,
and throughout the weekend 2h/26 Mar fresh rations
continued.
were to wait a little longer it seemed.
heavy bombing of the Eastern bank of the Rhine had been so saturating that the
roads had been cratered also,
and the passage of tanks in any number was, for
the time being,
not practicable.
the traffic on the roads and bridges.
On 25 Mar a sudden order was received during, the afternoon for seventeen of
our three-tonners to be detached to 310 Coy RASC to supplement their prognorm
of. 25-pounder amminition amping on the pm-sites.
This work lasted for two
On 29 Mar and also on the following day,
a Forward Supply Point was hela
at WERZE,
with an Admin Area Point in the.doy looation.
on 30th replenishment
was made from 130 DID MOYLAND.
Almost exactly one week after 21st Army Group had made their crossing
of the thine,
the Coy received its orders to follow suit.
The British hrine
head now strotched to within 15 miles of BOCHOIl and MUNSTER and was completu..
unassailable. We had been standing by since the 28th ready to move, and othur
units such as Div "B" Echelon and Condion Ingingers started to occupy the loc-
ation before we moved out.
"H" hour for the Coy was altered almost hourly in
a most "Wolf! Wolf!" fashion. The "Nosmos" lay completed except for the date
and time.
The "Nosmos" were a feature of most Coy moves.
onese famous
documents giving the particulars of the route to be followed, and other such
dread secrets as the number of vehicles to the mile, the type of hat to be worn:
and the speed (intended at least, for it seldom was proved acourate) of the
column, to be concluded by the lowest blow of all - an exhortation not to smoke!
Hence, after the well-known comedian these route cards were always referred to
the "Nosmos". But Nosmo must have preferred the daylight for he seldom ture:
up at the platoons for a night move.
When the order did finally come some were caught on the wrong foot, such as
the man, let him be anonymous, who was shaving, and the Chief Clerk who was
caught twixt pedal and saddle of the cycle he was using. He was last seen by
a greatly amused 535 Coy pedalling at top speed in the wake of the convoy.
Most unorthodox! This was at 1630 hrs.
ocumer
25284
WIN SANIT
