WEEZE with a further point for
During 11th to 13th March a Supply Point fox forard units was held at
the BBP was well situated in werns and stables.
remaining units held in the Coy location where
from 168 FMO at COCH, which meant only & shows Journey - matter of great
Supplies were being drawn
With the clearing of the West banic of the Phine elong
since the roads were aramed with heavy tonsunt antire Second.
Ariy front the river aropped neur our location
more benedit oronore
ai i lans returned to the area
same
- these were ellowed mince it was necessary
to keep the farms working, espocially at this inpor ant season though
many came back to ruins.
Strongly Roman Catholic,
Nazi as their fellow-countrymen across
had no: been so fervently
thoir houdos were a true indication, he fino, ala appeared to settle
doin peacefully under the Allied Military Governmen: with no thought of
rocriminations,
A large camp at BEDBURG nearby, housed some 20,000 dis-
placed civilians until such time as military operations would permit of
their rehabilitation.
and "Hebrt" Routes there was every sgn
there was necessarily a lull in actual operations,
that, even though
not a moment was being
lost in completing the big build-up in men and materials required for future
operations over the Rhine.
The Coy was called upon to supplement the transport availablo for this
great task as will be seen from the following
On 16 Mar twenty-three
canouflage stores fron No. 1. Ordnanco Maintenance
three-tonners were detailed for the collection of
Coy at HEIMOND and deliv
ery to 214. Coy RE.
on 17 Mar twenty-five three-tonners were dotailed to collect RAOC Stores:
from ANTWERP to Guards Armoured Div Sub Park at UDFIT.
This detail necessit-
ated the removal of tilts and super-structures from
the vehicles to facilit-
ate the loading of tank tracks.
The removal of tilts and superstructures may
sound a small job
to the uninitiated but it can be a wagrisom task since in
the first place it takes at least four men to wrestle with the superstructure
whilst the bolts are being removed - bolts which have become burred over since
in the superstructure seldon coincide
exactly. with those in the
It is a job that no driver.
ever liked - but was just one
of those things which made the RASC driver's job more tiring inon many ex-
Corps people might think.
details were followed on the 18th by a further one of twenty-seven
three-tonners for the
collection of Compo Packs fron the BSD EINDHOVEN for
build-up of two days 1st line and two days Ind line cations for all units
the Division,
AIl now seemed ready for great news to break,
since the West bank of the
Rhine was in Allied hands from NIJMEGEN to the Siles frontier.
next phase be the last?
Would it prove to to the "last great heavel so
recently referred to by Mr.Churchill?
Everyon could be heard saying
get this thing over now - its gone on long enough!"
A really fine spell of
warm clear weather had settled in, to proclain that spring with the impart-
iallity of the Seasons had come even to this stricken country.
Our Tactical
Air Force was naking such hay as it wished, whilst further Suath the Amer
icans, having cleared the lifel, had now swert over the Moselle to capture
the whole of the saar, and their aircraft were exacting a fearful toll of
the trapped enemy divisions.
Nevertheless, on our front the waiting continued, and evory day the dawn-
to-dusk smoke-screen could be seen rising from the British and Canadian held
bank of the Rhine away to the North and Tast, concealing wur preparations fron
the anxious eyes of the tenter-hooked enciny.
But administrative activity was raising its head meamhile, Having just
emerged successfully fron threatoned postings of Capts,Surunge and Beaford we
were confronted by another surprise.
The long-anned staff in ingland reached
out once nore to pluck Lieut Stokes from our midst to transplant him in an
Infantry Iraining establishment in tho Isle of Man,
This however, was the
second of the occasions when the scent of the humid. jungle a'mosphere was
detected - since already four NOOs in the foms of MSS. Anthony, Sgt.Martin,
(p]. Hutchinson, and Cpl. Boorman had received notificution that they must hola
themselves ready for postings under the mysterious "Pickford" scheme.
these MSS. Anthony was the first to be called, a few days later, to report to
an RHU at BRUGES.
On arrival there he was cheorfully told in the reception
office "You're for Burna!" Mary of Arnhom had often declared that BIA also
moant Burma Looms Ahead - we started to wond whether there night not have beun
for once, an eloment of truth in hor dulcet lispings,
TONG
win Took docume
TO THE DOCUMENT
RETURNS AREA
