- 22 -
was clear of the enery again and it seemed that
Canadatin
But up in the forest (the Reichaald) sorething was stirring! It was the fat
sand-waterborne!
on see rory, to too are pantent of a barrage of hundreda of gure
onlitres the offensiv was lonched against the floodell Retcherald, and
Sioptried line was breached shortly after.
de alt
Short passes: to
that was
inevitable.
excellent.
BRUSSElS were cancolled on the lith until further notice -
This norning the inhabitants of ThAt rogretfully bid the coy "au
aNd TURNHOUT to
the Coy was concent-
rated in this and its sister-village of BARTE HIRIOG with Corposite Platoon
the Postal Unit centred on the Ble at
holf the doy was in Belgium and the other in Holland,
So now
ALPEN some five niten are indeening:
The plos was
Supplios were being drem from BINDHOVEN and than later Srom alisk whilst the
Supply Point was held in TIlBUrG.
The two BAARIES had been the scene of bitter street fighting
during the
vious October when the enery was being pushed away from the scholdt Estuary.
The people there spoke of spending five long days and nights in the collars.
whilst the fighting raged relentlessly northwards.
We now resided on the V.1 route to AlTIERP and these noisy contraptions
were passing overhead with almost monotonoris
regularity to be net a little
further to the sw by powerful. Al barrages which were so efficient that we
many exploded in mid-air.
sarr
This was merely a marking-time position for the Coy since otner units were
on the move,
last for long.
and this made administration rather diffioult, but it was not to
PHASE XII - "NOI HOLTAND AGAIN!"
We moved during the evening to SCHAIJK near GRAVE in Holland arriving
t about 2200 hrs that evening
The recce carried out earlier in the day by
who was ror acting OC Coy in the absence of Major Hewos on leave
billets and we moved straight into then.
Light the terrain becu.s familiar to all,
for we were but a few miles from our
location of the previous October and November at WIJCHEN;
and especially the
rain and mud with which we had become accustomed to associate this part of the
Supplies were still being drain fron BEKK near EINDHOVEN.
The Forward.
Supply Point for 32 Gds Bde fighting to the South of the Reichswald Forest was
held in NIJMEGEN and a Rear Point for 5 Gds Bde
in VUGHT near TILBURG. When
32 Be later engaged enemy paratroops in their bridgehead opposite WESTI the
Horvard Point was shifted to GOCH and still later to WeEZE.
Thus 22, Coy had
already made its first crossing of the Reich Grenze - at least its first in the
operational role of an RASC. Coy though our valiant infantrymen in the Services
Battalion last December had held positions inside Germany.
Later in the month the Forward Supply Point only was required, other issues
being made from the Coy location.
The BBP in SCHAIJK was situated in a ston:
depot which though rather small was admirable otherwise for our use.
raised floor and accordingly a raised platform running outside which greatly
facilitated loading and unloading opcrations.
AKS gave several film shows in the school occupied in part by HQ Platoon
Cookhouse, and it was thus now possible to drink one's tea whilst gazing at thai
wonderful celluloid worl? beyond the war.
The Coy Canteen, now comfortably
arranged in the school, was the scone of a whist drive towards the end of our
stay in SCHAIJK and this was well supported.
SCHATJK will long be remembered by the Coy for its abundance of eggs.. There
was no linit to them, largely because of the general lack of transport in Liber.
od Holland that could be utilised for such fragile but beneficial foodstuff.
could imagine that gladly though these eggs were given us, how much more satis
faction it would have given all concerned if they could have been sent to the more
unfortunate Dutch of Norther Holland, where, under the spiteful German occupatinn
sechn
ho American Ninth Army also under F.M.Montgomery's command had swept through to
apture COLOGNE and BONN, whilst a large portion of the enemy's best troops was
aked in the bloody struggle in the north grinst the British and Canadians.
Ly the westl bridgehead remained to be clewed, and this job was being rolent-
sly carried out.
ment 25284
