32 -
which vill lend its voice all too willingly to any worth-hile crescendo
of the general hubbub.
13 APR
A Priday too! A regrettable note was sounded early in the mom-
ing by the announcement of the death of President Roosevelt;
an item of news which drew a crowd round each of the now many radios in
use throughout the day.
The supply Point and departure of the Replenishment Column to ENSCHIDa
followed at their usual times - life was going on nomally - no nove
today, even though Div HQ had reportedly moved.
As the sun reached its zehith so the "o" like some rare hawk swooped
down fron a great height to descend upon IQ platoon with a kit inspegtion!
Taken totally navares the viotin struggled under his all-enveloping claw.
There were many comings and goings to and from the erstwhile parade
ground - some arriving under a burden of assorted and jumbled kit some
ninutes after the sands of time had run out.
What dignity was no conferred upon the humble accessories of milit-
ary existence!
boot,
blacking to wit,
had now become objects of dismay and even terror
Shirts, drab, angola and brushes to those who had noither
to hold aloft in their left, or was it right, handl Holders of Ointment,
anti-gas, No.2 were spurned in favour of those possessing the "lucky
blue" No.5.
One, naned "Junior' exhibited the niserablo contents of his
"are for ton on the artieloo therein containgà vero, so it was docreed,
respirator to reap the baleful eye and utter derision of the
of the correct lark or condition.
It was rimoured,
albeit stoutly
denied in the affected quarter,
that the objects in question had been
borrowed from none other than the "o" himself for this sudden contingency.
In the evening, whilst the Mobile Cinena Section was erecting its
apparatus for a film show in an extremely odorous barn (which gave suit-
able atmosphere to the western bring shown), w/shops Platoon nad the
pleasure of exhibiting the glories of its individual lats.
A Point for
were issued.
It now appeared very likely that the doy would move forward on the
morrow, for the Recce Group had been told to hold themselves in readiness
to move off at 0700 hrs in the morning.
Tro more film shows were given during the evening, the film being
"Meet the People" and the auditoriun was, as on the previous evening,
the
bam adjoining the Burgomasterts house.
It was a unique experience to
watch a film in the company of oows and one large disconsolate bull.
On this next nove the Film unit was to travel in our convoy; this
was a new practice, naiting our column more "cosmopolitan" than ever as
we now had Signals, RAOd, and RE as well as our own vehicles.
At 1800 hrs a further Supply Point for Admin units was held whereby
the rations which would have been issued on the following day for con-
sumption on the hext. were issued in advance because of the impending
PHASE XVII - "HERPHNVOLK AND OTHERS"
The Recce Group swirled out of the farm gates at 0730 hrs.
was now the ouston for Sgt.Watson to travel forward with this
" Group as he acted as interpreter for the 0C in arranging billets in new
areas, and making such adjustments with the civilian population as was
necessary.
Often it was politic to remove the civilians from certain
buildings and areas required for the Coy's use.
In these areas there
were very few English-speaking people and thus his services becane inval-
uable.
A Forward Supply Point had been sent on to BAKUM,
south of CLOppEd-
BURG, just after breakfast in order to open there at 1000 hrs, with pack
rations in issue for the forvard units.
At 1100 hrs the Coy moved out to the
new location which proved to be
also in BAKUM.
The mute lay via mall villages, whioh purely for acad-
omic interest were Essen, Beverne, and Berge, but these were so small as
not to be shown on any but large-scale maps. BAKUM was but a few milos
Musecun
ment 25284
