37
PHASE XIA -
"IHE LAST DEUST
22 AFR
The Reace, Group
left
at 0830 rns on route to ESSERViSInE, a village
about
seven idles south
of
the BREMEN-HAMBURG Autobahn.
The
coy thus
spent
the noring
Toaling its vehicles and preparing.
movo,
which it dad at 1515 has.
The Journey was mainly by side roads, with nos
of note to comment
arrival,
upon found that the location was a well-concentrated one
viding plenty of accommodation in barns and houses from which the German occ
ants had been evicted;
The BBR
was situated in the midst of
the barns with
fam tradics as
the traffic circuit,
The 00g
canteen was cosily laid out in
ploturesque
cottage in which the furniture
still reposed.
Coy HQ was, in a n.
roomed inn,
Which was also the site of the
Officers: Mess.
One of the
severai
generators was
housed in a small garage foming part of the hotel premises and
was soon under heavy load supplying the necessary requirements.
23/24 AFR
The se
two days were eventful fron a military point of view.
both days the Supply Point was held in the BBP,
replend siment being.
nodo from son 1o Found tie failter aluster of
Here again we
non-working foreign workers,
ant
Belten sort eregarous existance in every concoivable tove of billains.
French, Polish and Russian civilians of both sexes and all ages living
It.
was
depressing to live in such an environment - to see
such a low standard anidst the animals of the farms,
these people living on
clothed in any such garnouts
as they had been able to lay hands on,
feeding on the products of the farns -
a litter of feathers edied in the breeze by nearly every barn door. -
Europe was:
in a frightful mess.
We had been used to
the endless destruction
of phisical property,
but here also ve were to become acquainted with the.
drecay.
topsey tureyisn of a conquered people, where their former slavos were now
free
men and women and were behaving extremely well and tolerantly considering the
ignominies they had suffered during the past jears.
There, were. rec.ininations
of counse,:.
but they appeared to have been
surprisingly. fev
sixteen
empty three-tonners left the location at 1630 hrs on. 24 April to.
report to 12 corps for the purpose of noving a BSD From VECITA to SOTTAW.
Thẩs
job was to take several days, for a BSD is no shall affair and entails very
heavy loads for transportation.
In the matter of supply it is the king-pie to..
which the elastic lines of the Divisional supply columns are indirectly attao. =i
and there is only a certain distance that can be covored without straining the
transport systen to brucking point.:
SOILAU,
at this moment,
was quite well
forward and the BSD at this point would therefore allow considerable latatues
of moverent to the west, North or East, in whichever of these directions our
ultimate target should lie - and there were not many possible targets left now.
There were those who favoured a thrust into Demark to enjoy a final teste of
the joys offered by the role of liberator, but as yet the Elbe lay between us;
and the Russians were atready coming up from the South-east at a cracing pace.
This of course, was not a matter for us to concern ourselves with, but it does
show the state of mind in which we found ourselves.
we found ourselves physic-
ally at the base of the small uninteresting peninsular lying between BREMET
and HAMBURG, and both of these places were closely invested by other formations
driving with our Division into what appeared to us to be a cul-de-sec. Rather
a disappointment and an anti-climas at this stage of the war, when we were
accustomed to speedy forward lashes, now to be denica the exciting. "swanning"
Novenents of our neighbouring fornations.
25 APE Tho vacillating attachment of our vehiclos to and from 704 goy con-
pleted another cyale at 0530 hrs on this date by the reporting of
six of our vehicles to this new-born sister Coy. Three hours later replen-
ishment of compo or alternatively 1 day's fresh rations was made from 122 FiG
at SOLTAU.
At 0900 hrs the supply point for all units was hold in tho Be,.
and fresh rations as well as Coupo were issued...
Thilst we were in Germany any particular
~ location usually yieldel something
of interest in its vicinity. Sometines it had been a Geran dump or a Isctors:
and now on this occasion it was a buried cache of licquers and such miscellaneo:
items as typewriters and other office equipment. Quite strange bedparters,
but there was no explaining some of the discoveries of war. So now it was ti
every Admin office had a upewriter and the aministratito efficiency of the co
judged by the quality of the tools at least, could be expectad to soar by leas
and bounds.
vene
War Museen
cumer
ment 25284
