-
23-
The doy moved to CUIJK on the West bank of the MAAS - a few miles Nortin
Workshops Platoon wan left behind. in SCHATTK fOInto
move, and was not to rejoin the Coy until the next which would take us
this
germany.
in this badly demaged village.
Private billets, a school and at en
the
a Supply Point was hold daily for Ainin units - a Forward Point to WiNAB supplios
were being dram fron BERK.
Across
the dropping waters of the MAAS lay the dark mass of the Reichswald Forest
now in Allied hands, and this was to be ou
for the time being,
outside Germany.
Soon we should be leaving the friendly
the liberated countries to becone the coupiers of the Third Reich.
civilian populations
What should
we find there?
BASE XITI - "GERMANY, HERE VI COME!"
A curious state of military dispositions now occurred when we moved out
of CUIJK during the morning,
and the forvard units - chiefly 32 Bde - noved.
back from the cauldron of the wESEl, bridgehead,
their work successfully completed.
But, the less spectacular work of the RASC,
like woman's, is nevey done.
The route lay vio the GENNEP Bridge,
GENNEP and MATERBORN.
The GINNEP Bridge proved to be, as
the pillars which formerly had supported the railway bridge.
usual, a Bailey in this case lid across
At the
time a
truly Allien band of engineers,
was working
furiously to erect a sturdier steel girder briage
support a single railway
line - obviously with a view to hastening later heavier supplies, and even to
carry leave personnel on their happy journey.
the UK.
GHNNEP was
or building having escaped
complete
destruction or severe damage during the heavy fighting-
However, it boasted of
a Town Major!
After a mile or so farm buillings and houses bore large signs in German script,
procted to boost the morale of the Wehrmacht's frontier defenders with such mis-
informed slogans as "With the Fuhrer to Victory!" and of course the inevitable
one people, one Fuhrer!"
your Guard
"One Stard - To pee do entering Germany!"
followed our own signs declared "Be on
This was really a great moment,
for whilst we vere very far from being the
first troops to arcss the frontier,
the sight of the Reich Grenze was symbolic of stepping on a massive rung in the
long steen ladder of Allied hopes and ambitions.
The road, busy with the traffic
wald, which it cut
of "soft! vehicles through like an arrow.
was now cast in gloony twilight by the shadow of the Reichs-
Of the Siegfried Line there was little
to see, perhaps because this section had been a more recent extension and consisted
mainly of earthworks concealed in the forest,
but a large sign triumphantly
proclaimed "Here was
the Siegfried Tine" and
then another adding "The Washing",
To this latter was attached a line bearing a motley array of nether garments of
doubtful cleanliness.
One of the unsung heroes of this war was the roadside signwriter.
prise this happy band of toilers which varinusly entreats, warns, orders,
humours us on the centre and maintenance lines with its breezy messages?
entreaties are often touching,
its warnings tense and urgent, its orders ourt,
and its humour direct.
Always it assumes that the average man has his share of
common-sense - its signs remind him to use it!
The location was at BEYHRSKOE - a straggling farming community made more
straggling by bitter battles - about three miles South of CIEVE and about six
miles from the Rhine.
The recce had taken full advantage of the limited
accommodation available in the form of houses and farm buildings and the Coy
quickly settled in.
This process was made easier by the general absence of:
civilians but enoumbered by the frightful litter scattered by the advance troops.
It was all very reminiscent, however, of the old Normandy days - everywhere the
tosholes,
mortar craters, cartridge cases and ammunition boxes - the flotsam and
jetsan of war.
The civilians, mostly old, crippled, or in bad health, seemed to want to be
friendly - as woll it night pay them to be since they were luckier than those
that remained in the shrinking Reich east of the phine.
The sociable British
Tommy is quick to forgive and forget, as the Germans might remember from World c
But of an evening a bright red ball of light followed by a straight white
vapour trail could be seen to the west streaking up into the purple sky.
Another V.2! For London, or Antwerp? The same ola Germany, fawning in captiv
ily, but a faun at heart.
Daily the Allied radio reminded us "No Fratemization!" - surely after five
years of war such a warning should not have been necessary - but it was!!
ocument 25284
