permeated the Coy that the next
Bays
thoorising again.
and thie
strategiats got busy
darine the
dischair
would bring many new
Rumour becane raspent,
adventure s+
The arrival of
next move tho
troops of 2 HOR would be
Coy, HQ
Indloating that
the who lo RASO
Angersed throughout
wes a closE
coln with
a sootion of
128 Bield Ambulance in the rear
andiontion that sonothing rathor unusual was about to
this was itl
Today, great airborne
Tot
Division and the Americon
the Britiah
dropped. at
101 at Airborne Diviatons -
were being dorps, with
strategio points for RINDHOVEl
tO ARNHEM.
the Guards Amoured bivision as
spoarhead,
was assigned the
great tank of linking up
these
furthest
Isolated forces, the
of which - the British at ARNHEM - was well over 50 miles away.
Obviously then,
the supply
upon which our transport would have to
travel was to be vital,
drawing our supplies was at
LONE BOURG IBOPOLD.
and vulnerable,
The IMO from which we were
At this time Capt Hall was posted from
Coy to bedome BRASCO
5 Gãa Bde,
and in his place
we received Capt. Bedford from HQ RASO who
then becamo
Transport and Welfare Officer.
the extended lines of
comminication shortly to bocome reality,
this did not seem to be an
enviable moment at which to take over the transport reins.
This was quite
Revoirit to otir noighbours constituting the Admin Arca
1he eating olomente of the birtutins
a unique occasion as the RASC was to movo with
Thus we temporarily bia
behind our Workshops together with the attached Postal and ADOS Durg
We moved out of the location at 1100 hrs, having stood by since
first light, and picked up our escort of 1 troop of HCR and four SP guns.
Progress was inded slow for us since the fighting continued just ahead ou
us on the road - in faot we were to spend 27 hours on the road for a
journey of 54 miles.
On croasing the Escaut Canal a large batch of the enery,
wore passod on the roadsido - possibly these had been one of the causes
of our late start.
The colum moved on with the clatter of the SP guns
now harmonising with the more faniliar hun of our tyres.
The Dutch frontier being crossed, the town of VAIKENSWAARD soon came
into sight and the flags hanging from the houses changed from the red,
black and yellow of Belgium to the rod white, and blue
tricolour and
orange banners of Holland.
Civilians, more
stoical in their outlook
notional neighbours,
were to be seen sporting orange
armbands and othor itons of dress of
the same colour.
Children greeted.
us, rather ambiguously,
with "Goodbye",
but they had not yot become
acquainted with the "Cigarette for Papa" which had been such a faniliar
azy in F'rance and Belgiun.
North of this town an incident occurred which nearly resulted in a
state of affairs akin to temporary chaos.
Whilst the Coy was halted
by the side of the road for a convenient breau la bloke iron one ot
an unknown motor-cycl
ist afterwards oclared to be a fifth-colunist
the other Coys" und a score of other identitios roared down the road
from the opposito dircation shouting "Turn round, German tanks are coming
down the road!"
The impression given was that at least 10 Tigers were
approaching at very short rango.
The sight of the armoured cars turning
round, though solely for the purpose of taking up defensive positions
for covering the colum,
apparently confirmed the urgent warning. The
loading vonicles turned round, and within a few seconds the whole of the
Coy was heading in the opposite direction.
Surely the most rapia
doployment (?) in RASO history!
Other factors aside, this turn-round
was certainly a remarkable exhibition of driving ability. Meanwhile
Od had sent DR Brown to the control car of 2 HR to onquire as to tho
origin of such an order, and was setting about the reorganization of his
The information was incorrect and the golum was quickly sot
in motion in its original direction.
This incident gave a nasty turn to the residents of VAIKENSWAARD for
they innediately hauled in their flags and querulously asked what they
should do. They were quickly reassured.
It was now growing dark and the large town of EINDHOVEN was, but a shot
distance away.
Deep fir woods lined the road casting an ominous gloon
over the scene - we inagined that large eneny forces could have been
concealed therein,
The colum stopped for a "brew" just short of EINDHOVEN in the vill.
of AAIST, just as the sound of approaching aircruft was hoord,
RETURNS AREA
Wan soon Done.
TO THE DOCUMENT
