Naturally
but most of
the bullaings were
contrally heated
and eleotie to
was plentiful
both important fact
during these
ever darkening
days of
winter ni
From
the Supply engle
this wan an ideal. location,
for large
bulldinga sith aple
5100г
space gave exocllent dxy storage
for
the purposes
of bulk-breelangi
the
traffio aircuite
were concrete roads with adequate
hard standings for many more vehiolas
the Coy possessed:
ax supply transport probably travelled less whilat
in this location
then at any other time since
supplies were drawn from the DID situated
In another part of the factory
and the Supply point was in
the faotory
area 21,so.
or the Ditch 0100011. hate tea the da delon for our delo
situated in the administrative buildings where some
they were
Later during
our stay
offloials
arranged.
concert for
after which the "proppiator"
feasted then in grand atyle.
This they greatly appreciated for food was
very short in Holland at this time,
and was to continue so for many weeks
to come.
The factory workers hung round the cookhouses every mealtime
hopeful
of a bite to eat, and they seldom went awey unrewarded - very
generous fellows at heart,
these cooksl
4 most unfortunate accident occurred in the BBP at the end of November
where Sgt. Oliver,
the Coy's Sgt.Butcher,
received fatal injuries from
a reversing three-tonnor whilst suporvising loading
Ho had
the Coy by his death was a real one.
Whilst in this location two
important things happened.
the first
place a leave scheme
to the uK was announcod by which eight clear days
would be enjoyed at home.
Seloction was by ballot,.
preference being
given during the first
two months to members of the
Priority Party.
Tho
newspapers gave a rasy and entirely misleading vio of the leave arrango-
ments by which they gave the improssion that everyone would have leave
within three months;
but on careful considoration it was obvious
that
this could not be,
and would take at least six months.
However, tha
damage was done and many folsoly raised. hopes wore dashed.
On the second place a Servicos Battalion composed. of RASC and. RIME WELS
formod within the Corps to rolieve infantry in tha line for a matter of
three woeks.
Tho Coy was required to provido two officers and thirty-
at other ranks for this purposo.
Those who represented the Coy's
contribution to this happy band of varriors were:
Capt.Gurtis (Bn HQ)
Ilout Muryan (Platoon Officer) Sgt.Oullon (Platoon Sgt); dol, Powoll,
Op1. GalLimoro,
Cp1. Road, @pl.Soott G-A.,
1/cp1.Marshall, L/cpl.Hay,
I./Op1.Jones K.W., I/Opl,Robinson J•, L/op1.Chant,
1/0p1. Boultwood,
Dvxs. Riohardson S.E., Grinnoll, Ansoll, Baron, Liadall, Novoll, Parlett,
Adams P.A., Bright, Morris, Biggar, Rock, Wintor,
Brown Le, Higgans;
Dox B.F., Inslay, Heron, Lofthouse, Foster,
Phillips, Holding, tront,
Read Fo, and last but by no moans loast, of course, CsM.Suttor.
This episodo warrants a separate hastory of its on, ropresenting
as it does yot another example of the over-increasing variety of the
RASO's duties, but it is only. possible hore to give but a brief synopsis
of the three oxciting wecks involved.
let it bo said straight away that the doy detachment did portioulasly
woll and discharged their dutios like voterans of the Lino.
The pesitions
mannod were situatod around a wooded foature known as Pan Handle Wood,
with the enemy entrenched bofore, a small villago a fow hundred yards
away.
This sceno was to be found in the GEITINKIRCHEN arca in the
valley of the notorious River Roer - notorious becauso of the great
trouble its dormed stretches had given both the Americans and ourselves.
When manning the forward positions our lads lived through the long draw.
out hours in trenches, only hopping out during darkness.
They
spoko
of the necossity for quietnoss and patience, for the slightost light or
sound by night, or movement by day would bring down a hail of mortar
bombs dircated by airect observation from a mill in the village, They
could soo enany noving about in the village at times and by night coula
hoár a farmer's horso drawn tumbril coming into the villago at cortain
hours.
It was as quiet and sinister as that.
Horo was no dramatic
heroien engulted, in spood and excitament, but instond a traot of lond
shrouded in silence in which at one moment not a shot or sound, as to be
heard though one false move could bring down explosive death in tho
next. It was nervo-racking to say the loast, and our lads inexperionoed
as thoy were in the application of their infantry training in on aotual
theatre, showed that they could do it.
