- 40: --.
it coula nut have been a similar number of barrels of inglish beer, but the rule
seemed to be bigger and better bottles of wine.
previously returned to tho fola:
replenishment were
a mere repetition of the preyious day,
with the confusing difference that replen-
lamment was made fron BASSIN as opposed to BASSU
3 MAY
at at any and to fa to theon on any net
ishment was on both occasions made from BASSEN.
Is tho great news that BERLIN had fallen "in toto" to the Russians we were
infornod by a news Mash on the wireless that all Gorman forces in MI Germany,
Holland, Dannitk and the Irdoshan Islands had surrendered to 21st Aruy Group
but thig did not come es a colute surprise since we had heard prophesies of
this fron irisually wall-inforned sourßes" earlier in the day.
This was really greatnews,
and for us meant only one
ional role was complete ana that on, the, British sector,
thing - that our operat-
at least, the
enforced
babit of kllling pn smashing up the enany had come to an end.
our great dash from Normandy, across the Soine,
through BRUSSELS to NIJMeGE,
and then again aver the Rhine througa, ENSCHIEDE,
over the DORIMUND-EMS Canal
he woser and the Aller against continuous and fanatical opposition had ended
tricphantly in the CUxHAVE pocket!
Late as the offical nows of this capitulation came a number of bottles
popped and a little fitting celebration ensued. We heard that we had now but
one of operational move to nake this would bring us nearer to the Division's
forward troops - and theny whath
Daring the last two days we had haa the loan of an armoured cor to accompany
ow forvard Supply Points, and during the evening of the 4th a small tank chum-
ed its way into the femyard with tieut Mountford at the steering levers.
new addition to 221 Coy's armoury!
It was officially
desertbed at a Looust tanit of tho type used by the Airboro, but it was to be
hopel that it wouldn't prove itself such a pest as its name implied.
It seen.
ed rather queer that having cong all this vay through the crises of the test-
em Front fighting we should now receivo such protection for our columns when all
official figiting had ceased. But he who walks in a fog does not see all!
But we were to move again; the Recce Group hod left during the norning and
returned with the woeful tale that having found "smashing billets" in STADE
pn the banks of the Elbe Estuary they had discovered also that the occupiers,
the Housenold Cavalry, vere holding on to them with bulldog tenacity, and thus
had been forced to look nearér at hand.
Our new hone it seemed was to be in
"L, another inaignificant village about 10 nilos Sil Of STADE-
5 MAT
At 0930 hrs the Coy oclim pulled out of GR-MECKELSE en route to the.-
new location.
a large proportion of the volicios, varticularly those of 10 Platoon hauled.
trailers large. and snall. There were trailers.on jeep chassis, 15-owt chassis,
ex-Gernan chassis sad now, in addition, to extraordinary towed, vehicles of
weighty construction which had every serbalnce of being the product of an
engineer's. nightmaro, fot despite theis weight and their total absence.of:
brakes they were towed by dwarfed 15-owts!-
new location at 0900 iprs., cour
The supply whigles had already gone forward to operate the Point in the
The veather vas kind enough to graco our arival with à seasonal (?)
shower of rain and hail. Someone had said of British weather that we did not
have clinate but just samples of yeather, and that wisecrack seemed to apply
equally well to the Nordic spring.
The wet cold day was capped by the bright news of the surrender of two
complete Army groups to the Americans in the MUNICE area.
the latest manifestation of German Furerhood - was now telling his troops
Achiral Doenita
(the ezact identity of wich not even he could now have exact knowledge) taut
resistance to the western /lies was hopeless, but they must, at all costs,
Whilst we couldn't agree more
with the first part of this dearce we couldn't help thinking that he was a
little nis-advised with regard to the latter. Way the hell aidn't he give
up, we thought, aã let us have our VE Day?
of recent wooks, and particular
ly of the last few doys the lucky ones about to go on leave to Britain had been
wondering whether they would have the good luck to be at home when the "cease
"Lit up".
Pire was soinded, so that they, as woll as the cities, could get properly
C.
vars
