the groind wast which acoopented first light the doy moved out.
to taie up a new posttion at AlOUDANaY a few idles North of dARN.
HQ was in some farm buildings, with the rest of the boy living uniler canvas
with sono looping in the reoently dug foxholes, The BBP wes in the orchard
forming part of the location,
A big attacie ves to go in to breal the eneryta hold on dAli to be preceded
by a heavy RAT attack with lencasters at 0530 hrs the following moming.
bombers arrived on shedule and most of
turned out to have a look at
the bomber fleet going in,
there was much enemy aix
activity over the area,
and the foxholes fornel good shelter front falling shell
splinters fron the concentrated AA fire.
Whilst Divisional arowr was engagea
on ithe good tank country" South of
areas of COLtUMBETTES - a
CAN Forward Supply Points were held in the faotor the habit of dropping in this
Sw suburb of the devestated town.
locality and on frequent occasions the Supply Point personnel were obliged to
The wirelcas crew of the supply Column set were rather perturbed.
the coppery head of the supply officer popping up and down nearby
since it apeared to be a too prominent landmark for enemy rangings to be
Supply Points for the renaining units were held daily in the coy
location; supplies being dram first fron SOMERVIEU and. later fron a point
North of DOUV ES DELIVERANDE.
"C" Platoon was detached immediately on arrival to 535 loy RASO and oper
ated across the CAPN Canal to Forward Petrol Points.
Unfortunately for us we
although various of its
to seo very little of "g" platoon in the future, to time to let us mow,
members were in the habit of calling on us from tine
amongst other things, how they were faring.
They were destined to a very hoard-
working but happy Platoon.
During this period Dvc Smith J.J.H, becane the first doy casualty by ro
eiving wounds - though not of a serious nature - from a nortar bomb which burst
near his vehicle whilst on a Forward Point.
Whilst we were in this location AKS gave several film shows in the bam adr
joining Coy HQ thus seiving all units of the very concentrated Admin Area which
now contained about 1,100 vehicles.
Dvi Morgan delivaring a car to the Colonel at Div HQ on one of these days
arrived there just in time for some shelling which caused several casualties
thereabouts.
Div HQ was not a particularly healthy place at that time.
The weight of the British attack was now being shifted west to the
CAUMONT area,
and the loy moved during the day to a new location
in the village of SECQUEVITIN-EN-BASSIN, the size of which name belica the size
of the village.
The G-O-0, Guards Armoured Division visited the Coy in this
9/30 JUL Continuing its westward novement the Coy moved to an orchard near to it
ormer location Fast of BAYHUX for one night only.
All that night the roads
were jamned with arour and transport moving through BAyaux to the South-west.
The weather was firmly settled and was to renain hot and fine for several weeks
to come, giving the Allies excellent opportunities to deploy their ground and air
strength for the vital break-out from the bridgehead.
PHASE III - "INTO THE BOCACE".
31 JUL. The Coy moved by first light to another orchard near the village of
1 AUG SATEN Botth of CAUMONI.
"Monty with a glittering escort of CMP
overtook the Coy column during this move, this location proved picturesque but
noisy, since we were in alose proximity to the gun positions of 8 AGRA who.
were in the act of putting down a heavy barrage on enemy positions to the South-
East. Those gun-flashes attracted eneny aircraft by night and the dropping of
anti-personnel bombs made the many deep shelters in the neighbourhood a valuable
possession.
4 AUG The Coy moved to the South of ST.MARTIN DES BESAGES through heavily dat-
aged and mined areas,
Coy mine detecting personnel were sent forward
with the OCts Reace Group to clear the new locality. Large numbers of dead cattle
in the fields made the hot Sumer air heavy with the unpleasant odour of decaying
flesh,
vases, beds left unnade, a little grease in a frying pan mite on the cola ashes
of an unkindled fire, Small signs were these but they told a poignent tale - an
oft-ropeated tale, The operation to heal wounded Prance was a painful one.
