Et. Cols downwards.
noprossing death she had - by collision with a common yard-broom! Incongruous
christoned Pupert i,
she was nevortholoss a lady in her own right.
Phoenix-1twu-
Rupert II rose front her shes in a Dutch farm and waxed fat and strong in a tex.
short tine.
She, knew none of the green french fielde that Rupert I had knorn.
but took her exercise in her enclosed estate.
She created rabbit history by
no peculier circunstances of her death - she was killed in revolving doors.
Iut hor will revealot her noble sacrifice - she had given her body to feed a
hungry Dutchman!
A lator audition was gaunt, sarthy Carl, a refugee from the Reichswald.
His nationality was Gonnan,
hie title Danish.
Iatho of body, yet arkward of
suit this rhounatic old man possessed a gargantuan appetite -
two ting of steal
all lidnoy wore but as mony swallows.
Acutely conscious of any deviation, in
colour from khari ho was allergic to civilians who, though Geran, presented, to
his classy ayo a tasty norsel.
His master, if master he had, triumphed by si
alone over this Werewolf of the Porest.
Dear Carl, sweet Carl!
What command
shull I now give you that will please your obedient gentle heart?
A nico juicy
civilian shall it bo, or just a cast-off hind-quarter from the butcher's slab?
To, Willians, no! Donty shoot him yet, hets ballast for the Hunber!
1 9
4 5
ASI XI -
"ICI, SNOW AND DOODLE-BUGS".
The comnencement of the uk leave scheme found the weather at its torst, and
sc later reporting back said that the train journey from BOURG IFOPOLD to
iS i (then unheated trains lasting 16 hours, was the worst part.
no state of the roads, alternating betwuen thick snow and glassy surfaces
naking tronsport a sticky business, and vehicles procoding on dotails had
ook out at the Transport Offico, where Tom Ranson and his minions "the pet
ahs", checked the slowing pulse of the transport veins, at an eaclier hour
i for the difficulties of the roads.
Whilst the number of Accident Report.,
ved at loy office showed a marked increase during this treacherous period.
much for the standard of driving within the Coy that nothing serious occur
Ters task vehicle was continuously in use.
The large amount of traffic o
ads feching the counter to Rundstedt's offensive also contributed to the
ulties. For five weeks it was necessary for all motor-cycles to be vith:
from the road, and DRs motored in joeps instoad. It is an ill wind that
obody good!
becane a familiar sight - those for BRUSSELS apparently passing to the
f the town, with those for ANTWERP to the North - at least that as the
station wo gave to these sights. One or two fell in the neighbourhood
asualties were sustained by the Coy.
sho.s were given by the Filn Unit in LEAU and we were able to attend
ad ENSA shows at the Div Club in TIRIEMONT - the large sugar-refining
in this town being the site of the Mobile Bath Unit.
ms that every positive must have its opposing negative as was borne out
is month when we lost one Sgt.Major and shortly after gained another.
iter who had been with the Coy since November 1941 when it was re-organ
SUPER-MARI had received promotion to RSM and was posted to a General.
Coy stationed at ANTWERP.
Questions put to him good-humouredly as t
ld deal with an "incident" arising from v 1 and V 2 activity were not
red however!
Ho had actually left the coy on the oth, and for the
ght the identity of the new Sgt. Major was concealed by the deep admi
rooves of "the, usual, channels".
In the meantime, Sgt. Cullen assun
rown and laurels in his own inimitable manner.
Eventually CSM
red on the scene, and we realised that in him, we had, at least, be
fate worse than death, Questions plied in the Sgts! Mess revea
