- 2
and the sun
was shining from a
cloudless sly;
too good to but 1700 hrs the trenon coast care into aight,
and with it
There were hundreds
the "Rodney" resplendent in
tug and the even smaller landing-craft.
these ahips we passed by liice a
of needles.
Đt.
our first physical controt with French soil.
Soon we were and.tting.our
share of the smoko-soroen wich was inid over the aran as the light of
day finally disarpeared.
through the
A single enery iront thortly appes hit or rather was heard
he could not miss!
smoke-sargen
and endeavoured to
1e he coula.
and instead was
pomptly shot down, for
his tacable.
henceforth the night was peaceful.
During the afternoon of the next day Lots and Rhinoes came alongsine
and we clambered. down the sacombling nets into
them whilst our vehicles
were swing up fron the holds and lowered into
theso smaller oraft after us o
md landing craft thrown ashore during.
wo sailed off to the beaches, and therothe recent gelo,
amidst the wrecks of cargo-ships
we landed day-shod.
Our meticulous water proofing had,
fortunatoly, been in vain. We had our in
instructions and drove through the small village of COURSIULIES-SUR-MER.
to the open country behind.
There the vehicles would stop and complote.
stage 1 of the de waterprooßing process.
It was then possible to drive.
the direction of BAYKUX,
just beyond which lay our first location.
an as found without nuch aiffloulty - in fact, it all soned vory much
like an exercise so far.
Where was the catch?.
Capt Higgins with that part of HQ,
and B Platoons which had.
sailed in the ILC were the first to arrive in Franco,
and to pitch their
can in hedged fields on the. Port-on-Bessin Road about 1 mile NW of the
oathedral town of BAYBUX, On 24 Jun.
the remainder of the Priority Party, which had kicked its heels
for another night on board "Fort fork" and "Ocoan Vagrant", disembarked
azy-shod on Sun Beach and proceeded to the location.
Work immediately
commenced on comploting the de-waterproofing of vehicles,
and the first.
Supply Point was hold near BAYEUX for units of the Div alrendy landed.
Supplies were being drawn fron the BSD at SOMMHRVIHU •
PHASE II - "NORMANDY"
27/30 JUN This period was used to get acclimatised and to prepare fully
for field conditions.
Considoring the size of the bridgehead life was
surprisingly quiet,
the only evidence of battle being in the sounds of
field artillery and oneny night-flying piraraft.
Every day, as more
wits landed, the roads bocame more and, more congested. Pioner Coys
were hard at work in the vicinity making bye-pass roads round BAYHUX and. -
laying pipo-linos for oil supplies fron the little port of PORT-Ell-BESSIN
ready for future operations.
These pipolines were later to be extended.
right across France into Belgium.
Our fightors were already flying from
small landing strips within tho bridgehoad. BAYHUX itself remained out
of bounds to personnol of tho doy.
on 28 Jun the Coy suppliod a detachment for the formation of a small
composite company to supply 32 Gas Ble in action in the BROTTEVIITE sector
west of CAIN, This Joy was under the command, of Capt.
trange, with. Capt.
Hall and Sgt. Watson and opI. Whodhoad in the HQ.
It operated from BREDY
some 7 miles to the oast of the parent Coy's location, with Forward Supply
Points near BRETTEVILLE.
During the evening of 29 Jun a large force of RAF. Lancasters passed.
over the Coy location to bomb concentrations of enery armour in the woods
around VITTERS BOGAGE some 8 or 10 miles to the South.
30 JUN As other units
constituting Admin Area had now arrived in the
bridgehoad the doy movod early in the noming to a new location about 2 miles
to the East of BAYEUX. This location consisted of wheat fields and
hodgorows, Here the pivision, loss 32 Bde, was concontrated within a very
small area - tank rubbed shoulders with pack ration dums - and accordingly
the fow field tracks which passed through those fields bocame very busy
with traffio of all kinds, Tho whoat, maturing with the rodn and brilliant
