the Worth of ARRAS - rich an metories for the
the
to a Boston of 52 miles.
the retreating me
horso-dram transport, in tho lator stages of his fotront the ght
the caronses of horson bocere fore
remains of their
Lay on the the ten drivers
consone
Sooras of tirid beasta
and ditchos very often accompanted by the manted
- daught by our vengatul
Typhoons on thair
dosly sbouring of the angry liras of
communication
and rotreat.
AREAS WAS Full of FEL
with
thotr satiafying job of doaling
enemy prisoners still boing dolivarad from outlying poste.
The
tom itslef wes not so badly
soen,
and many of
its inor buildings appearod to be
comparativaly untouched.
A faste
moving open is onsior on tho land mnd ita contros of
habitation
than the probing attacks against stubborn organisod opposition.
The Coy
arrivad at ROCHLINCOURT about midday, and in
it was found possible
visit to tho famous VIVY RIDGE Monorial, to Canadian courago
po range for those not on imediate which
tha afternoon
stood prodly on the ridge of higher ground about 3 miles wray.
Sono wore able to spond a
few hours in ARRAS afterwards - naking a
welcone break after wecks of continuous work,
FHAST V - "BRUSSELS!"
Dawn found the leading
olements of the Division thundering out
Of DOUAI in accordance with
the G-O-0is declared purpose
to advance
and liberate BRUSSELS.
The
operation andod succon-fully to bacome
0110
of
the most fanous and spoudiost advarcos in minavary history, mine
tomporarily, as it did anil scones of unparalloled oxcitene
joy and domonstrations of affection fron the deli to
Suigians.
In its more humble way the Coy made its own liberation and had a
great day as a result.
During the moming, in fine weather, the Coy moved up
to tho
Bolgion frontier along to main road and then turned off along
shock-
ing minor roads in the frontier region
to a pleasant location in the
ground of a chateau in the village of BRAFFE, a few milos to tho
South of TOURNAI on the TOURNAI-MONS road.
All along the route
especially in Bolgium, tho foll of evory village tumed out in front
their houses and showered fruit and flowers into the cabs of the
vehicles.
In all, by the time the Coy arrived at BRAFIlE the colun
resemblod more a "Concours d'Elegance" or "La Battaille dos I'lours"
of Southern France that an RASC Supply Coys
Wo were the first Allied troops to enter this noighbourhood, and
within an hour or so cf entering the locality, roports camo in of
numerous enemy troops still in the vicinity.
Defenco posts were
immediately set up at strategic points on the roans and manned by
PIAT and Bron toans as well as riflemen.
Whilst our posts were not;
as it happoned, brougit into action, our "0" Platoon with 535 Coy
RASC and armoured olements of 268 Ewd Del San in Admin Ara gave
battle and captured a sizeable batch of prisoners.
During the night
a very dejected-looking German was brought to coy HQ by the sustries
and he was despatched to the POW cage.
The chatear itsolf was usod,
on the invitation of its occupants, for the Offioors! Mess and evory
member of the village eagerly sought guests for tea or suppor or
to sleep the night.
Such cafes as wore open welconed in our troops
and many had a very enjoyable evening. .
Letters were to be scon i
months later going to and from various addresses in BRAFTE.
It wor
a village lorig to be spokon of in the Company.
The second day in the place differed in no way from the first vati
the axception that there was no interforenco from the cnomy.
A HO
supply Point was hold, as also on the previous day, just outside itu
The camp had buzzed during the provious evoning with a runour that
the Coy was to move on the following day into BRUSSIS,
and inmodiat ly
there were conjured up visions of palatial billets on the Boulovard
d'Anspach, Whilst this proved to be a mere mirago, we wore at loost
moving into a southern suburb of the city and thus hopes of a visit
to the now gay capital were only a little ruduced.
Having left the village the doy turned right along the route .
nationald" towards the capital and shortly was joined by its ascort
of a troop of Cromwell tanks from 268 Ewd. Del Sgn for there wes
still considerable likelihood of the road being out by many rockets,
The road was lindd with flags from every possile pander und other
