- 18
One norning an enemy mashino-gun was giving
trouble
and the
lot foll
to
Op1, Rend A.
to zive ringings to artillery.
support to doal with
this nuisance
molter.
So bodiarato were his dirootions
that
within a few inutes the Spenden
spat no more.
op1, Read was Inter oclimented by the Batfelion cormander
2or tie nico little pole bor infantrymen had was cocasioned by Typhoon
One unpleasant experdenos our
pilots mking a slight error of judgement
causing
thatr rockets to pass
unoomfor bably
nent to their positions.
In roading of Typhoon attacks
on
oney positions they sinitted to feoling a
Tater Little sorty for
the Hun involved,
forerly of this Coy
Thoro vero tary mines in the too end a/con to dia some very good worke
togethor with DvI. Fatson
caused by these mines,
Booby-traps there were also,
in moccupied trencnes,
and affixed
the
the as yet inburied fallen
both British and German (the enemy had
compunction about thus troating his own dead in thia master.
fatal one,
in that Opl.Powel1
shortly
after caused his death.
He had been vory well liked,
and had beon with the Coy since 1940 - everyono
was going to miss Goorge Powell,
The very next day after
this ocourred our detachment was brought out of
the line back to
where they rosumed
their normal. duties - much richer
in experience of wor.
To Costa permitte they were given a le hour pase
to BRUSSELS,
which needless, to say,
cane as a most welcome
Meanwhile the Ooy's work had boen going on,
and the ballot for UK
Leave
had been
orried out with befitting dignity
under the superviaion of Cat,
Bedford in the presenco of Platoon representatives.
Towards the end of our stay in this location enemy night-flying airoraft
made one or two hit-and-ran
attacks on
the distriot but the number of bombs
dropped was negligiblo.
foll
in the
locality.
V. 1s began
to make
their appearance, but none
On 16 Doo von Rundatodt launched his offensive in the Ardennes full of
and the news of this was received very favourably
The Hun had come out of his concrete
PHASE X - "FUNDSTHDI, BELGIUM, AND CHRISIMAS"
19 dotton on to afroilet that this night to now to elusion i
A strong runour had circulated in the loy that we were to nove
though BRUSSELS was hardly synorgnous with rest - but the next three days
were, to see several noves, and whilst the ultimate location proved, in most
senses to be a "rost" area, it was rather different fron the idea conjured in
the minds of wishful thinkers. Undoubtedly the cause of those several noves
must largoly have been the Gornan "Western Offensive".
During the night of 19/20 Dea the Coy noved, from the factory aoross the
Maas via HASSPIT to LANGDORP, a mall villago lying some 10 miles or so to
the North-east of LOUVAIN.
The Coy had noved in two sections and by the
tine that the sooond section arrived down wis not for off, on arrival in
the carly hours the chiof thing that attracted attention was the light of
cookhouse fires burning on a small green in the village - which indicated.
that a welcome meal was on the way.
Overhead V.1s were constantly passing
and many were brought down in the noighbourhood by gun barrages,
insomuch.
that by the time the Coy moved out some 12 hours later the locality had
already boen dubbed. "Buzz Bomb Alley".
That our stay in LANGDORP was to be but a short one was indicated eaxly
on by the Ol's departure on route to recce a now location, and therefore
orders to nove there were expected to come through at any time
Runours of enemy paratroops boing droppod in this area to add, as the
Hun dearly hoped, to the alleged confusion wrought by his BRUSSELS-and-
ANTWRP-taking offonsive were talked of, and whilst small parties of
suitours nay, in aotual fact, have boen dropped none paid us a visit.
The afternoon of the 20th was dismal as the loy pulled out to nove.
South-east to WITDERIN, north of ST. TROND.
Meanwhile Composite Platoon. and the Supply staff were having a complicated
tine in arranging the delivery of the "goods" whilst contending with these
sudden moves.
In fact the position of supply loads, reserve rations, and
tho finding of the necessary vehicles to move them, were always problons
which had to be solved when the Coy was moving location. To the casual
observer of the vehicle strength it night have seemed apparent that there
should always be plenty of transport available, but in view of the nurbers
of vehicles invariably on detachment to RA, RE, and the blanket lories
and sometines "Champagne Charlie's waggons the situation was seldon oasy.
Musecun
ment 25284
