222L CONTENTE RASO (ENDANERE PRICES)
A DIARY OP EVANAS FROM JUDE 196
BUSE I - DIO THE ERIDOUARADE
attacies
to the decompenáment
ost thie
boginning
16 Meter to ope priority party.
consisting
of 2 ofelders ma 194 other Ranies, noyed out of Isonhurat P
ank in Susgen
on the first stagp of dos sourney
tha Noruandy Bridgehead,
the journoy sbartod at 0345 haa.
in driesting ratn, and tite
form Labotter going
to work would not have malised the suppressad exoite
ment that abounded in the hourt of owny man
that
convoy.
ith soered:
antlaipated
that
it would
strange to be moving North hon
have boom in quito the opposite
Mrootion,
But
when one
is but the
tiniest of coge in a mighty machine it is alfejault indeod to conrehend
the order to vo, to bond on soй di
as a whole.
found the
On roaching the southorn
civilians noving about heavy-eyed and with o
look of slight bowilderment
on their faoes.
an hona go te which they van not go
They were being blastod by sonothing fron
the air, the
As we journeyad
an we foul ovidence of the
seviral places - chiefly
shattored windors of houses and shops along the road.
The civilians had
boon spending the night through an "Alort" which was still in force,
ve ourselves bocano so ongrossed in this rostery that wo temporarily
forgot our excitement ovor forthooming adventures.
Eventually we got to
that thoso "Things" ere the long-vaimtod"V. 1.
- or "Doodle-bugs"
the londoners with thoir flair for deprocating it
anony tercorising
activitios chose to call them.
Passing through the Last ind a london womon stood by the rondsido.
with baskets of pandriches and cigerattos which they distributed as woll
as they could amongat us.
It was a kindly gosture, partioularly in viow
of their present troubles.
We found that Monstead Flats was our rondozvous for the time being
and horo we wore to livo under canvas for the noxt three days.
Whilst here,
the final stago of waterproofing on tho vohicios was carried out, ombark-
ation lists completed and honded, in, and lifo-bolts and omergenoy rations
Tho Coy hat ounrily becone morgod, in tho goral life of
the Transit Cainp.
INSA shows, voru providod to help to pass the time of
waiting
Thay were,
on the whole, a lary throo days, during which timo
flying-bombs continuod to como ovur regularly:
the Flats provided a good
view of london's dofonces in operation against them.
12 JUN During the moming oun vohiclos voro driven by their rospective
drivers down to tho Albort and Victoria Docky for loading, whinst tho
remainder of the porsonnel travulled later to the. docks in ICIs.
Our party vas thoro split into troci
one part ombarked on
"Fort Fork",
another on "Ocuan Vagrant" (both Canadian-built Liberty
ships), and the third part on a Anurican TIC.
All sailed that evoning.
As to slid out of the docks, pornios
and other, now, uscless coins wore thrown down to the dockors and port
oporatives standing on tha dool: sides.
Soon the broad Thanes was, bear-
ing us down to SOUTHIND, where unopectudly our ships droppod anchor.
A gold vas raging in the Chandl and off the Franch "beaches"
_and wo verd destinod to stand off SOmEND until 2, Jun, although those
on the no weighod ancest tyrous day and wunt shoad of us. It was
dark, as our convoy of a score or nor ships with destroyer and corvetto
escort entored the straits of Dovor and passud the guns of CATAIS which
were kind onough to ronain silont during our passage within their rango
A day of brillioni sunshino followod. Over-zoalous aspirants
for a P.I. Parado on tho Quartor-Duck (actunily it was tho Forword Hold
cover) wore qui kly discouraged by tho unimprossod, Captain for the ship
who intimated in no uncertain mannor that whiled PI might bo an oxcellent
thing for the Army, such thumping on board might attract a tarpodo which
would not be good for his ship. So, fos once in a whilo, wo haa.
cause to admit that German l-boats hnd their usus.
with so many mon
aboard fresh wator was bound to bocoris in short supply if caroful control
of its uso wore not maintainod, and thus a Wator ploquet consisting of
a junior NOO was put into oporation during the daytime.
