- 34 -
to carty hin forward on the next sove intil we
should find a POll cage which was
opon for business.
Then last soen ho was sitting in
empta
iroo tonner
onjoying the genial oceany of one, Dirtalker.
togeticer
vith a tin of
oread and buster.
tro becane quite close
emd it was
said that he did not want to leave
FUSE IVIL - I5C-BE, HAPSHIRE ROG!"
17 AFR
By 0700 hua the Recod Group had Tantaied en route to the NIRNBURG arca
oast of the faMiser.
The Division
had now come
under the cormand of
12 dorps
to operate on a now soctor that south of HAMBURG.
Whilst the
Coy Has losing up in roadiness for
the
move scheduled for 1130
one day's pacit ratione vore, issued to all undts
at the Supply Point in the BRP
openiay at 0800 hrs.
the Reploniament Column had gone dom to
Where, on tic. had noi boon sot we
to load with one day's pack and
on their return journey, nec the ronninder. of the
these vehiclesta more thich tha to laStRa on the enat bank of the iterer
Coy mowing c
involvel a journest of some fifty or so miles.
route lay via VECITA, SULi
and IZABERGHT across wido peat moors which abound in
this part of Germany:
Tho colun hát not been on tie road long and had travelled only some five til
whon a longthy voit ensued, for other units of the Division ware passing throw.
VECITA and ve had to wait our tur for "road space".
The usual ronarks were
passe regarding the delay (of five hours) and a Gallup Poll of opinion would.
luve becn that "someone had boggel it"!
Be that as it nay, our wait was pass
pleasantly enough on a forner lultaffe airfield just to the West of VECHTA,
bathed in an extraordinarily hot april sun.
This airtield, of wich we hod tine to make a thorough survey, hold points
considerable interest.
ten for an airfield it was excoptionally level - t
tracts of the westphalien Plain - and its
construction had been
simple matter - the addition of concrete runways and dircuits had rendered the
fiold operational. Now, it was decidedly non-oporational for recently it nai, 9*f
carpet-bombed by the RAF lewing a regular patter of sandy weter-filled cratu=s
on the field, and the hangars a seried of twisted skeletons.
An occasional
oriosity was the dumy aircraft of latin and papier mache fashioned to the shops.
of JU. 88s and other two-engined planes.
The real article haù been parked in t
specially made clearings in the coniforous foreat lying on the western outsicats
But those had not escaped lue attention for they now laid. lio
roasted vultures anidst the silent unneeding forest with the elaborate camoufle
netting string taut high above as though to hide the final ignominy of the
Luftwaffo from the all-seeing RAF.
Sone novelled at the sicill and magnitude of German carouflago; but instead st
being a German triumph it was but striking evidence of an Allied victory,
for this
camouflage was tho Child Invention of Mother Necessity.
In this respect the 3
and USAAF had been prolific mothers, as they had also boen flourishins undertoucrs.
On the outer circuits stood racks of bonbs - HE, whistling bonos, and the
faniliar "Breadbaskets"
containing a delightful nixture of incendiary and anti-
personnel bombs.
polluted by Nazi terror.
This silont, dosolated field, fron which even the cheap gilt of 1940 trauma
had faded long ago, scened as a symbol of the decapitation of the Gurnan Chicora
by the Allied Bellophron.
The furious ride of the Vallerie had been crude ana
slow compared with the grace and speed of our nodern pegasus.
Another lengthy halt. between VECHTA and SULINGN meant that duck vas alreaus
gathering before we had passed the half-way. point on our journey, though a thun r
storm had laid the dust on this now busy road,
By 0330 irs on the morning of 18th April we were crossing the pontoon brily.
now spanning the Weser.
This river, though suall compared with the Rhine, DI
to be a considerable water obstacle and the maicing of a taporary bridge had.
necessitated the construction of lengthy approaches.
The speed at which the
Sappers work and the thorouginess of it never failed to impress us. Ivery arm,
of course, plays its part in an advance but the contribution of the Sappers is
immense.
The moon, in its first quarter, had disappeared long before we rolled into
ASSBERG near 0400 hrs. In the darkness, and in our tiredness after the long
ight
nose to tail,
But when the hot
am no to tri undi on a dea it unprint the thing ping forest
1 the clean sandy soil that fomed a carpet beneath. In view of the fine
ther, and the proposed shortness of our stay, only one house was requisitioner,
we lived in the open and it was good to do so.
renal War
ocument 25284
