- 9 -
Yont to polye to poledond standing, Choarins and waving, as they had
"Byo"
baconse
famous!
At and litH boing passed, the clun turnod South noor the oity t
entor
tho
Rabarb-of TOURNBEES whero
the Coy ensconcod itsole
in the grounds
of
nin onl
As a matter of
this loaality was alweys roferred.
to.
mojority ha DIORPE
which was the Planiah equivalent of TOURNErFE.
faultlossly furnished, the oners wore
absent.
appearad to be that
Germen officors and troops
had been occupying ho
days before the
Daviadon had
*Autunn
The people
Of TOURNEPPE spoke
with gloo
of the hunded vacation of the promises by the Germans, during the
previous
Sunday ovoning.
Various itoras of Gortan
houschold requisites were
discovered in one of
tho roans in
it was not long before
tho
Coy had arrangod a suitable
A fow of the luakier ones managed to get into BRUSSELS for a few hours
that evening; and the
tales that they told on their retum in the early
hours made
those
that had remained bohind even more detormined than, evor to
go thare also
imminent, and only a
if it were at all possible.
However,
another move was
ven, ranaged
to reach the city on the following day.
roturned they told of the milling crowds in its teeming streats
of the wild unrestraihod excitement of the people who were taking exactly
Every khali- and blue-
olad man was the contro of attraction for those civilians to whom he
happenad to be noar at any particular moment,
and the autograph books that
he
had to sign were logion - but who could possibly have resisted some of
the applicants?
The people were proud to air their English and to relate
thoir pre-ar oxporionces of and contaots with Britain and the British.
Public erDracings
were quite a normal
and many many red-faced.
through the crowds.
hotel or private house in arder to celebrate the occasion.
embarrassing to the majority!
Many friends woro mado
in the very short
space of timo that could be spared for such a visit, aven though here was
a soldierts dream of olympus come taue!
the sight of the burning Palais du Justico dominating the
dits it orient dottinthe poet not abets the comparat
ivoly littlo imaged city - and the knowledge that the forward elements of
the Division had alroady gone in pursuit of the late ocoupiers of the city
brought one back to reality and the real job in hand, in spite of the
efforts of Bacchus to deny that this was so.
the troops that had made all this possible had already moved out -
The noxt morning the coy was to nove out also, heading for greater and
more exciting adventrues.
with a total of 400 miles travelled in eight days already behind it,
oy moved out of JOURNaPE through Southern BURSSELS via the Foret des
Soignes, in pouring rain, on to the LOUVAIN road.
Here a considerable
delay occurred, caused by the enemy temporarily outting the route and
necessitating sone Divisional armour returing to remove this obstacle t
our "soft" vohicles.
LOUVAIN, well-known to the Guards in 1940, was
found to be badly damagod though its fine Hotel de Ville - rather sinix
arghisauturally to its more famous brother in BRUSSELS - was practically
unscathed. Along the road were the now familiar wrecks of smashed and
burnt-out German vehicles which had been caught in several days' suecessi
straffing by 2 TAF.
Civilians were endeavouring (after thriftily renovi
all useful items) to clear the wreckage from the roads and from the tracl
of the light railway which is a feature of all Belgian main roads.
these obstacles caused only slight deley to our now fast-moving colum,
which was still being showered with fruit and flowers by the excited
roadside spectators.
Meanwhile, as the loy tumed off to its new location, the Forward
Supply Point vehicles were retuming fron the Point further Fast along.
the road in the direction of BEARINGEN, to harbour with the Coy in its
