32 -
which vill lend its voice all too willingly to any worth-while crescendo
of the general huboto.
13 AFR
A Friday too! A regrettable note was sounded early in the mom-
ing by the announcement of the death of President Roosevelt;
an item of news which drew a crowd round each of the now many radios in
use throughout the day.
The Supply Point and departure of the Replenishment Column to ENSCHEDS
followed at their usual times - life was going on normally - no nove
even though div to had reportedly noved.
As the sun reached its zenitir so the "Q" like some rare hawk swooped
down fran a great height to descend upon He platoon with a lit inspegtion!
Taken totally maores the viotim struggled under his all-enveloping claw.
There were many comings and goings to and from the erstwhile parade
ground - some arriving under a burden of assorted and jumbled kit some
minutes after the sands of time had run out.
What dignity was no conterred upon the hunble accessories of mili-
ary existence!
Shirts, drab, angola and brushes,
blacking to wit,
had now become objects of disnay and even terror to those who had neither
to hold aloft in thois left, or was it right, hand! Holders of Ointment,
anti-gas, No. 2 were spurned in favour of those possessing the "lucky
blue" No. 5.
One, naned "Junior' exhübited the niserable contents of his
respirator to reap the baleful eye and utter derision of the
haversac el of the urtiatos therein containod, voro, so to was decreed,
of the correct mark or condition.
It was rinoured, albeit stoutly
enied in the affected quarter, that the objeots in question had beon
borrowed from none other than the "o" himself for this sudden contingency.
In the evening, whilst the Mobile Cinena Section was erecting its
apparatus for a film show in an extremely odorous barn (which gave suit-
able atmosphere to the western bring shown), w/shops Platoon nad the
pleasure of exhibiting the glories of its individual kits.
The 14th April vas a quiet, uneventful day and differed only from the
provious two or three in that a Forward Supply Point was held at BERGE,
a village some twenty or so miles along the road to BREW. A Point for
Admin units was held in the Coy location where the usual fresh rations
were issued.
It now appeared very likely that the loy would move forward on the
morrow, for the Recce Group had been told to hold themselves in readiness
to move off at 0700 hrs in the morning.
tro more film shows were given during the evening, the film being
"Meet the People" and the auditorium was, as on the previous evening, tho
bam adjoining the Burgomasterts house.
It was a unique experience io
watch a film in the company of cows and one large disconsolate bull.
On this next nove the nilm unit was to travel in our convoy; this
was a new practice, making our column more "cosmopolitan" than over as
ve now had signals, RAOQ, and RE as well as our own vehicles.
At 1800 hrs a further Supply Point for Admin units was held whereby
the rations which would have been issued on the following day for con-
sumption on the hext were issued in advance because of the impending
move,
PHASE XYIT -
"HERRINVOK AND OCTORS"
15 APR
The Recce Group swirled out of the far gates at 0730 hrs.
It
was now the custon for Sgt.Watson to travel forward with this
" Group as he acted as interpreter for the 0C in arranging billets in new
areas, and making such adjustments vith the civilian population as was
necessary. Often it was politic to remove the civilians from certain
buildings and areas required for the Coy's use. In these areas there
were very few Bnglish-speaking people and thus his services becane inval-
uable.
A forward supply Point had been sent on to BAKUM, south of CLOPpy-
