the bridge.
That sooned to antisty hin nore.
Today the Coy loved a short
to the Bast to the village
of fun the Booond night hore ona y sholla fell in the namby ciolda
threo or four nilos from the Comen frontler.
for several hours throughout the night.
We thought that these were
probably boing directad fron the Reichevela torost at on arena batteries
which was in aotion,
or because of
the laot that our Div HQ was in this
a 0oxps mobile battory opened up with counter fire for a tenth pariod.
anoa.
and by morning, peace ruled again.
FASE VIII - "A DUTCH INTRUDE"
The Division was now regrouping and this necessitated a further
move;
mile From the town of wIt to Fio
tozning community about a
and on the banke of the Maas,
Supplies
were now being drown fron tho
at WIJCHEN.
This proved a good location from the
supply point of view as we
had the use of axcellent barns in the form whor doy HQ was
situated also.
with the exception of vory few tho whole of thy Coy was still. living under
canvas which was quite confortablo while the wanther romained reasonably
dry.
But towards the end of our stay in this location the weather deter
iorated ahd the orchard and fiolds bucane hopoless.
"" and "B" Platoons
had to perform a major oporation every
time
their vehicles noved out,
and.
the putting down of rubble dia very littlo to help.
Finally it became
necessary to park most of the vohicles on
cho mads, and as many mon as
possible went to livo in the barns and outhouses.
barges to be brought up the Maas and to
In an effort to solve this situation so noorol.
it was trrangod for two river
as noar
as possible
to
the Coy location,
near
that proviously occupied by the Mobilo Bath Unit
(now situated in NIJMEGEN) •
Dospite the fact that thesc ultimately
proved unsuitably, the chartoring of the barges bucame the subjoot of nuch
nautical wit throughout the Division,
So far as 1dmin Arce was concerned
Admiral's opauluttus were, netaphorically at least, amferred on the 00
overnight;
in Futio all hours were to bo roforrod t, in turns of bells,
and the loy was to ba styled waterbore".
But whilst no order was givon
to "splico the mintraco" frequent issues of run were made during this
pariod.
At the beginning of Novenpur short Zeavo to BRUSSELS and ANTWERP waS
colmenoed.
This was very ood nows, for there vero many who wished to
revive hootio associations with tho gay, but rathor pungry capital.
It
was a six hours journey by ICI to both placos but ail who went declared
that it was woll worth while for the sake of 48 hours spent in civilization
onco more.
There was a Coups cinona at WIJCIN to which nonbers of the Coy sould.
go, and tho Dutch Anny Barracks at GRAVy, had boon tumed into a Divisional
Club for which the Coy roccived daily allocations.
Not least of the Coy achiovements whilst at KRISEOFL was the construction
of "Evorott way" as a traffic cirouit for volicos porting to tho supply
Point in the Coy loontion, This bechne the Burna load for Divisional
supplios, in local fane at least.
Bricks ad rubble were brought fron
wrecked buildings in NIJMEGEN and shinglo and gravol fron narby pits in
unit transport,
and under the direction of the Chiof Engineer (personitiod
by Capt Strango) and a host of willing (?) workers this Dutch Watling
Strect made stady progruss.
The draining of the Pottine Marshes was no
greater foat, and the sight of tho strutting Dictator declaring the aroa
duly drained could not havo boiterad that of the Chiot Engineor surrounded
by his ablo assistants, cutting the ribbon in the preconco of the dodier
and of the cup that cheors.
Whilst BRUSSETS bocano incrensingly popular for 48 hrs leavo the euni
ative offect of "y" woapon activity on ANIVIRF rathor took the gilt off
leave in that vital port.
On such a visit Dvr. Palmu: was the subjuct of
a "near miss" and escaped with injurios which however wore surious enough
to tako hin to hospital for a while.
Workshops Pl toon made a valuable contribution to troop welfaro in
this loention by the construction of one bod, flat, folding for onch non.
Invostigations into the nutritivo value of Army fool had scoringly
liscovered that curtain vitanins were present in insui iciont quantitios.
lespite the fact thnt frosh rations were now in issue, and thonceforth
eculiar selling vitonin pills becane a regular issuo.
reme
ocument 25284
