- 20 -
in a gally deosrased
mich stood a tal
though perhaps
cola,
dining-all in the centre of
illuminated Christius Free
During
the
meal Capt. Strange mounted
messages loud and long fron the supreme
the
Comtendez downwards,
"atest and read out many hang
his loquaciousness marred by constant and raucous interruptions from a
shockingly inebriated nember on the floor!
was being poured fron cavemous jugs into
ke animate more
hundreds of euptying mugs by the
Oc and his officers maling the rowds of the tables.
On BORITE DEy 50Ot began to
and thence forth the ground was to be
Severe
frosts (up
to
a serious tenace
to vehiole
freeze mixture was
engines,
institubed outside doy Ha
and a
tray
anti-
on which a constant watch
was kept for any sins of
its freezing.
This to promptly
addy
Ingines
vere then started every 1t or 2 hours during the night, and rost casual-
ties vere thus avorted.
As the days passed and no retained in lalu,
so we came to learn some of
its nistory.
of
considerable importance,
but the industrialisation
country had left
LEAU high and dry with the exception of the one mill in which our BRE was
now situated.
• But Time had left
it in possession of many fine old buildi
of which the Church was a beautiffl example.
unmarred by modern industry.
During the reign of Louis XIV (or was it XVth?) of France the
town had held
out for many veels against the invading forces,
and successfully bargained
for terms.
This trimph vas largely due to
the formidable earthworks
which surrounded the
town,
some of which remained to the
present day and
vere now being utiliged by the village youth as excellent teboggan slopes.
On New Tear's Ive and also on the following night a dance was held in
the Hotel
de Ville and was well attended by the Coy
whose
dancers found
however that the dancing of Belgiun was decidedly different from our own.
No jitterbugging here! But, the hospitality of the people of IllAU was
unlimited and the lads were enjoving themselves here more than at any
previous place,
or at any later one either.
1944, was over!
It had been a most eventful year and rad,
of course,
witnessed a great change for the better in Allied fortunes?
and the
enemy staggering back into his shrinking Reich on all. frorus.
Although
we had said the same on one or to previous New Teac's DYe,
this time it
must be that the New lear would bring total viotory over Germany.
We had
done well in 1941, and we felt that 22, Coy had fultille.L Its snare.
no time during operations had the Division wanted for foot,
no matter what
the aiffinities might have been, and our vehicles had run to schedule
carrying out a variety of jobs in adition to that of feeding the Division.
There were those vehicles attached to Div HQ,
those rurring daily on long
and heavy runs for ADOS, the detachment to the Engineers which had been
warmly comented upon by the Sapper Transport officer for the cheerful
and efficient manner in which retails had been carried out.
And guards
for the drivers were coning round frequently too,
and tere to continue so
for many months to come.
But it was all part of the lob,
and anything
that helped to bring about the defeat of Germany and bring nearer that.
precious "pioce of paper" was worth it!
"ANIMATIA" As we pause twixt the years it would he ormlich to omit mentio
or 22, 's pets.
There was a more or les+ vermanent strength of one dog and.
two bitches, with scores of tenpuamy attachments which for the taipontn
this chronist, must be onisted.
"Ginger" - takes pride of place in this roll of honour by length of contin..
service alone, if nothing else.
She, a small and (nat rally) ginger speci
of terrier was on the strength of Worl-shops.
She was an old hand and very
experienced of the "Facts of Life".
She joined the coy in the weston days
and had soldiered on ever since.
Whilst faithful to a degree to her immed-
iate masters, she was decidedly internationally minded - no colour bar
there! Her love life must have been inmenso, for having presented the Coy
with innumerable litters in England she was not slow to form an Intente
Cordiale of her own, and no doubt sooner or later some log Low German woul.
come her way - or would she too, refrain from "fratting"?
Next, nervously and arrayed in bespotted virginity, Freda stepped on the
scene one Autunn day, at the end of a long leash descending fron a great
eight.
Boasting a Balkan pedigree, she possessed a regal gait. A quiet
haracter this with an orderly mind - returns could come and go before her
ve and she would not bark a word.
ext to receive his cue was Phillip - a Frenchman dragged from a northern
reet. He became an HQ dog - the dog! He had many masters - the number
his mistresses was never known. Front-seated during Coy moves, becush-
ed by night,
his was a life of luxury.
mpene
Mar d
Muscan
ocument 25284
