The Location proved
part of
there sas
Linicod sep
"Trphoon tractment"
not nach, aodomodation,
the shape
previously
niơn boing tram
mid that is never
unicode
- there
that was by no means
rakes wer
But
adied to
ation of Germany
the doy equipment and it
ours end
the end of troaked as though our portod
would be made
zach bore
of theso unoful items. The Coy was never
confortable by
the
acquiettion
opportunities!
slow
take
advantage of
its
Diffioulty, was encountered in keeping civiltens
the, cony,
Ver-boden",
in spite of endless signs bearing the rustic
words "Toegang
side,
though by the second day of our stay things
and gentloating they were tastering
a bit easior.
HQ RASC held a dance
kindly sent allocations to the Coy, wich had
in the town during the evening for which
twin Sniths for the band,
The Supply Point was held in the camp
later
Replenisiment was still being made from ISSELBUIG.
At 1400 tir's the Coy was asked to supply twenty three-tonners for the
conveyance of Ordnance Stores from LICHIRNVOORDE to ENSCHEDE where they
were deposited in the loving hands of Ordnance Field Parle.
Thus it will be seen that the vehicles were being kept pretty busy.
though, there is no need to make a special instance of this
since invariably every tasic vehicle was in constant use.
Whilst we were confined to the pari, some were able to go
out again
during the evening for the purpose of patronising a second dance sponsored
But these were tiring days and the faot that there was no
beer available locally, except for an odd bottle or two supplied by the
civilian in charge of the pavilion which formed part of the accormodation.
together made an early retirement to the "pit" a very attractive proposit-
FHASE XVI - "'ACROSS WESTPHATTA"
The Supply Point in the park for all units including Admin Area,
no longer being supplied by 704 Coy, at 0800 hrs heralded the
second and latter morning in ENSOlE.
We read in the papers delivered
to-day that ENSCHIDE had been liberated - amazing! Considering the dis-
tance now to be covered the mail was coming and going with remarkable
speed - a great tribute to the efficiency of the Amy postal Service and
to our particular attachment - an efficiency which the queer noises and
fitful propulsion of the APO's "Horse-box" did their best to deny.
At 1200 hrs the Recce Group was called upon to go forward to find yet
another resting place for the Coy, while the Replenishment Column was on
its way back from ISSETBURG with another load of Compo packs - 14 loaus
which were then dumped in the pavilion for the time being.
These were
to act as a forward reserve.
Shortly after,
the order was received for the Coy to move at 1600 t
a time which, on this occasion, was not to be altered.
Accordingly the Coy moved out at the appointed hour and after quito
fast journey crossed the German frontier for the last time and entered a
farn set amidst thick woods just short of the German town of NORDHORT.
The farmer here was a German and employed a Butch staff.
This Gemon was
given a good "character" by the Dutch employees who said that he had
always treated thei well both before and during the war. Thus, whilst ne
and nis fanily were removed to another house, orders were given that his
house and property were to be scrupulously respected. The Dutch vere
instructed to wear a piece of arange ribbon to differentiate them from
the Germans.
"to then
RETURNS AREA
Document 25284
non parali
