bombäng
The route lay
ad shelling)
Sheroe
almost surrealist bonity.
they had been represented by such large
the peculiar strength of dts lind to
reached at 0200 hirs 31 Mar, was a farm-yard
boasting of the name of SCHULZINHOX.
Pise Coys harboured up nearby.
There were mines about rendering it inadvisable
wander about never
since they were loaded to
There wes little space in
considerably more: packs
capacity. - many of the supply vehiales carrying
then was their nortal load.
Supply Officer cast a longing eye in the direction of
"domestin" vehicles, and particularly the one from which the
being no other acommodation.
So, most bedded down for
grunt of pigs
the night under their vehicles
who had arrived earlier
received injuries during the afternoon from a lifted "R" mine lying on
reace group the road-
side when it was exploded by a tank-transporter making a
diversion over the
Fortunately his injuries proved later to be less serious that was at.
though, he was evacuated to England.
by him escaped injury.
Sgt.Neal who was standing
The Coy rose to an early breakfast in very cold morning
expected to nove again during
The Supply Point for all units East
of the Rhine was being held immediately after breakfast.
This was held in a
field close to the Coy location.
Admin Area units West of the Rhine drew their
supplies from 704 Coy RASC for which.
purpose some of Composite Platoon had beer
During the morning vehicles for ration replenishment went down tc
In the afternoon the Recce Group went forward North of
ISSELBURG on the AALTEN road,
and it was at first thought that mine detectors
but this proved unnecessary.
received the previous evening that
would have to be sent fonvard also the Division had taken AAtiN, ve were now
able to add the knowledge that GRONIO had alsa been liberated.
silence was in force on our front and the only news we could get of the progress
made by the Division were the odd soraps gleaned from ration representatives
coming to the Supply Point.
It seemed that the Division had now advanced over 75 miles from the Rhine
and was meeting some opposition and blown bridges.
large numbers
the enemy including paratroops were giving themselves up and. Dutch civilians
now armed after the manner of the old Maquis were rounding them up - very much
like the old days of the SEINE.
At 1900 hrs the Coy moved to HaMDEN on the Dubch-German frontier arriving at
about 2200 hrs.
Here there were some buildingsiand the Coy clept the night
There was a number of civilians about, and being seated on the
contier fence, so to speak
it was rather diffioult to know whether conversat
ion with these
people would be regarded as an act of fratemization or of syn-
pathy for the unfortunate North Hollanders.
It had proved a cold dull day -
very unsuitable for air support.
Knowing the distant objective assigned to
the Division the weather was doubly disappointing for it coula do no other than
slow its advance thus giving the enemy time to effect demolitions - and this he
doing in no uncertain manner.
This "last heave" of the war was developing into a great race.
We knew that
the Americans were making rapid progress further South against weaker opposition,
and. it was only natural to hope that our objective could be reached with reoord-
breaking speed. But whatever might be going on further forward the Div Axis was
certainly cramed with traffio and our moved. from location to location were nec-
ssarily at very slow speed and mostly in the failing light of these Easter
venings. For it was Faster after all, though there was little evidence of it
n either the weather or the furious bustle that, was going on in the Westphalian
So ended the month of March.
Woula April, besides the ouckoo, bring the Dove of peace to Europe?
WITH '
RETURNS AREA
Document 25284
