NoTE B. —See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
pa provide data dion is Shoto.
ch to base future improvements in
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
army training, equipment,
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommer
benet for short-term ne, tactici, the ration and i
History of the War research in the Army,
n A.F. C. 2118.
tC. lary wil beetend up daily, each entry initialled by the oficer detailed to keep it,
ron a war diary is an of e tede the beta stion Ad retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
or other person mentioned in para
VoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.—Omitted.
preparing a diary :-
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
nu decisions taken.
APILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
iv Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
day of mobilisation or
i portant phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
a subordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should
ve nocca.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
pintments (Sec. 36), and
viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
und his representatives.
Army, war duties will be
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.300S and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
outine order or instructio:
in issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any ske
appendices will be
reading naming the author. References
of A.F. C.2118.
(iv) Copies or important and relevant demi-oficial letters by
which may have been marked "personal"
(provided the writer considers
All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
i) De for water on ordered, the of the copy of a war diary for the treeting me chi!
be forwarded on the first day of the
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Ofhce, care being taken that all its appendices
the unit concerned.
SPECIAL NOTE. The time entered should be the time he formation or
The time of the event recorded should
WAR DIARY
Month and Year..
Ave 19H4 SAUNT LIGENCE SUMMARY
Date
Summary of Events and Information
го 503 вийте рет ва уді:
Weathe: Wam Dull.
Army F
C. 2118.
Unit 635 COY RASC (BULL PET
Commanding mending 635 But Petrol Trans Coy. RASC,
References to Appendices
3
7
9
Wether Fie Sung, PastOut 2 Drins
Wenthe Fine Sung
Wenter Fine Sung
Wentle Fine Sung Pestont: 2 Dnies IC.
Whate Fine Sung
ParOst: 1 DrinIe 1 SupStam.
Order at 1400 lu
Vet a 1400 a as GeT Weather, Fine Summ
WAR DIARIES
8 SEP 1944
G.H.Q. 2nd ECHELON
uments in your Bulk Or
you have requested,
more of your doc
ments - Enquire at
pre documents are in us
Desk for full details
