pg_0056.pdf:
65
Within the ring there is a small magnifying prism M, whose
casing R is hinged to a slide in a shield screwed to the brass
thus revealing the eye-hole, above
which the prism casing is slotted.
When the hair-line HVH
is vertical, the edges of this sighting slot ought to be seen to
be parallel to it and are so in a well-constructed instrument.
It will be found that, for focussing the prismatic magnifier,
it is necessary to draw up the prism; for this purpose a shide
attached to the prism casing is provided to work in a groove
in the shield.
65. Observing with the Prismatic Compass, Mk. VIII
To make an observation with
the prism, pass the left
thumb through the ring, place the left forefinger underneath
the box, the right thumb on the stop and the right forefinger
on the tiny stud A at the left of the hinge,
actuating a check-
spring in the box, which steadies the swing of the needle.
The hair-line must be vertical.
through the
sighting slot, keeping it vertical against the object to be
sighted and at the same time observe the readings of the
At the centre of the swing press the check-spring
stud A to bring the needle to rest.
Then free it and allow
the card to settle.
The required bearing may then be read
to a quarter of a degree if the hand be steady.
The compass may also be read directly but much
accurately by means of the inner graduation on the card and
the lubber line
Open the lid out fat.
The axis of the
compass NHHN is now the line passing through the notch
in the ring, the centre of the compass, the lubber line and the
notch in the tongue.
Direct the axis towards the object
and read the inner figuring on the card against the lubber
For use at night turn the glass over until the setting vane
indicates the bearing of the object on the external gradua-
tion of the box.
Clamp the cover at this bearing
screw J, and
again direct the axis towards the object.
will then be seen that the luminous direction mark
exactly over the arrow-head on the card.
compass is then set for night marching on this particular
bearing; if you preserve the direction mark and arrow-head
in coincidence and move in the direction of the axis, you will
be moving in the line of bearing indicated by the setting vane.
The direction of the required movement is clearly indicated
at night by the luminous terminals of the hair-line.
Note, finally, the rubber ring on the base of the box which
prevents the compass from slipping when on & smooth surface.

