pg_0054.pdf:
62
The protractor, properly
so called, is
represented by
degree graduation along three edges of the front face.
point from which
the rays are drawn is on the fourth (or
zero) edge and is indicated by an arrow-head.
It will be seen that there are two sets of figures to these
graduations an outer set, reading from 0º to 180° and
inner set reading from 180° to
All readings being
made clockwise,
this arrangement is
plotting bearings, which are always measured from north by
62. Plotting Bearings with the Protractor
The angle denoted by any graduation on the edge of the
protractor is that contained between
the zero
edge, i.e. the
180
o t
FIG. 31.
edge joining 0° and 180°
, and a line joining the centre of the
zero edge, marked with an arrow-head, to the graduation in
To plot any bearing between 0° and 180° from any point x
Fig 31, draw a line xy through the point in the direction of
north-true, grid or magnetic as the case may require. Lay
the protractor with zero edge along this line with the arrow-
head on x and the graduated edge to the right. Any bearing,
such as th and 115 Join up and xy.
may then be marked
off with a sharp
pencil at p and q.
To plot bearings between 180° and 360°, say 226° and
, set the protractor in a similar manner, but with the
graduated edge to the left.
63
It is not always necessary to draw a north line through
the point from which bearings are being
plotted.
the paper-such
as parallel lines drawn or
printed on sketching paper or meridian or grid lines on a map
-it is often possible to lay the zero edge parallel to north and
south by setting the protractor so that one of these lines
cuts its bottom and top edge at graduations symmetrically
placed, as in Fig. 32, or to set off the required bearing from
mag. mer.
mer.
21
,6St
FIG. 32.
a convenient corner of a grid square, and transfer it by means
of parallel rulers to the correct point.
63. Reading Bearings with the Protractor
Proceed in a similar way for the reverse process of reading
from a map.
To find the bearing of t from x,
Fig. 31, join xt by a straight line, set the protractor as before
with arrow-head at x and zero edge parallel to the north line:
then read the bearing where the line at cuts the graduated
It may be noted that the reverse bearing* tx, i.e. x from
t, may, if desired, be read at the same time on the other set
of graduation
Thus if the bearing xt reads 94°,
the bearing tx is 274° (Fig. 32).
* If the bearing of B from A is t°, then the bearing of A from B is
called the reverse bearing, and is equal to t°#180°.
If to is less than
130 the the severe being 8180 180. If t° is greater than 18°,

