pg_0009.pdf:
(a) To
(b) To
A secti
Kingdom i
importance
320₴
8927
covered anc
The
officer.
It
ord
will
be
con
The
39090€
90277789475
SESB-DEA
sloodts bazaucall floud elf to? noos ood go stew ol
rEinon odt to bre
i abeleau neod evad bluon go hoteloni ne dons tul dinon out padrub anda
ort seasof ent train suo no zoßs odi autteem nobileogo Puta act to wolv
sumo dud anto yuen font edetobtanos osew boinog aide antsus begotia oba
a batded Ml autacosont tavo 20 asol sid di 191 osadl Sua miao fla of 500z01
cosring and Site
To tai ono noTi noidicoggo odi to east out i trove oldstones
aunit diedt Sotosgre fon
osoled arod sorts or anisua boatsinian ad LIlm sonaltaiv
anuod perild end
QUES
devil to jasmmue
S,0l reino no.
20 1
УЯАММИ?
зрИлантИ
claritosqess (sunsM. Raid adf bas
заповлався ді beogog ad Пік
9. GENE
As
or other
Tr
command
90819
NOT in s
Wh
the approp.
In cà
units the relevant papers should be inserted by groups and lettered accordingly, beginning with " K."
10 NOTES.
Appendix " A." The forms which constitute this appendix are intended for use by operational units and
headquarters of divisions and below.
The form will be completed whether the unit or formation is eneaged in
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
474
oregillaini bus asiaill unil aru!
2W
2K
The operations of 185 Inf Be on D. Dey end D t1
down at 1000 hrs.
At 0945 hrs Advance Brigade HQ left the HQ ship in a LCI(S) and touched
At that time, as the ICI(S) approached the shore
under hy mortar fire, sporadic shelling and light automatic fire.
then moved on towards HERMANVIILE SUR MER.
o'touched down.
At about 1010 his*(1 NORFOLK possible earlier) ICIs carrying infantry
ICK
Two of 2 WARWICK and one of 2 KSLI's ICIs were hit by shells ano
mortars and battalions suffered a small number of casualties before disembarking.
On touching down units proceeded irmediately to their assembly areas,
move taking place under sporadic shell and mortar fire and at least two salvoes
from multi-barrelled flame producing weapons.
2 WARWICK reached their assembly area by 1100 hrs losing a number of men,
chiefly through sniper fire, on
the
way.
On reaching their assembly area the two
Westernnost companies came under accurate IMG fire from German positions towards
LION SUR MIR and CRESSERONS, suffering a number of casualties, and the CO prepared
a plan for attacking these positions pending approval by Brigade.
2 KSLI reached their assembly area by 1050 hrs suffering a smell number
of casualties en route.
1 NORFOLK reaching assembly area by 1040 with some casualties.
Brigade Iac IQ established itself near the Church in IRAVITIE at 1105.
At that time the situation as it appeared to Coma 185 Infantry Brigade
was that the infantry of the brigade less their support weapons were in their
assembly areas; STANIS YEO being held up by congestion of the beach exits; 1 S LAN R
(8 Bde) at the x ras SOUTH of HERMANVITTE;
COIIEVILTE SUR ORNE not yet cleared.
of the enemy;
the German strong points HITIMAN and MORRIS reported very strongly
hela but were to be attacked by SUFFOLK.
The Brigade Cormander called 'O' Group at 1200 hrs - 2 KLI were ordered
to cormence moving forward on axis HERVANVILIE - BEUVILLE - CANT;
STARES TO to
get clear of beaches as soon as possible and catch up and marry up with 2 KSLI
vide original plan; 2 WARWICK were orderel to disengage from enemy in their
original assembly area and to re-assemble in woods EAST of IURNANVIILE church:
1 NORFOIK were ordered to proceed towards COIIEVIILE SUR ORNE ready to pass ther
-8 Bde directly HILIMAN and/or MORRIS were taken.
At 1215 hrs Commander 185 Inf Bie received infornation of enemy tavo hrs.
NORTH of CAT, of fire from position at FPRIRS SUR IN DAN and of heavy fi
pn 8 Canadian Bde front, which caused him to decide to put, into operatio
ltemative plan of moving 2 WARWICK on to the EAST of the
axis behind de to carry
hus taking advantage of the anti-tank obstacle.
Meanwhile 2 KSLI noved off and was met by,
and. dealt with successfully,
opposition fron many enemy MCs and mortars on the high ground astride the road
EAST Of PERIMPS SUR LE DAN.
At 1430 hrs Brigade Cormander moved to COITIVILI where he found that 8
Bãe had been unable to capture INTIMAN and that MORRIS was still held by enemy.
Situation at this time:- 2 KSII and STATES YEO approaching IN HOOL
leaving a company to deal with the enemy battery at FIlIER SUR IN DAN which was
dominating the main axis.
2 WARWICK moving into their second assembly area, sone
delay having been caused by difficulty in disengaging from the
enemy in their
original assembly area.
No battalions at this time had yet got any support
weapons with them, owing to the concestion on the beaches.
At 1500 hrs HITIMAN was still holding out. MOR IS and SOIE were still
reported to be held by the enemy.
Brigade Cormander ordered 1 NORTOLK to by-pass
HITIMAN and make good high ground EAST of BLUVITTE.
2 WARWICK ordered to SI AUBIN D'ARQUIAT and follow up behina 1 IOOLK,
or to move up axis of canal road, one company to take over bridge at BINOUVITIE
......./from

