pg_0018.pdf:
•L-
Captured Fapt
Units capturing enemy capt in battle may use such capt if necessary,
reporting its capture, with details of omn by immediate signal to
this HQ,
copy to ADOS. This does not effoct present procedure for vehicles.
11
Papt NOI roquired by units will be handed in to Ord who will retain
pending disposal instrs
orficer's shop
When the 10D opons (anticipated 1 Jul, actual date will be notified when
known) itons of offis?
ciothing, necessaries and camp lit will be on sale at the
prices shewn in Appx 'A'
As soon as circunstances permit a Mobile Ofers's Shop
will be available in the fud aren.
13
The following sonorol instrs apply:-
A11 sales will be for cash
In order to conserve stocks it will be necessary to ration sales to
individuals.
Naximum numbers of each item which may be purchased at
any one gime are show in appz is!
( c)
An offr purchasing for other offrs will produce a signed request
from the other offrs specifying their requiroments
(a.)
No salos will bo made to ORs
Repairs to Offast Poots:
14.
Ropairs to offrs' boots and shoes may be carried out by unit
shoemakers on
repayment,
Pricos to be paid are listed below :-
Half soling ond heoling with plain leather
65 frs
Half soling only with plain leather
51 frs
Heeling only with plain leather
V. frs
Solos sown on by hand - extra
10 frs
15
OC Unit will recover the cost incurred and will credit the amount in
the Unit Imprest a/c.
Repairs for offrs will be shewn separately in the Unit's
record of boots under repair and the date and amount of payment by tho offr
will be recorded against the entry
If the type of repair, e g. stitched soles is bejound the capacity of
unit shoemakors,
the repairs will
be carried out by
the AOD as soon as
this
The despatch of boots to AODs will always be under unit arrangements
through ADOS, who will despatch thom to the A0D by whatever means are available.
AODs will seturn them through the same channel.
A11 boots handed into ADOS Dump must be securcly tied in pairs and the
label shewing the personal number rank none and unit of the offr concerned att
to cach boot
Consignnents of boots must-be securely packed.
Each package must contain
a package note detailing the contents,
shewing the ADOS, the unit and the number
rank and name of the offr oning the boots.
Evory precaution will be takon to safe guard the boots whilst in transit to
and from ADOS, but no responsibility con be accepted by the RAOC for their
ultimate return to owners
Battle Bottorios
The UK system of issue of Battlo Batterios dry H/If 162/3v and 150/3v on
an automatic roster will NOT apply in future
22
Units will maintain holdings up to but NOT exceeding four batteries per set.

