pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
WAR DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174)
OBJECT.
1. The objects of a war diary are two-fold: -
(a) To provide information from theatres of war in sufficient detail and in such a form as to provide data,
USUL
which to base future improvements in Army training, equipment, organisation and administration.
(b) To unish an historical record of the, war.
constructive recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
2. A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1 (a) above.
It is therefore of the utmost
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para, 11 below.
GENERAL.
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
on the L. of C.
(b) Unit commanders.
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters,
sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
combined war diary as is found convenient.
4. Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: —
& Coe :
Index as printed on cover;
warranvel
(8) Appendices
Sov All detain do the wait an a fornicion vill be detachmen tie concerned, the name of the parent unil), period
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staf
officer.
"Truis a secret document.
he extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is ar
affence under the Official Secrets Acts.
7. In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
will be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
routine.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices.
8. The narrative should be written up daily. It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
precis of any of them.
It should contain: —
3a090e
count of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
Notes of how orders were
carried out.
Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome them
Note of how time:
not accounted for above was spent.
Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and important
Appendix leter and folio number; and, only if necessary, a very brief note of the contents.
e) Intermediate movements of unit or formation.
Notes of auy important visits paid and received by commanders and senior staff officers. It is equ
portant to make a note of the reason for the visit and decisions tal
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted
APPENDICES.
9. GENERAL.
ssignment of copies of the war diary. When an operation order, appreciation, letter laying down pol
other important document is prepared, two copies will be made at the time specifically for the war dia
Where there are no documents to be included. in the appendices the word "NIL." should be entered ir
he appropriate space in the index.
unis the satyan pread ional a radices ay at pi able for the each of bein he get ge for certain
10. NOTES.
are didi and for ice con til the compendid are inter the finite by mation a gage and
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
474
Instructions regarding War Diaries and Intelligenc
Vol. I.
and the Staff Manual respectively.
will be prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year...
JUNE 1944
WAR DIARY
Place.
Date.
Hour.
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY.
(Erase beading not required).
Summary of Events and Information.
COLTEVILIE 16/7
COLLEVILLE
0800
0800
1010
BRUVILLE
066756
BHUVILLE
085751
12.00
D day and D + 1 recorded in detail
Bde HQ at COLTEVILIE SUR ORNE where it had been est since evening D day.
Some trouble experienced with alleged snipers in the village and Def Pl was
sent out to round up
any Germans or 'Collaborateuses' who where everywhere
suspected of firing on our tps.
No results.
Corns with fd units were difficult at times, particularly with 2 WARWICK
who lost their M14 Rear Link in LEBISHY WOOD.
The rather depressing news fron the front was lightened on the morning of
JUNE 7 by the
arrival OBIRST KRUG and his staff, who had been running the
German battle from
the strongpoint at HILTNAN.
He was commanding 736
Grenadier Regt and surrendered to 1 SUFFOLK.
Much saluting and heel clicking
accompanied his farevells to his staff.
Posn of units first light 8 JUNE was : -
2 WARWICK
- BEUVILIE
1 NORFOLK - Woods WW of BIVILLE
with one coy in BEAURECIARD.
2 KSLI.
BILVILLE.
These posns, although we did not expect it
there, were to remain static for
several weeks.
Report received from 2 WARWICK that eneny in INBISPY had tanks and assault
guns in rear areas of woods and many MG posns.
Posn believed held by 125
Pz Gren Regt which had moved into the posn just before our attack.
2 WARWICK report their FOB and party are missing.
Bde HQ moved to a field near BRUVILLE.
Shortly after our arrival a party of
Canadian airmen turned up.
They had been held prisoner in the German HQ and.
BEUVILLE and had brought 61 of the captors captive to us.
During the morning some targets of Gernan armour near LEBISH were engaged.
Y STAFFS THO and by naval units and some casualties inflicted.
ide HO moved to new location at BAUVILIE Chateau. Shortly after our arriva
Wt 13171/1805 1,200,000 T/40 BPL 517171 Forms C2118/22
KEYOU WILL LIA
vue original plan; 2 VARVICK were ordered to disengage from enemy in their
original assembly area and to re-assemble in woods LAST Of HIRIANVIIIE church:
1 NORIOT were ordered to proceed towards COITAVILLE SUR ORNE ready to pass thre
8 Bde directly HITIMAN and/or MORRIS were taken.
NORTH Of CAN, Of fire from position at PERIS SUR La DAN and of heavy fi
on 8 Canadian Bde front, which caused him to decide to put, into operatio
altemative plan of moving 2 WARWICK on to the EAST of the axis behind de to carry
thus taking advantage of the anti-tank obstacle.
Pirat
Meanwhile 2 KSLI moved off and was met by, and dealt with successfully,
opposition fron many eneny Mis and mortars on the high ground astride the road
EAST Of PERIS SUR IE DAN.
At 14,30 hrs Brigade Commander moved to COIIEVIITI where he found that 8
Bde had been unable to capture MILIMAY and that MORRIS was still held by enemy.
Situation at this time: - 2 KSII and STANTS YEO approaching IN HOlDI
leaving a company to deal with the eneny battery at PIRIUR SUR IN DAN which was
dominating the main axis.
2 WARVICK moving into their second assembly area, some
delay having been caused by difficulty in disengaging from the enemy in their
original assembly area.
No battalions at this time had yet got ony support
weapons with them, owing to the congestion on the beaches.
At 1500 hrs HITIMAN was still holding out. MOP. IS and SOIR were still
reported to be held by the enemy.
Brigade Commander ordered 1 NORTOIK to by-pass
HITIMAN and make good high ground EAST of BEUVILLE.
2 WARWICK ordered to SI AUBIN D'ARQUAY and follow up behind 1 NOmOlK,
or to move up exis of canal road, one company to take over bridge at billouvitia
......./from
Army Forr C. 2118. •
Unit.
HQ 185 Inf Bde
Commanding
Officer Brig K.P. Smith, OBE.
References to Appendices.
Apox 1
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No.
4 SEP 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelen

