pg_0041.pdf:
V10323 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
38
20. CONDUCT OF PURSUIT
164. The success of the pursuit will depend largely on the
previous grouping, on the determination of all ranks to press
on to the utmost limit of endurance, on the capacity of ad-
ministrative services to keep forward units supplied, and on
the ability of the engineers to clear mines, repair demolitions,
or to construct new bridges rapidly.
In pursuit, as in the approach, it is useless to unleash fast-
moving columns, or to employ airborne troops, on an unco-
ordinated plan; centralized control is essential.
Direct and parallel pursuit
165. Direct pursuit should be carried out on a broad front
so that, if the enemy makes a stand in one area, that area can
be outflanked or by-passed and dealt with later.
The nature of the
country and the remaining enemy
armoured strength will influence the composition of forces
detailed to carry out parallel pursuit. Armoured formations
will generally be most suitable for this task.
Engineers
166. The engineer problem will probably present consider-
able difficulties owing to extensive demolitions and the use of
large numbers of mines and booby-traps.
Forward formations will generally require additional en-
gineer assistance to ensure rapid movement.
167. It is essential that engineer reconnaissance parties
move well ahead, that bridging and road repair resources are
centrally controlled, and that bridging units and bulldozers
are placed well forward in the order of march. It will generally
be necessary to decentralize some bridging equipment to lower
formations. especially to those detailed for parallel pursuit,
but by well-planned air reconnaissance major requirements can
often be foreseen.
Airborne troops
168. Airborne troops will be invaluable, particularly when
used in co-operation with the formation carrying out parallel
pursuit.
They may be used for carrying out demolitions, for seizing
advanced landing grounds or other vital areas ahead of the
forward troops, and generally for disrupting the enemy's
communications.
V10323 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

