pg_0015.pdf:
V10323 (14) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
12
7. DECEPTION
47. Offensive operations offer great scope for deception as
a means of achieving surprise. Deception forms an important
part of every offensive plan, and must be considered from the
beginning.
Measures for strategical deception fall outside the scope
of this pamphlet. Certain measures for obtaining tactical
surprise are clearly of the highest secrecy, and their con-
sideration and adoption are, therefore, matters which must be
reserved to the Commander-in-Chief in the theatre of war
concerned.
48. Tactical deception must be considered by all grades of
commander, and operation orders will include the measures
to be adopted; but the deception plan must be initiated by
the highest commander possible and all deceptive measures
effected by subordinate commanders must be within the
framework of the higher commander's plan.
49. The following are some of the factors to be considered
by a commander in working out his deception plan :—
(a) Enemy psychology and the personality of his com-
mander.
It is important that any action taken
should cause immediate reaction, and should aim at
a sensitive nerve of the enemy system.
(b) Relative morale of the two sides. Deception during
pursuit will be extremely effective.
(c) The most probable enemy plan.
(d) Facilities available in material and personnel.
(e) Information, such as concentration of troops, stores,
or vehicles preparatory to attack, which it is im-
perative to deny to the enemy.
(f) Extra demands made on all troops and services for
the required action, and the extent to which the
extra effort will be justified.
(g) The probable air situation.
Visual deception
50. Display.—In the offensive the main objects of deceptive
measures will be to mislead the enemy as to the direction of
advance of the main columns and as to the main concentra-
tion before attack, and to simulate armoured threats to
exposed flanks, especially during the pursuit.
Dummy tank units, properly employed and equipped with
adequate transport and signal resources, are invaluable for
the above purposes. Dummy camps, vehicles, and guns
V10323 (14) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

