pg_0011.pdf:
V10323 (10) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
4. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE THREE TYPES OF DIVISION
The armoured division
29. The armoured division is a highly mobile formation
designed for an offensive role.
The basic components are
selected in such proportion that, to obtain the maximum
operational value from its organization, the formation must
be used in all phases of war as one fighting whole.
The full power of the armoured division in attack will be
exerted only if the armoured brigade is employed fully
concentrated, is closely supported by all the other arms, and is
employed on suitable ground.
30. The roles of an armoured division in the offensive
are :-
(a) To dislocate and destroy enemy headquarters, com-
munications, and rear areas generally.
(b) To exploit success by deep penetration, flank attack, or
pursuit.
(c) To assist in the destruction of enemy armoured forces.
(d) To create opportunities for the further action of other
formations.
(e) To attack enemy unarmoured formations incompletely
prepared for defence.
31. The threat of an armoured force in being is a powerful
weapon in the hands of the higher commander.
It will often
be possible, by skilfully co-ordinating the movement of strong
armoured forces without actually committing them to battle,
to make the enemy react in a way that will upset the defender's
plan and thus assist the attacker.
The mixed division
32. The mixed division is designed to attack well organized
defended areas. It is slow in movement, unless provided
with transporters for its tanks and troop-carrying transport
for its two infantry brigades.
For any major action, to obtain
its full power, the mixed division must be used as one fighting
entity on ground suitable for employment of the tank brigade.
33. The roles of the mixed division in the offensive are :—-
(a) To destroy the main forces of the enemy.
(b) To create opportunities for the employment of
armoured divisions, either round the enemy flank or
through his front.
(c) To seize and hold ground as a pivot of manœuvre for
armoured formations.
V10323 (10) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

