pg_0038.pdf:
V10323 (37) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
35
Consolidation and exploitation
151. Consolidation, which includes immediate reorganiza-
tion of units, must be carried out on the capture of the final
objective allotted to a formation or unit; the final objective
for a unit may, of course, be a formation intermediate objective.
152. Consolidation consists in securing the objective against
counter-attack so that it may form a pivot for further offen-
sive action. It is therefore a means to an end only, and
defensive dispositions of all arms must be completed in
minimum time. Some tanks may remain hull-down on the
position until adequate anti-tank defence has been arranged;
artillery FOOs will arrange immediate support; a reserve will
be organized as soon as possible. Existing enemy minefields
can often be utilized for the protection of newly-won localities.
153. Troops may arrive on the objective exhausted, and
units may be mixed up. Readjustments will probably be
required within units owing to casualties in men and equip-
ment. Reorganization of units and, if necessary, regrouping
will start as soon as possible.
154. Local exploitation will be carried out by reserves at the
immediate disposal of local commanders, who will use their
own judgment as to the direction in which it should be carried
out.
Until consolidation is adequate, exploitation must
generally be limited to patrols.
Major exploitation will normally only be carried out by
forces specially earmarked by the formation commander.
All commanders must fully understand the higher com-
mander's plan so that, whatever the orders regarding exploita-
tion may be, it will be carried out by local commanders in
the manner most likely to assist the general plan.
Attack against hastily prepared defences
155. In a hastily organized defended area the enemy is
unlikely to be protected by extensive obstacles, his anti-tank
defence may not be fully organized, and his defensive fire plan
is likely to lack co-ordination.
In such circumstances it will often be possible to secure the
final objective without the preliminary capture of a bridge-
head over an obstacle, or of intermediate objectives. The
attack will then be carried out in three phases only, and speed
in planning and execution will be vital, in order to give the
enemy minimum time to improve his defences.
Attack against heavily fortified defences
156. The conduct of attack on fortified positions is governed
by the same principles as attack against field defences, but the
V10323 (37) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

