pg_0036.pdf:
V10323 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
33
been allotted their objectives, will press on at maximum
speed regardless of loss and of the fortunes of formations on
their flanks.
The attack will generally be divided into four phases
consisting of :—
(a) Preparation.
(6) The initial assault.
(c) The main assault.
(d) Reorganization and exploitation.
Preparation
146. During this phase enemy outposts will be driven in,
the necessary additional information will be collected, assault-
ing troops will be concentrated and detailed reconnaissance
carried out, reinforcing artillery will be deployed, and the
plan worked out in detail.
It is of extreme importance that the arrangements made for
the moves of assaulting troops to start lines should be simple
and foolproof, especially if the assault is to begin at night.
The more direct the axis of movement from assembly areas to
forming-up places, the less risk will there be of confusion, and
of units failing to cross their start lines at zero hour. An
ample time margin must be given to allow for unforeseen
delays, especially when a combined tank and infantry attack
is being staged.
The initial assault
147. It will often be necessary to secure bridgeheads over
obstacles protecting the outer defences before the main
assault can be launched.
These will be captured by specially
organized assault groups.
These groups will usually consist of infantry and engineers,
and sometimes will include anti-tank artillery and tanks.
They will seize a covering position beyond the obstacle, and
will prepare and mark bridges or gaps to allow the free
passage of the main assaulting troops. Maximum covering
fire must be provided, since every weapon of the defence that
can bear will be directed on to the areas where gaps are
being and have been forced, and immediate counter-attacks
are inevitable.
under cover at moke or usually be carried out at night, or
The main assault
148. Gaps having been cleared through the outer obstacles,
the main assault troops will be launched through them and
the real " dog-fight" will start.
V10323 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

