pg_0012.pdf:
V10323 (11) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
9
(d) To engage and to destroy enemy armoured formations.
(e) To take advantage of the opportunities created by
other formations, including airborne, to complete
the victory.
The infantry division
34. The infantry division is especially suitable for operating
in broken or enclosed country unsuitable for tank action.
It possesses great fire power, is strong in defence against any
form of attack, but cannot rapidly complete the destruction
of enemy forces in open country owing to its lack of tanks.
It is particularly suited for attack against well organized
defences to secure bridgeheads over obstacles. It is slow
in movement unless provided with troop-carrying transport
for its three infantry brigades.
35. The roles of the infantry division in the offensive
are :-
(a) To carry out operations in country unsuited to the
employment of armour.
(b) To attack and capture bridgeheads in main enemy
defences in order to create opportunities for em-
ployment of other formations.
(c) To clear any minefields or obstacles.
(d) To hold in succession vital areas seized by other
formations during the approach phase.
5. GROUPING
36. Variations in basic organizations should be of rare
occurrence and then only of temporary duration. Full regard
must be paid to the effect on signal resources and to the
repercussions which may arise if commanders and troops have
not trained together or on the modified organizations.
37. Headquarters must be capable of controlling formations
however composed. A corps headquarters must be trained to
control a formation consisting of up to four divisions of any
type.
6. AIR SUPPORT
38. An offensive is largely dependent for success on maxi-
mum co-operation from the beginning between the Army and
the RAF.
To achieve this co-operation a joint army/air
headquarters will always be established.
39. Aircraft should be able to operate with minimum inter-
ference, and the army should suffer minimum delay and loss
by enemy air action. These requirements can best be met
V10323 (11) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

