pg_0059.pdf:
V10323 (58) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
56
45. AIR SUPPORT
256. Direct support tasks will be reported by tactical
reconnaissance aircraft, by special sorties, or by tentacles
with formations to the army/air headquarters at army or
corps. Targets selected by army/air headquarters for engage-
ment will be notified to divisions, who must assist direct
support aircraft in location of targets and in easy recognition
of their own troops.
CHAPTER 11
ATTACK AND PURSUIT
46. PREPARATION FOR ATTACK
257. When contact is made with a well organized and
strong
enemy defensive position, it is probable that the
formations carrying out the eventual attack-after a con-
siderable period of preparation-will not be the formations
that have led the approach.
258. The successive steps in planning large-scale attacks to
drive the enemy from strong positions are :-
(a) Offensive operations to force the enemy back to his
main positions.
(b) " Piquetting" the enemy position with light forces.
(c) Obtaining the necessary accurate information, from
which can be decided the technique to be employed
in the attack on that particular position.
(d) Training the troops in the technique to be adopted.
At this stage the troops, who are to carry out the
attack, are held well
back, but reconnaissance
parties, etc., are forward " building up the battle "
(e) Finally, main bodies are brought forward to link up
with their reconnaissance parties etc., and the
attack is launched at the most suitable time.
259. The remainder of this chapter deals with the division
which makes contact and then attacks, but the basic methods
apply equally to formations, not in contact, that are brought
forward, as outlined above, for the attack.
260. Provided the approach has been properly stage-
managed, the leading brigades will have driven in the advanced
elements of the enemy by quickly planned encounter attacks ;
they will be in occupation of ground chosen by the divisional
V10323 (58) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

