pg_0037.pdf:
V10323 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
34
The enemy defensive zone is likely to be organized in depth,
with successive minefields or obstacles and with nuisance mines
interspersed. In such conditions the attack must be pressed
by stages, each involving the clearance of gaps through
obstacles and the destruction of the posts or localities that
cover, or are covered by, successive obstacles. Only when a
penetration of the zone has been effected can armoured
divisions be released to pass through and to undertake their
proper tasks.
The main requirement in this phase is that adequate fire
support and engineer assistance for the assaulting troops is
provided for the capture and consolidation of each objective.
The situation will often be confused; close fighting of a
disjointed nature will take place; parties of enemy, by-passed
by leading echelons, will require mopping up by succeeding
echelons. This is the period of in-fighting in which personal
leadership, individual initiative, courage, and determination
will decide the issue.
Correct employment of local reserves and close control
by commanders are necessary to take immediate advantage
of local success and to amend tasks, or allot new ones, to
assaulting troops if desirable.
149. It will often be necessary to pass fresh units or forma-
tions through forward assaulting troops. Such leapfrogging
will necessitate close touch between leading formations and
those who are to pass through.
150. The following rules will govern action during this
phase :—
(a) The momentum of the attack will be maintained by
units in leading echelons no matter what is happening
on the flanks or elsewhere.
Infiltration and penetra-
tion in the direction of the objective will be
continuous.
(6) Success must be instantly exploited.
(c) Troops who have lost touch with their units must
continue the action on their own initiative, acting in
accordance with the higher commander's general
intention-which they must know.
(d) Information must be passed back regularly and fre-
quently to enable commanders controlling reserves
to use them to the best advantage and without delay.
(e) If a counter-attack develops, troops must stand their
ground at all costs, and resume the attack as soon as
the counter-attack has been beaten off.
V10323 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

