INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOI. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
() Each era or suof the of thin the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
(ii) Unit commanders.
(li) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 3G), and personal
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders,
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept trom the As the as con formations and units of the Irritorial Army, war diaries will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
in addition the case then ans on ellens and of ans, ta sport, be.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vil) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
) do come of ceror id retion (e in the petite overed ay to cure votine or
routine order or
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
and To provide data dian in to is object i promena hitri reco greation,
organisation and administration.
.. i be entered be daily, hath en extractial and the fi or detailed to meep it, on.
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secret Ad retention of appendices, maps, etc.
oF oNer peTe shona he made det, hot the fier who is is the ent dier is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing a diary so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
" important stoken"
instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i Dare cations Move entering
its of of formations the or and present dispositions.
(ji) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war dinues as follows :—
Return by (20/11/2025 13:51
rt Duan
09 October 2025
Document reading room
Comp use DA.
Book a visit - The National Archives «noreply@nationalarchives.gov.
03 October 2025 08-10
Adval
- Standard visit - Thursday 09 October 2025
WO 171/677
14625542
the unct NoT The in mered should he the time the even it one ror te
"ethers-
field.
Month and Year....
June 1944
Date
Hour
14.
13
ORIGINAL
WAR DIARY
ANTELNGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Normal training and workshop activities.
C.R.E.M.E. visits Workshops.
2/Lieut. Garner joined Unit.
Normal training.
Normal training.
2/Lieut. Marshall joined Unit on Posting..
Normal training.
Normal training.
Normal training.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
Normal training.
Normal training.
Normal training.
1.4 JUL 1944.
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Normal training.
0.C. and Advance Party proceed to Marshalling Area with
154 Infoode. Workshops.
Normal training.
O.C. visits from Varshalling Area. Unit prepares for move
Army Form C.
Unit 152 Infantry Bde. Workshop,
Commanding Officer. MAJOR C.B. EASTERN
References to Appendices
to new location.
Wt.17724,093 2,600,000 3/43 W. H. & 5. 51/5575
