Return by (20/11/2025 13:
Comp use
Book a visit - The National Archives «noreply@nationalarchive
03 October 2025 08:10
Duan - Standard visit - Thursday 09 October 2025
bert Duan
day 09 October 2025
Document reading room
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.—1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
fi) Unit commanders
(ii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NOTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
(iv) Detailed account of operations
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
of tolarder aalie athe is sho ad be noted!
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
accur, or come to notice.
, To to thou be at rod up, not to dr )ven in iệt t he time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(1) A come order i felt retion are Wing the pro, evel) ay do cure o rotine of
i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
on to thon de at it ion to bade future improvemen is in any record quipation.
to appendices wil be made in the ideolipin ed ediC. ming the author.
or. References
(Sce F.S.A., Vallejaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
on AT C. 2115. it ise entered up daily, each entry initialled by the oficer detailed to keep it,
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
and retention of appendices, maps, etc..
of other per fe menta he in e deaf, that the officer hid iris to the the ie ia tv commander
!
preparing a diary :—
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(*) Imp deist osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
are cations. Moves ontari the ot torty our hours and present dispositions.
(ia) Imports
int matters relating to the duties of each branch of the
WO 171/677
14625542
The War er 1/c G.H.2. 2nd Echelon for
the won No The the in entred should be the timo the torn at on of st er reoce
(Bde. Divn.. Area, etc., with which Unit is serving.)
BERY
Month and Year. APRIL 1.944
Date
WAR DIARY
INtELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Hel den
Wethersfield 4
Preparation for move of Unit
Packing up and preparation for move to new Location.
Unit, less Rear Party, moves to new location - Mushroom Farm.
Wethersfield Camp. (108509)
Settling into new Billets.
Normal training and workshop Duties.
Normal training and Workshop Duties.
Fear Party joins Unit.
Party of 84 attached for fürst Waterproofing Course..
Visit of Catering Adviser (Capt. Dunlop)
Combined Church Service in Workshop Shed - 5th Black Watch.
152 Bde. Workshop and 153 Bde. Workshop.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
Normal training and Horkshop.
Normal training and Workshop...
Normal trainigg and Workshop.
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Army Form C. 2:
Unit 152 IN MAVERY BRIGADE WORKSHO; REliS.
Commanding Officer Major C.B. Easterbrook
References to Appendices
Trung.
