Book a visit - The National Archives <noreply@nationalarchives.gov
03 October 2025 0B.10
Duan - Standard visit - Thursday 09 October 2025
ert Duan
/ 09 October 2025
Document reading room
Comp use DI
Instructions for compiling the War Diary
COMPOSITION
Both original and duplicate copies will consist of:
(a) Cover;
(b) Index, printed on cover.
(e) Narrative;
(d) Appendices.
covered, folio numbers of appendices will be shown on the cover.
All details of the unit and formation (if a detachment is concerned, the name
of the parent unit), period
NARRATIVE (A.F. C2118)
The narrative should be written up daily.
appendices.
The narrative should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give a précis of any of the
It should contain:—
(a) Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and importa
very brief note of the contents,
and a reference to the appendix letter and folio number; and, it necessary, a
(b) Intermediate movements of unit or formation
(c) Notes of now orders were carried out.
(d) Acco int of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting
them.
(e) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
(i) Changes in establistment, strength, casualties.
Note of how time not accounted for above was spent. The type of training,
etc., should be specified.
(h) Note of any administrative dificulties encountered and action taken to
overcome them.
Note of any imporiant visits paid and received by Commanders and Senior
Staff Officers.
visit and decisions taken.
It is equally important to make a note of the reason for the
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted
APPENDICES
4. GENERAL
The appendices will be assembled in the groups shown on the cover,
chronological order.
pendent elate a sected i to the group as at cut tap codix, the id iNDie
should be entered in the appropriate space and the appendix left blank.
5. NOTES
Appendix «A." Two proformas are available: M.E. Form 161 for units; M.E. Form 162 for formations. The
headings of these are shown on page 4 of this cover.
A reply to each question is required daily.
he how he used for
several
consecutive days, a clear division being shown.
fresh protorma
The same pore taken at the beginning of sach
Appendices "B" and "C."
The signal log
and messages kept by the unit or formation or by the signal unit ol
detachment aftached will be placed in this appendix
• Formations and units belonging to the Indian Army will submit complete War Diaries in Triptial.
and Intelligence
WAR DIARY
will be prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year. MAY 1944.
Place
Hour
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form (
Unit. 152 Infantry Brigade Workshop R
Commanding Officer Major C.B. Easterbro
References to Appendices
Hethersfield.
÷
Normal Training and Workshop Duties.
1st Waterproofing Course run by Workshop assembles.
1st Waterproofing Course and Normal Training.
1st Waterproofing Course and Normal Training.
1st Waterproofing Course and Normal Training.
1st Waterproofing Course and Normal Training.
let Weterproofing Course disperses. 1 O.R. on a Mine Lifting Course.
Visit of 21/c R.EM.E.
2nd Waterproofing Course assembles.
C.R.E.M.E. visite Workshops. 2nd Waterproofing Course and Normal
Training•
C.R.EM.E. visits Workshops. O.C. to R.E's at Fly. Sten Gunners
exercised on Range.
o.C. to 4th.R.H.A.
Lieut C.F Rogers joined unit on posting.
WO 171/677
14625542
Return by (20/11/2025 13:51
