Comp use
look a visit - The National Archives < noreply®nationalarchi
Advanced Document Order
Duan - Standard visit - Thursday 09 October 2025
lIbert Duan
sday 09 October 2025
Document reading roon
VOTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
ITION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
of mobilisation or
ordinate command
is representatives.
war diaries will be
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
matict hour at important occur post, factors aopting
v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
1, or Revento should be entered up, not in the order is given tho we hut at the time they
PARa. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :
) fo che or ech fast reton Are iang the pet, seed a to cach protone or
ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or Ner per i sion he made det, hot the dicer do is to die in ties is to commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing tary so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(1) Ind deant stars, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(* Day aton Mesment due unto at trenty fos hot and present dispositions
iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
(See F.., Volume lanies will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, ete.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :-
(1) We loswarher in he tered, ty of tie sal coin month dire to the preceding tch con
or transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attachec
three monthse auplicate copie:
the unit concerned.
SPECIAL NOTE.-
The time entered stold be the time the nform ation of ot it reaches
Poturn av
WO 171/67
14625542
+Rom :
• Tan +4
ORIGINAL:
TEN CANTRY BRIGADE WARSHeS
R. E.M. Era.
To:- 315r Ja, 4 4.
: R. E. M. BA
KIR DIARY
SECRET.
