Book a visit - The National Archives «noreply@nationalarchives.gov
03 October 2025 08:10
Duan - Standard visit - Thursday 09 October 2025
ert Duan
/ 09 October 2025
Document reading room
Comp use DA
INSTRUCTIONS FOR GOMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
cre ford the parter diary wilt to kept in depicate from the first day of mobilisation or
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
-In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept trom the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B. —See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
The Van in y quat not dant hair on nt a day on to t a
a lo to in a day at to te yet late tria litera sad eaten,
their formations or 1
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations. topographical and climatic.
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Chers in the bismen of stre ran.
the number of other ranks or
As rolards ana is the names and rante de
In addition in the case of units on the I of C. changes in stores. transnort et‹
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
ccur. or come to notice.
I cone to no should be entered up, not in ty ever a giand i hut t he time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(1) outy of each felt retin is. sig the peti, overed) a t of carte opene of
the war diary.
(i) Copte of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(tv cop or try nat and reta cente a ten on dra rations
All diaries will conform to the reculations for drafting orders, reports, etc
on Ar. a diary i be entered up diat, ech tray in and rel in tone of op detaile, to peep it;
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
or other per or shent he made deal, hot the offer who nis to the ne de ie to ommander
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
ME Form 160
SECRET
MAY 1944
ORIGINAL
DUPLICATE +
the SET NoT The time enced heard to tate on a on at er a
WAR DIARY
of
152 INF BIE WORKSHOR
(Unit or Formation)
REM.E.
From
AS ABOVE.
(VOLUME
INDEX
Narrative (A.F. C2118)
Appendices:
A
Situation at Nightfall (M.E. Forms Nos. 161 or 162)
Signal Log
Messages connected with Log (in chronological order)
Operation Orders or Instructions issued
Operation Orders and Instructions received
Formations
Intelligence Summaries issued
Administrative Orders or Instructions issued
Administrative Orders or Instructions received
Strength States, Field Returns, etc.
Other Papers
Most Secret Supplementary War Diary
Higher
• Each document to be numbered and details entered here
† Cross out whichever is not applicable
Return by (20/11/2025 13:51
14625542
WO 171/677
PARA. 3.-0mitted.
preparing a diary so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(i) and decisions ters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
an it eaten san den to or rot on to are a pent dipation,.
* Fos.
Nos.
*Fos.
Nos.
Nos.
*Fos.
* Fos.
Despatched tc
G.H.O. M.F F
Date
Instructions for compiling the War Diary are given inside this cover
