9991969 (Albert duan)
Return by (20/11/2025 13:51:22
Commanding Officer
Month and Year
DATE
SITUATIGTON OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
f mobilisation or
rainate command
CHANG
LOCATIONS (Map Ref.)
H.01
\ 36), and personal
1s representauves
war dares wil be
NOTE B.-Sce also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
uestion of doubt whether or not a war diary
should be kept by a
NoTE C. Any question rouch the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
Tie War will, Loren, S. S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary 1s Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
A.F. C ill be ents to be noted that
initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
ction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NOTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted,
PARA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
11) Dally locations
Movements during the past twenty-tour hours and present disposition
March tables in the case of larze unb o otto mations die or assistance
(ii) Important matters relating to the clues of each branch of the staft
(1V) Detailed account of operations
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranlis of
oficers tod the member of other take of licens at stores, transport be.
onus and ol dullids suould be noted
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.-Events should be entered up, not in the order as giv
occur, or come to notice.
above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation of
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
The war carv.
(i Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para, 4, iv above). Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive headin
TArA. 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(Sec F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES)
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows:
of trendinission to the Under-Secretary of State, iOd oW ar Office.
The duplicate copies
2nd cheon to be tin mil bed to eid othe sat dom tire months to the offer 1/c
SPEnd The the tin entered shoot
thered sold ed should also be formation of order reaches
WO 171/677
Flace
B. L. A.
Month and Year. December: 1944
ORIGINAR
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
liens Less looting •
Normel routine.
50, of Unit on Holf dey.
of Unit on Helf Doy. 1N.C.O. and 12 men fron 153 orkshop returned
own Unit.
Normel Routine.
02. 1N2. visits Workshop end remains overnicht.
0.0. to door Div re forming Div Collecting Point at Vught.
formine a Div Collecting Foint unt:
10ce50o to Vuent Concentration Gest and 10 Voh lochs to 15
arrival of 153 Workshop.
00. to H., ROLE. Telecomection to 15 3de.H., for /T
Inspection.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No.
Normal Routine,
God visite orkshop
Noral soutine,
Recovory voction return to Unit.
Selecon Section return.
WE 19701 G68 2.000.000 3:48 W. H. & S. 51/637.
10 JAN 1945
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Army For u
Unit. 152 Infantry Baselorkshop,
Commanding Officer.hajor G.l. Basterook.
References to Appendice.
