Peturn bv 120/11/2025
14625542
Comp use
Book a visit - The National Archives < noreply@nationalarchiv
03 Octob
° 2025 08-10
Duan - Standard visit - Thursday 09 October 2025
bert Duan
day 09 October 2025
Document reading room
COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. —1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :
(i) Each bra or sub the s of the the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
ent from the first dav of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
(iv) Detailed account of operations
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
, or T to to thou be a rod up, not to dis Ng) ven in hit t he time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(1) care of are it retion Ate. yang the peto, overed by did curt votine of
the war diary.
(i Copies re orders or instructions, received trom higher commands if no longer required
Pa provide data dory vase to ate obte in provenien his trial record pipains,
maps relating thereto, to supplement the ces oint
lo effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
to piper ices will be made in the last eiptive cane. thing the author.
or. References
there ford to one or units quideas, factions ara nisation and inter, saved o-operation vie
organisation and inter-service
may be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be
ater for the History of the War.
on A C. diary, Will be entered up hay, each tray in and ety the offer detaile, to keep it,
(Sce FA., Volume aries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
or other person mentioned in para.
her p. On ment he inde deal, hat the oficer he denis to the the cler is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing a diary :
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
() Imp decisions tars, it
instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
(i) Day caties forement durin the at tornaty on hour and prent dispositions.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the up on NoT The in tred sold be the time the iven it on over er recte
WO 171/677
DENY
Month and Year APFIL 1.944
Date
Hour
WAR DIARY
INRELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Hel den
Wethersfield4
12
Preparation for move of Unit
Packing up and preparation for move to new Location.
Unit, less Fear Party, moves to new location - Mushroom Parm
Wethersfield Camp. (108509)
Settling into new Billets.
Normal training and workshop Duties
Normal training and Workshop Duties.
Fear Party joins Unit.
Party of 84 attached for first Waterproofing Course.
Visit of Catering Adviser (Capt. Dunlop)
Combined Church Service in Workshop Shed - 5th Black Watch
152 Bde. Workshop and 153 Bde. Workshop.
WAR DIARIES SECTION"
Normal training and Forkshop.
Normal training and Workshop.
Normal trainigg and Workshop.
L6 MAY 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Vt.47724,903 2,000,000 3/18 W. H. & S. 51/5375
Army Form G. 2
Unit 152 IN MVIRY BRIGADE WORKSHON; REMS.
Commanding Officer Major C.B. Basterbrook
References to Appendices
+ ang.
