pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF. THE
WAR
DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
OBJECT,
1. The objects of a war diary are two-fold: -
) To provide information from theatres of war in sufficient detail and in such a form as to provide da
son which to base future improvements in Army training, equipment, organisation and administratio
The views and constructive recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1 (a) above.
It is therefore of the utmost
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para. 11 below.
GENERAL.
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: T
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
on the L. of C.
(b)
Unit commanders.
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
combined war diary as is found convenient.
4. Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: -
(a) Cover;
(b)
Index as printed on cover;
Narrative;
(d) Appendices.
5. All details of the unit and formation (if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent unit), period
covered and folio numbers ef appendices will be shown on the cover.
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staff
officer.
It is a secret document.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
will be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
rouulic.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices.
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
The narrative should be written up daily.
It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
a precis of any of them.
It should contain: —
(a)
(b)
Account of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
Notes of how orders were carried out.
(c) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
Note of any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome them.
(f)
Note of how time not accounted for above was spent.
The type of training, etc., should be specified.
Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and important
Appendix letter and folio number; and, only it necessary, a very brief nose of the contente.
and a reference to the
Intermediate movements of unit or formation.
(h) Notes of any important visits paid and received by commanders and senior staff officers. It is equally
important to make a note of the reason for the visit and decisions taken.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GENERAL.
Assignment of copies of the war diary.
When an operation order, appreciation, letter laying down polic
r other important document is prepared, two copies will be made at the time specifically for the war diar
It is essential that copies of all important documents should be placed in the
wat
diary, including
commanders' "personal" and demi-official messages which contain instructions of operational importance.
Grouping of the Appendices.
The appendices will be assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover,
NOT in simple chronological order.
This is intended to make assembly and reference easy.
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
the appropriate space in the index.
In cases where additional appendices
appear suitable for the branches of certain headquarters or for certain
units the relevant papers should be inserted by groups and lettered accordingly, beginning with " K."
10. NoTES.
Appendix "A." The forms which constitute this appendix are intended for use by operational units and
headquarters of divisions and below. The form will be completed whether the unit or formation is engaged in
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
18t.
2nd.
3rd.
4th.
5th.
6th.
7th.
8the
Original.
W.R DIARY
JuLy 194A.
VULUNGS 55.
a mion unalterod Routine as usual. Lecture at Bio. for Tank Cords.
1050 hrs.
One tank arrives fron 260 r.D. gn.
crewed by Liout. inclair.
More sha lind by enory arty fron the diraction of Ciu Bullo.
Al. HR shells fell whort of our location.
Wo are getting down seriously with 165 Ble with the question of intua
support and-eonn
cation in an adrance through this
close coutury.
120г
ance of keeping in teuch with, and Inowing the exact location
of the Infentry, camot be overstreased
Casualities - Nil.
Location altered.
Routine as usdal.
0o1. holds "0" Gp
conference at 1100 hrs.
Orders and plan of attack
given bythe Col.
Tk Conds., vitting officer of Inf. and
supporting group
several HE. shelle fell on our area
at 1400 and 1430 hrs.
Later at 0130 hrs more shelling in our direction. This was answered
by our s.P's located nearby.
Casualities - N11
Location maltered.
Routine as usual,
Quiet day, weather improves
towards evening.
First enemy
fall in our area came over at 2116 hrs.
halle
¡ DIARIES SECTION
18 AUG 1944
2nd Echelon
Casualities - Nil.
Location unaltered.
Tom tile die or 185 Into has
(Brigadier Eric Bolel.
Court of Enquiry held by Capt. Underhill to invesigate the circumstances
Fothergill was wounded by accidental firing of enemy arms.
Enemy arty. shell our area at 2300 hrs. Large calibre shells fall on
utbuilding of farm, killing Tprs. Ineson and Pounder of "B" Sqn.
Several shells fell in the Echelon area brewing up
armo trucks of
the K.S.L.I.
Warwicks.
Frogments
of the shelle were taken to Div. Ron. for identification
and proved to be 150 mm. fired from Gunhowitzer.
Casualities - prs. Ineson and Founder killed by enemy shelling
Vehicles
- N11.
Location unaltered.
Nose shelling by enemy irty, shells falling all around the farm.
Tprs. Ineson and Founder buried and burial service held by the Fadre.
all in shelling for approximately one hour, commenced again at 1430 hrs.
1Lied medium bombers attack airfield of CARPIQUET in support of
8 Oin. Bde
Casualities - Nil.
Location unaltered.
Routine as usual.
Enemy shelling on our area commences at 1030 hrs.
The heaviest attack to
date, at least 30 shells falling in and about "C" Sqn. area in two minutes.
Shells fall all the afternoon in intervals.
Casualitões - NLl.
Location unaltered •
Routine as usual.
Col. holds
"O" Group in Hillman, orders for CHARNWOOD given.
Quiet afternoon
spasmodic shelling by Hol.
We witnessed heavy air raid on CAEN.
Casualities - Nl.
boston seats adi ange to bate
Tanks move off at 0330 hrs by
attle posns.
Zero hour 0420 hrs •

