334 A Great Feat of Improvisation
stock but more importantly, to execute a programme, in conjunction with 155 RWC, to fit
ex-GWR locomotives with Westinghouse brakes for operating in France and spark arrestors
for operations in ammunition and POL depots and port areas. 199 RWC° arriving in May
1940, was established in a disused shed at Martainville near Rouen.
No 1 Ambulance Train
Maintenance Section arrived in January 1940. Based at Dieppe, its work was essential to the
delivery of medical evacuation capability. No 2 Section deployed from the UK in May 1940 to
Etaples, but the German advance prompted its evacuation to UK before it was fully operational.
Taking The Strain
The railways in France were critical in delivering and sustaining the BEF's deployment including
logistic support, engineering projects, defence works, airfield construction, unit, personnel
and equipment reinforcement, leave, course, training and rotation programmes and medical
evacuation. Without the railways, the BEF, like the French Army, could not have functioned,
which is why they were central to defence planning in Western Europe in 1939 and 1940.
The table below, showing the BEF's military imports, less flying aircraft, to France, concisely
exposes the size and scope of the railway transportation task:
Table 12.1
BEF and AASF - Military Imports"
September 1939 - June 1940
Commodity
Quantity
Ammunition
109,000 tons
Petroleum Products
166,000 tons
General Stores
449,000 tons
Tanks
704
MT Vehicles
68,618
Motor Cycles
21,161
Personnel
732,531
As the logistic requirements and operational imperatives of the BEF continued to grow, it
became obvious to the planners that the manpower, motive power and rolling stock available
to the SNCF would be insufficient to support the British and French defence efforts and
the french civilian economy. The British therefore, British and French defens, to import
additional military and civil resources in order to assume responsibility for railway traffic from
the ports to the Base depots and from December 1939 onwards, British railway capability was
Tracks Across France
335
Aves, Supporting the British Expeditionary Force, p.72.
71
There is no war diary for 199 WC in the TINA for the campaign in France but it is assessed that the
untitled RWC
mentioned in WOOH, Transportation, p. 42, is this unit.
Table compiled from information in WOOH, Movements, Appendices to Chp 10.
13 on. BE sought to import wagons from British railway companies until sufficient
sock designed for BE use in the UK and France could be manufactured. (Author)
facia say, sam units. All alway units were under the operational command
I T CH acept for the ambulance trains. Within this matrix, HQ No 1 Railway
rig cup a control of all railway operating units, whilst the HQ: No 1, 2 and 3
erin dinance Groups were responsible for directing new builds, repair and
come tit truth control of allocated assets, although units were often detailed to
i acts of in out it ographie boundaries. The key point
i i ta it th Fi was the only army in the French campaign that was fully
tant ad omarions relied almost entirely upon the railway for its logistic
mum from the Main Base areas.
nin tr da rading demand, the War Office was obliged to increase the outputs
nic cn m, l in upon No 1 RTC, the Army's oldest railway training
1 in 03 at on nor Military Railway (L.MR)," which also supported
