A Great Feat of Improvisation redresses the long-standing lacuna in the historiography
of the BEF: logistics. Wide ranging in reach, comprehensive in scope and meticulously
researched, it lucidly demonstrates, through description and analysis, not only the
importance of logistics to military operations during the campaign but provides fresh
evidence and analysis on the deployment sustainment, operations and evacuation of the
BEF in the period 1939-1940.
A Great Feat of Improvisation examines how pre-war strategic, economic, political and defence
dynamics influenced the plans to generate and deploy the BEF, before assessing how the logistic
challenges were met. Many aspects of the BEF's logistic operations are described and analysed,
including the development of the BEF's Wheeled Motor Transport capability, the establishment and
expansion of the Base, the role of military and commercial railways to the BEF's capability and the
organization and capability of logistics at divisional level.
The BEF's ammunition, supply and fuel distribution systems, together with the delivery of equipment
spares, recovery and repairs, are examined in addition to the logistics under-pinning the BEF's growing
offensive Gas Warfare capability. Logistic support to the lst Armoured Division is described from the
division's formation to its evacuation from France, whilst the logistic aspects of denial and recovery
operations are explored. Also assessed is the planning and delivery of the 'Quartering' requirement
within the United Kingdom for the returning units of the BEF and support to the Soldier in France.
Clem Maginniss was born in Coventry and educated at Ratliffe College Leicester and at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst,
being awarded a Bachelor of Arts in Modern European History and International Relations in 1978 from the University of Warwick. He
subsequently served for 42 years in the Regular Army, Territorial Army and Army Reserve, first in the Royal Corps of Transport and then
the Royal Logistic Corps. A graduate of the Army Staff College Camberley, Clem has written extensively for the British Army Review
and the Royal Logistic Corps Journal on logistics history, doctrine, operations and equipment. A Great Feat of Improvisation is his
second book. His interests are Great and Second World War military and naval logistics, underwater exploration, ship-wreck research,
defence archaeology, railway heritage, keeping fit and a range of outdoor pursuits. Clem lives in Norfolk with his wife Edwina
ISBN 978-1-913336-15-8
FLION C
OMPANY&
www.helion.co.uk
fyo| helionbooks
781913
336159
