526
A Great Feat of Improvisation
clear that this plan would not mature, supporting the incoming Ist Armoured Division and then
the formation of the 2nd BEF took priority, although under War Office direction some stocks
were recovered to the UK. What the Committee failed, or perhaps chose not to grasp, was the
dilemma the War Office presented Karslake. Even with crystal orders, a shortage of military
and civilian labour and major interruption to rail movement, any withdrawal and evacuation
was going to be difficult, but adding in reinforcement, without a clear military, rather than
political mission, was asking too much. That there was confusion and hesitation is not in doubt;
that there were good reasons for it are indisputable and the report at least recognized some of
the difficulties they were facing, not least concern over the swift arrival of German forces, the
effect of French armistice arrangements upon the BEF and the priority of 'Men over Material'
in evacuation planning.
Whilst in some areas the Committee was unfair, it raised some interesting and relevant
points.
Although the report failed to mention it explicitly, the logisticians inability to have
access to timely and credible intelligence prompted an associated comment: 'There was a
tendency, both at Headquarters and at the ports, to pay too much regard to unauthenticated
reports and rumour..........A robust determination not to be stampeded by unverified reports
and hypothetical fears of disaster would have allowed more time for an orderly and successful
evacuation'. 33 The Committee also believed that stock levels in France were, for the most part,
far too high and for some commodities, one has to agree with them; neither was the support
properly balanced. In May 1940, enormous resources were dedicated to storing, in-Theatre,
60 days rations for 400,000 men, whilst some key MT spares were dues out, a situation amply
illustrated by the fact that on 30 April 1940, 1 Base Ordnance Depot had 16,000 indents
unsatisfied and demands were arriving at the rate of 1400 per day.34
The failure to issue and execute a denial plan for the ammunition storage facilities, drew
the attention of the Howard Committee, which placed the responsibility for this omission
on the GOC of the Line of Communication, Lieutenant-General Karslake. The Committee
concluded that: 'There was a lack of decision on the part of the GOC L of C on the policy of the
destruction of ammunition left in the Depots, which resulted in many thousands of tons falling
into the hands of the enemy,35 although the logisticians were absolved by the Committee of any
failure, the report noting. 'In the conditions existing it is not considered that more ammunition
could have been evacuated to the UK, unless an earlier decision and more energetic steps had
been taken to reduce the stocks in France' 3 Given that replenishment to Theatre from UK could
have been enacted in seven days, the plan to put the Base in France, with enormous quantities
of resources and materiel held forward was almost certainly flawed. Concern about possible
interruption of the Sea LOC appears to have had much to do with this and for ammunition, the
shortage of storage space in the UK. Even though the BEF was originally deployed to engage
33
TNA WO 33/2384: Howard Committee Report, para III, The Evacuation.
WOOH, Ordnance Services, p.153.
TNA CAB 106/272: France and Flanders - Equipment Losses, War Officer Letter, Brigadier Latham
to F W Deakin dated 18 September 1948, agrees with the Deakin figure of a loss of 7,000 tons.
Howard Committee however, estimated that ammunition abandoned to the enemy totalled 24,400
tons. TNA WO 33/2384: Howard Committee Report, Appx B, Ammunition, Petrol, Ordnance
SIVE SO 3572384: Howard Committe Report, Appx B, Ammunition, Petrol, Ordnance Stores,
Supplies
Reflection and Retrospect
527
fire pration, the logistic support arrangements seem ponderous but when the plan
ed to a failing encounter battle, it became positively unwieldy.
atle Goes On
ins continued discussion about the role of the railway in supporting operations in a
ate evironment but even in the Western Desert it proved indispensable to supporting
combat operations at scale.
Adjustments were made to the position of forward railheads
bartfeld but replacing the railway with WMT imported so many challenges relating
wring the additional vehicles, fuel, Equipment Support, trained MT manpower, road
cance material and engineering resources that it was never a viable proposition.
me in race for the provision of food services and Equipment Support resulted defined
so the Army's logistic structure with the formation of the Army Catering Corps (ACC)
sad the Royal Electrical & Mechanical Engineers (REME) in 1942, which withstood
of time for 52 years in the case of the ACC and is on-going for the REME.
otrinal debate relating to the RASC organizational arrangements for divisional
king based upon Commodity or Composite company structures rumbled on well after
ain from France, with both concepts having merits. The Commodity company had
tages of operating the WMT more efficiently, had greater simplicity in the field,
particular expertise in the logistic spheres of ammunition, fuel and supply and enabled
capity to re-deploy at short notice?& The two limitations of the Commodity system
alice and Alexibility. Should a Commodity company be destroyed or cut off from
in, here was an almost immediate reduction in capability, which was difficult to
rostite. In adition, the Commodity arrangement could not support brigade group
is nich required a company arrangement containing all three RASC distribution
did a point reinforced by the decision to form Composite companies to support the
meting rough Force W. Perforce of practical experience both systems were retained,
•Comision noting that, CRASC must be prepared to operate on either a composite
soiry basis as operational circumstances dictate' 1"
i red, it, commanders wrote Post Operational Reports, of varying quality, some
fused on promoting the role of their units, and perhaps, thus themselves, but for
i par CO were focused on not repeating the failures in France, whilst ensuring that
so il thad delivered logistic capability in combat were correctly understood
lid One of the most prescient was y the commandant of the oldest technological
replity in he BE, tre Animal Transport Force K6, who in his first POR wrote,
milt a Comdr of an administrative Force should have up to date knowledge of
HOC remained under the control of the RASC until 1 January 1965 when it became an
not Cop, roder the coth othe RASC pot the Royal Logistic Corps (RIC) on 5
a Bas it rth thy late 1945, beld as Serial 9, The Operation of an Armoured and Infantry
193, which uses its motto. We Sustain.
Son. a a rie our and Infiney Dision RASC, 48, para 2, Control &
577
489, 505
1n, 412
