420
A Great Feat of Improvisation
Conclusion
That the SNCF was capable of continuing to function in such chaotic conditions is testament
to the courage of its people, resilience of its infrastructure and the flexibility of its systems. The
SNCF organization retained its cohesion long after the French military in the North-East of
France had disintegrated and only collapsed when the German Army overran its central HQ.27
Railway controls were adept at efficiently diverting traffic and the civil engineering staff generally
conducted critical repairs with commendable speed. Railways operations continued even in
the shrinking pocket in North-East France, but capability was slowly eroded by the German
advance and aerial attacks. Whilst there was confusion on occasions and much frustration, the
railway system stood the test of war remarkably well, with sufficient tempo being maintained to
support military operations.
The BEF's increasing rail capability was just getting into its stride when the German attack
commenced, with some units still deficient in personnel and equipment, whilst others were
working up to meet their operational commitments, so the BEF's rail capability was not fully
effective.
Of the operating units, two were Regular, two Supplementary Reserve and one
Militia, whilst of the construction companies, three were Supplementary Reserve and five
mainly manned by Militia l28 Whilst many were rail tradesmen mobilized from commercial
railway companies in the UK, they had little initial experience of operating as a component of
cohesive team in a challenging military environment, especially in a foreign land, so coherency
was sometimes a constraint, especially in the Militia units but taking 190 ROC's evacuation
experience as an example, there was certainly no shortage of initiative or confidence and it is
remarkable that they achieved what they did in very trying circumstances.
The railwaymen operating in the corps areas did well to keep the wheels rolling and there
is no doubt that the railway units of the BEF gave of their absolute best in delivering military
capability; their story, especially the staff of the ambulance trains, deserves much greater
recognition. The BEF planners recognized the significance of a forward military rail deployment
but were unable to practise the relevant skills in the locale because of French reluctance to allow
British soldiers to practise on site, whilst Belgian neutrality prevented reconnaissance, liaison
and training to support Plan D. The BEF could not however, have functioned without the wide
range of military railvay capability in France nor could it have operated without the French
railways whose staff proved to be more than equal to the task until the Nation began to collapse.
The courage of the soldiers in BEF railway units involved in combat action during this period
has mostly been forgotten but the dedication, diligence and courage of this small band of people
with all their niche skills deserves to be remembered.
Riding the Rails
421
Dedication
This chapter is dedicated to the memory of all those British and French railway men and women,
citary and civilian, who gave their lives in the cause of freedom during the Battle for France
ere aboard HMT Lancastria. Judging from the ages of those killed in the Rennes train bombing;
the SR ROCs were comprised of older men. with most casualties being in their mid-thirtie
