A Great Feat of Improvisation
and railhead storage facilities all organized into four EFI Areas. HQ EF|67 and HQ Forward,
supporting the three corps, was at Arras,168 with North at Le Harve in the Advanced Base
Area, whilst South based at Nantes managed the Main Base Area, GLOC and the AASF
around Rheims.169 Another HQ was formed on 10 May 1940 to support X (Arras) Sub-Area,
and across the Theatre, the lay-down of the BEF across France led to some adjustment of the
doctrinal approach in Field Service Regulations with EFI stocks in the corps areas not following
the RASC supply chain. 170
Conclusion
Whilst the 'sharp-end' of logistics focusing upon ammunition and fuel may have attracted
the most attention from commanders, the wealth of supporting activity played a key role in
sustaining not only the operational capability of the BEF also the morale and thus effectiveness
of its soldiers. Improving the MT skills of the BEF was arguably an under-rated technical task
but one that was crucial not only to its logistic support but also to its combat edge. That corps
MT schools were established is clear testimony that commanders were alive to the problem
and intended to prosecute a solution. The deployment of AT appears at face value to be at best
anachronistic, and at worst, a failure to comprehend the changing nature of logistics in the
military environment, yet the picture is more complex. Unlike the other Armies that fought in
the 1940 campaign, which placed great reliance on the horse, Force K6 was niche, deployed as
a precaution to meet a specialist need. Whilst the utilization of K6 was not as envisaged and it
was obviously over-faced in manoeuvre warfare, it played a useful role in engineer support work
during severe weather conditions that precluded the effective use of WMT and in this respect
met its remit of delivering transport capability in places where WMT could not.
Reverse Logistics, the management of AGM equipment and the supply of water have been
air-brushed from the published record to the point where these important tasks do not feature
in the many histories of the BEF and yet for those involved in delivering them, they were as
important as any other activity undertaken by the supporting logistic Corps. Equally significant
was the provision of labour, which seemed to expand exponentially not only to support the daily
activities of the BEF but also to enable the completion of the growing number of construction
projects. Procuring additional skilled trades was always a challenge, whilst access to the French
labour market relied greatly on female personnel. Clear improvements to catering appear to
have been less successful across the Theatre than GHQ had hoped, the rapid expansion of the
Taken for Granted
299
me and the pread of responsibility in delivering enhancements proving to be major hurdles
grating effective solutions in the timeframe.
be importance of MBUs and laundries to health and hygiene, morale and thus operational
qi, so became clear and the commitment and industry of the personnel of these
pait organizations has certainly been forgotten.
For the most part, operating with
aried equipment or through contracts with French commercial companies, the experience
frane generated the knowledge and will to create much more agile and productive military
so cople of supporting deployments at scale. Whilst such facilities were often the butt
rach oder humour, the reality was that they were as important to the individual as they
rant amy. That the war diary of 2 MBU exudes a level of professionalism, pride and
iment their task as high any infantry battalion, speaks volumes for the dedication,
Cary d morale of the forgotten' logisticians.
167 The Commandant EFI BEF was Lieutenant-Colonel (later Brigadier) Norman Victor Peters MC,
a pre-Great War manager of Gordon Hotels, who joined Navy
and Army Canteen Board in 1919,
transferring to NAAFI upon its formation on 1 January 1921. Brigadier Peters deployed with the first
EFI contingent supporting 21st Army Group in June Y944.
168 Upon arrival in France HQ EFI deployed to HQ LOC at Le Mans but transferred to Arras in
November 1939 as the Centre of Gravity of the Fl operation moved North. WOOH, Miselaneous
O sergices n 161
169 Major R A D Alloft, who was also the Assistant Commandant, commanded Area North, Major S
B Martin Area South and Major J W Martin MBE X Sub-Area and Major N F Hart controlling
canteens assigned to the AASF.
170 WOOH, Miscellaneous 'Q' Services, pp. 162-163.
