344 A Great Feat of Improvisation
and later, III Corps, whilst the GLOC was supported by a 3½ day schedule. No 3 Ambulance
Train for example, undertook ten runs over ten weeks in the period December 1939 - February
1940 to both corps and GLOC ATRs, transporting a total of 1,951 patients to Dieppe for
evacuation to the UK. The ambulance train departed Dieppe collecting patients en route and
then dividing at Rennes, one part travelling to Brest and the other to Nantes to evacuate soldiers
from Base areas before the halves were reunited at Rennes for movement to Cherbourg where
patients were transferred to a hospital carrier. 20°
Practical experience identified numerous operating, logistic and technical issues, which
reinforced the importance of attention to detail. The ambulance train length restricted the
choice of stabling locations, which was important because the units needed to be separate from
military operations such as munitions trains, with the best sites being sidings at small village
stations. 21 From the medical and practical perspective, smooth braking was important because
of the importance of avoiding distress to patients, whilst as a precaution, it was necessary to
secure equipment to prevent damage to it and personnel. The heating systems, which used
steam from the locomotive, were discovered to be ineffective in the cold winter of 1940 with the
rear coaches remaining cold, a problem unresolved by the few Valor paraffin stoves held on the
ambulance train Ordnance Equipment Table (OET). In addition, without a locomotive, there
was no heating on the train because no auxiliary arrangement had been provided.
Watering was another difficulty because although there were plenty of water-points available,
a hose with suitable connections had been omitted from the OET, which meant that the tanks
had to be filled by bucket; a most inefficient arrangement. The Equipment Support component
of the capability was also fragile because initially there was no ambulance train maintenance
unit, with repairs and servicing being conducted on an ad hoc basis by one Sapper in 8 RCO who
was not fully conversant with the equipment. 22 The blackout and lighting arrangements also
posed a challenge. 23 The windows had been painted to permit the use of interior light at night
but this meant using artificial light during the day thus draining the batteries, or opening the
windows, which during inclement weather conditions was not conducive to either patient care
or staff efficiency; both these matters were partially resolved by engineering action. 24
20 Crew, BOH, The Army Medical Services, Campaigns, Vol 1, p. 24. Russell Plummer. The Ships That Sara
Limited, 1990), p.55-66, lists nine ferries thates conVentiot Willing cart: Pt During tine
in Army: A comprehensive record of the 1,300 ' Little Ships' of Dunkirk (Wellingborough: Patrick Stephen
period September 1939 to early May 1940, most of the carriers were relatively inactive.
121 Given the outcome of the Rennes incident of 17 June 1940, this proved to be a wise policy. TINA WO
361/114: Rennes Train Bombing, although there were instances during operations when ambulance
trains were stabled, if only briefly with ammunition and troop trains.
122 DGT BEF proposed that a RE Carriage & Wagon technician conversant with the electrical and
heating systems
should be assigned to cach train, a solution fullo nasant with the arrival of the
Imbulance Train Maintenance Sections. INA 167151: GioR Serves, transportation, letter DGT
123 Repairs to the lighting systems were complic Directer readportationhey were all 24 volts, there was not
R/48 dated 11 October 1939 to War Office Director Transportation
across the fleet. TNA 167/51: GHQ Services, Transportation, letter DGT R/48 dated
11 October 1939 to War Office Director Transportation.
124 Battery charging systems were purchased, and blackout boards were procured from the LMS Workshop
War Office Director Transportation
(Derby. TNA 167/51: GH Services, Transportatt boards were procured from thi October 1939 i
Tracks Across France
345
4 BE increasing rail capability was just getting into its stride when the German attack
-ned, with some units still deficient in personnel and equipment, whilst others were
dig up to meet their operational commitments, so the BEF's rail capability was not
brated. with 8 RCO, training was initially a serious concern, especially in the
tuit, Rank & File of which consisted mainly of conscripts. Whilst many were rail
men mobilized from commercial railway companies in the UK, and thus brought some
act thra kil, thy had little experience of operating as a component of a cohesive
caina allenging military environment, especially in a foreign land and much had to be
col, ded as the case in many of the Base logistic operations, 'On The Job'.
krate mase investment in the Base depots and the inherent reliance upon rail to
sit marat and from them, it was inevitable that the initial emphasis would be on
charte development, a process reflected by the deployment of RCCs over ROCs.
is aleging start, the ambulance train capability improved consistently throughout
i hyment rod, building regular loop cycles and enhancing medical and technical team
rich were to prove invaluable during operations in May 1940. The proposed airfield
son pet would certainly have posed an interesting challenge to the British railway
ain ace, which would probably have required reorganization to ensure efficient
con of th resources and personnel reinforcement to ensure the BEF components
can til spe. From the equipment perspective, the plans to introduce
act umbers of aditional locomotives and wagons to the Continent unambiguously
cut him tish commitment to expanding its military forces in France and ensuring
re ply stained. The most critical task however, was yet to come.
