254 A Great Feat of Improvisation
of the VD issue in 1939 is therefore, an interesting one, as it is a subject involving the emotional,
the practical, the moral and the operational. In 1939, commanders and Staff, regardless of
their personal views, were faced with dealing with the effects of VD, and there was plenty
of historical evidence and command experience to indicate that it would degrade operational
capability if the spread of the diseases were not controlled. The Official History of the Medical
Services in the Great War, certainly offered clear guidance: 'In the army during war men are
so valuable that every possible means of successful prevention, early diagnosis and treatment
should be investigated and employed if men are to be protected, the in-efficiency caused by the
disease reduced and army personnel returned to their own kith and kin in good health mentally,
morally and physically 123
VD in the BEF 1939-1940 averaged 2.39 cases per 1000, over seven months of the deployment 24
In October 1939 there were 384 recorded admissions, from a force of 160,000 and in April
1940, with the ration strength at 394,000, around 880, the incidence thus declining from 2.50
to 2.23 per 1000 personnel, 125 a figure 50 percent lower than the 1918 rate.26 Much effort
was therefore, devoted to preventing infection 2 in the soldiers of the BEF through education,
regulation, and where necessary, early treatment. It was though, a subject that required careful
handling, and for the most part it was left to the AG Branch and medical Staffs to issue policy
and directives. One notable exception to this approach was that of GOC 3rd Division, Major-
General Bernard Montgomery, who issued a rather more soldierly directive entitled Prevention
of Venereal Disease' 128 to his Commanding Officers!2 than might be expected from a member
of the Staff or the GOC, 130 Replete with sound military advice, it was, unfortunately, too frank
for the sensitivities of the GHO Senior Church of England and Roman Catholic Chaplains.
gonorrhoea, 31.3 for non-specific VD and 37.6 for syphilis. See, Mitchell & Smith, BOH, Medial
Services, Casualties and Medical Statistics of the Great War, p. 114.
123 Ibid. p.79
124 Mellor, BOH, Casualties and Medical Statistics, p. 176. The figures may be subject to error because some
of the BEF's medical records were lost during the evacuation of the force.
125 Ibid, p 176.
126 Mitchell & Smith, BOH, Casualties and Medical Statistics of the Great War, p.75.
127 According to Crew, MBOH, The Army Medical Services, Campaigns, Vol 1, p. 79, this campaign was had
a 100% sues in one area because the Medical erecord, Caaignes of the indian soldiers of Fore Ko.
contracting VD whilst serving in France.
128 HQ 3 Div 179/A dated 15 November 1939 quoted in Alun Chalfont, Montgomery of Alamein (London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson 1976), p.111.
120 There has been confusion as to whether the directive was a divisional order as initially described by the
II Corps Commander, Lieutenant-General Brooke, or a personal for subordinate commander leter,
as noted bv Montgomerv.
The contents of the document are reproduced in Ibid and the style is very
much personal for'. In his diary, Alanbrooke notes it was a 'circular to his troops', which is certainly ar
incorrect description of the document.
130 This was not the first time that Montgomer's intercession on behalf of soldiers' sexual heath badl
i can because a can a see dent had eecurred whilst he was
the CO 1st Warwicks at Alexandria in Egypt in 1932. On this occasion, Montgomer arang lira.
regimental brothel to be established with medical inspections being conducted by the batain medical
Oficer and inevitably, this came to the attention of sple as being condoutal, se, Hamin, il
Monty, pp.201-203.
131 Probably the most contentious sentence was the one concerning brothels. Montgomery wrote: "There
are in Lille a number of brothels, which are properly neping rathe where the in of infection it
Mightier than the Sword
255
cin, in rached the ears of the AG and then the C-in-C, came close to curtailing
not a dirt to a to become one of the Nation's most famous. 32 Montgomery was
ad by the intersion of Lieutenant-General Brooke, Commander II Corps, who, despite
ng the considered the language in the letter obscene, 'obscene,133 persuaded Gort that the
ta vas a chain of command issue, and that Brooke should deal with it.134 In his diary,
he ch do Montgomery that he: 'had a very high opinion of his military capabilities
Laul voo his literary ones? 35 It would appear that on this occasion, the pen was
it that the sword! Monty, despite his exemplary personal standards, took the view
rational capability outweighed in war, the absolutist moral dimension, whilst as Nigel
ein has identified, Brooke failed to recognize Montgomery's personal commitment to
year is sodies' welfare, 36 be that military, spiritual or sexual. 137
spat of this process, GHQ was determined to ensure that the contraction of what was
made self infited injury did not result in soldiers having a free ticket to Blighty, either
te are but trough the medical system. The PSS perspective of the problem cannot
a in though, by the results of the censorship work undertaken by the French
a trade otal hose personnel at Le Harve, reported: 'Drunkenness of English troops
igue and their attitude towards women and girls is disgraceful....some ask if there is
( cie in the English Army, others whether France is a conquered country 138 The
race derence and of punishment was illustrated by the policy of denying soldiers
gone in their privilege of leave, although there may also have been a strong practical
cat tir pop with the intention of preventing married soldiers infecting their wives,
a on discovery, would bring in its train adverse domestic and medical effects. Whilst
re notedly effective in reducing problems with the latter, the denial of leave also
any dest cocal their infection. This process was unfortunately fostered by the
not . hear hown to the military police, and any soldier who is in need of horizontal
net would be well advised to ask a policeman for a suitable address. Chalfont, Montgomery
I events is described in: Nigel Hamilton, Monty: The Making of a General 1887-1942
pon in amiton 1981), p. 354-356 and the issues surrounding it are explored in detail in
i energy sun dubtedly brought to book in the interview and he recorded, in an unusual written
so contin, hun a ched to a considered positive output, that Alanbrooke did so in no
orin name and reived from him a proper backhander ... Anyhow it the letter] achieved
i redit ca in hima rope backhe denomey K, The Memoirs of Friela-
Kim in 193 in 8: dia, a Diarie: 1939-19152019.
