216 A Great Feat of Improvisation
aerial bomb caused a fire" that destroyed 9,000 tons of ammunition.? This incident, which cost
an eye-watering €2.185 Billion at 2018 values, had a long-lasting and fundamental effect upon
the design of future ammunition depots, including those of the BEF with sites constructed
away from other installations and designed to have greater internal dispersion.?" This resulted
in a depot planned to store 30,000 tons requiring at least 1,000 acres of real estate" and 50
miles of internal railway to serve it. 100
These points were seared into the minds of the BEF
RAOC planners, the Gibson report noting of the psychology, that, 'There was an obsession as
to the losses which might occur from bombing, based on memories of the Audruieq depot....
and other experiences.'101
The BADs in 1939 were thus smaller, more dispersed and intended,
despite the fire risk, 102 to be sited in woods, in order reduce the opportunities for effective enemy
aerial observation. 103
1 BAD was established in the Foret du Gavrel in the Southern Base Area, with the
SPOD at Saint Nazaire. Stocks were cleared from the docks by rail to four railheads serving
the BAD area: La Maillardais, Le Gavre, Nozay, and Coudray Plesse, from which, WMT
delivered the stocks to the stacking areas.
Whilst locating 1 BAD in the woods was most
commendable from the tactical perspective, there was little examination of the resources
required to support the process and is an excellent illustration of the balance that was required
between operational security, logistic output and engineering input. The forest tracks required
considerable maintenance to make them fit for high traffic levels and both of these activities
could compromise the location if tight control was not exercised. This experience appears to
have been tempered by the time the RAOC 'ammunition Lessons Identified' appeared in the
95
The Court of Enquiry held on 23-24 July 1916 identified that the initiation involved no more than
five small aerially delivered weapons and probably only one. The immediate "Lessons Identfel
report covered the design of future depots, fire-fighting equipment, ammunition packaging, splinte
protection, decoy sites and the positioning and operation of railheads within ammunition depots. The
learance of damaged munitions, many of them rastable, took months. Correspondence in TINA
MUN 4/3077: Reports on Fire in France at Audruicq, including the "Report of the Court of Enguiny
and Instructions in regards to Storage of Ammunition, GHQ OMG Loose Minute dated 8 August
96
The loss included 500,000 rounds of 18 pdr anc
the los in also do be, 0 no Ond at prien, 100 ounds of 8 and 9,2 inch howitzer. Cou
Wilfred Miles (Comp.), History of the Great War (BOD), France and Belgium, 1916, Vol II, and
Appendices and Map, 2nd July 19% the Ce Find of the Battles of the So ame (London: Maila, 195).
Based on the Measuring Worth UK, Project Economy Cost as a share of the Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). The financial loss was assessed at £3.5 million in 1916 prices.
For the 1934 safety dion was ase, ely 635 cilitary Engineering, Vol VI, Aromatin cal
Installations, Plate 85, Ammunition Depot Safety Distances.
1,000 acres equates to an area one third of the size of London Heathrow airport, which provides a dea
illustration of the real estate recuired for these debate and the complexity of the staff work with th
incation of then alestrite re wied, for these depos authe ehe land and to obtain the autony o.
store such large quantities of munitions
100 Henniker, BÖH, Transportation on the Western Front, pp. 322-323.
101 TNA CAB 106/235: BEF Ammunition Supply (Gibson Report), p.2
102 TrY C106/235, TEa Am Mention Supply (5, 10g Be 194) War Ofic, 190) a 27 a 0)
.8, COC Asy From he Miere, nore at whisp: 19900 in particula, would always comp
i fire risk, in other woodland, the risk was 'not so great as might be expected'.
103 TNA CAB 106/235: BEF Ammunition Supply (Gibson Report), p. 2.
104 Foret de Gavre is 25 miles NW of Nantes.
Factory to Fire Trench
217
a hing Memorandum in August 1940, which suggested otherwise, 'Road served depots
ad troth. Little constructional work is necessary, and they are easy to conceal', which
it to do i relative terms to rail operated sites sites.l05 The stacking areas often needed
ding and were sometimes not next to the feeder tracks, which entailed a 'carry'106 to and
a ter hides all of these problems reduced in and out-loading capability. Storage materials
o required, equating for every ton of ammunition, to six feet of timber dunnage and 1.5
y conditions, fire was a potential hazard and the Germans could have caused effective
scion attacking the forests with incendiaries.108 2 BAD was located around Plouaret109
* Northern Base Area with the SPOD at Brest and two railheads at Plouaret and
corn from which stocks were moved by WMT. Neither of the two road-served BAD sites
sible the tak, which may, despite the concern over the vulnerability of in-Theatre
amad or operated locations, have prompted construction of three rail BADs out of the
a tre tut for the evacuation. The Base storage of ammunition stocks, including
af here bombs for the RAF, was the responsibility of the Army.10 Initially, all AASF
ns were held in 1 BAD and those for the BEF Air Component at 2 BAD but these were
reamed and split between the sites.
he d he key asks as new depots were constructed was to ensure there was a stock
a unitin pes across the different depots to ensure that the appropriate levels of
sion were held in each site. There was however, friction between GHQ Ordnance
in and Movements) because the latter Branch strongly opposed the plan on the basis
it rainst the principles of movement."2 Study of the Chapter IV of the Manual of
at Way which, examines "The Principles of Military Movement, 113 reveals no evidence
apons this objection, although there is a comment that 'foresight and co-ordination'
licite a verse impact upon the capacity of transportation by constant changes to
la" The conclusion must be that R (Movements) failed to grasp the significance of
in since to ammunition storage above some disruption to the efficient utilization
vition asts, which of course, could have been mitigated by better planning. Either
(Morements) principles were sacrificed on the altar of operational efficiency.
h i it it ta ben part of Plan W4 to ensure this balance, the initial shipping
year do in cordance with the plan. The first two ammunition ships loading
a cod, my Training Memorandum No 35, para 27 i) (a) p.18, RAOC Lessons from
tong and bading were done by hand. If a chain or portable conveyor could not be used, the
n also had to be carried by hand.
Lace, Mitary Administration in War, p. 47.
To hi an ory die rien 959, or Bomber Command to attack German forests
+ ch to serent 19 er in Plan CAn 11d to attack Germain Right
