A Great Feat of Improvisation
only its importance to military operations during the campaign but also record and highlight
the incredible contribution of a significant number of men and women to the deployment,
sustainment, operations and evacuation of the BEF in the period 1939-1940. In this respect, it
is wide-ranging in its reach, and except for pertinent logistic matters, does not focus upon the
evacuation from Dunkerque.
The greatest challenge in researching the logistic aspects of the BEF is the scope and scale of
its many facets.
Whilst as an organization its lifespan was not quite 10 months, the planning
and industry involved in supporting it was remarkable and deserves exposure. A Great Feat of
Improvisation is not a comprehensive examination of every aspect of BEF logistics, although
it covers much ground, or a short history.
To achieve the former would involve more than
one volume and the latter would omit much fascinating detail. It does however, bring a new
and fresh perspective by analysing in a series of engaging essays, the critical contribution of
particular components of military logistics through the lens of specific elements and themes,
each of which, cast penetrating light into dark corners of an important, yet mainly forgotten
and ignored story.
A Great Feat of Improvisation touches upon how pre-war strategic, economic, political and
defence dynamics influenced the plans to generate and deploy the BEF and concomitantly
create an enormous challenge to an initially significantly under-resourced logistic organization
that inevitably struggled to retain professional coherence during its rapid expansion, whilst also
delivering operational capability to the BEF. A Great Feat of Improvisation explores the success
of the BEF's Quartermaster-General, Lieutenant-General W G Lindsell,? in utilizing the
skills of his logistic planners and soldiers to deliver the operational logistic capability that was
the salvation of the BEF during its deployment, advance, withdrawal and evacuation. Logistic
operations in France and Flanders are analysed to highlight the military 'logistic learning
steps', including the impact but not the detail of supporting the Advanced Air Striking Force
The development of the BEF's Wheeled Motor Transport (WMT) component is
reviewed, including its influence upon the deployment and employment of armour, infantry,
artillery and air components, which were all affected by the expanding use of WMIT, creating
a requirement to improve its efficiency and effectiveness, which, with a rapidly expanding force
was a clear challenge. The organization and capability of logistics at divisional level is explained,
supported by an analysis of the BEF's ammunition supply system and a review of the logistics
which, under-pinned the BEF's growing offensive Gas Warfare (GW) capability.
Rarely studied, the logisticians played a crucial role in the preparations for the evacuation
of material from the Main Base Areas and the Ground Line of Communication (GLOC)
after Dunkerque, whilst logistic support to the Ist Armoured Division is examined from the
Lindsell was also the author of the manual entitled Military Organization and Administration published
in 1923 (Aldershot: Gale & Polden, 23rd Edn, 1941) which ran, in various editions, until the 19605,
which lucidly illustrates its resilience. He also wrote, A & Q or Military Administration in War, 3rd Edn
(Aldershot: Gale & Polden, 1933). Lindsell held several senior MC posts during the Second War
World, including the BEF in France, and appointments in the Middle Eastand India.
Whilst this process is often referred to as a learning curve, the reality ise hat and sul of various factors,
regressive activity sometimes occurs, and the outputs are often more like steps than a smooth curve.
23 The logistic operations of the AASF are fascinating and deserve a singleton study.
Introduction
division's formation to its evacuation from France. Elements of the soldiers' administration,
directed by the Adjutant-General's (AG) Branch in GHQ BEF is examined, and to complete
the A& coherence, the 'A' is embedded with an assessment of the logistic 'Q' contribution to
managing and delivering the BEF's leave policy. Also explained, is the planning and delivery
of the Quartering' requirement within the United Kingdom for the returning units of the BEF.
A Great Feat of Improvisation draws these threads from the bobbins to weave a colourful pattern
of achievement, whilst illustrating how logistics evolved to overcome complex challenges and in
doing so, transformed operations, creating a legacy that remains relevant to the British Army's
logistics in the 21st Century 4 Logistics however, do not swim alone in the military pond. At
the operational level, the role of logistics is to develop, sustain and regenerate combat power
to ensure that the tempo and effectiveness of the operations maintains momentum. Equally,
logistics placed constraints on strategy and tactics, a critical point concisely summarized by a
future field force QMG: 'Strategy and tactics are now tied hand and foot by administration'. 25
The BEF's logistics, never perceived as racy, has been all but forgotten, and its practitioners,
from General to Private, are mostly long gone and the experiences they recorded and the lessons
they learnt, many still relevant in the 21st Century, lie in dusty volumes and files in archives and
libraries 26 I trust that A Great Feat of Improvisation brings their fascinating achievements to life.
24 Sec, Wiliam G T Tutte, Defense Logistics for the 21st Century, I (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press,
25 Lindsell Administrative Lessons of the Great War, JRUSI, Vol LXXI, February February p. p.713.
26 For dusty read un-opened because l am sure that the TNA in particular does not have any dusty files!
