70
A Great Feat of Improvisation
squads on the Line of Communication. The deployment to Palestine in the period 1936-
1939 reinforced the need to mitigate ground based threats to logistics in such environments"
but equally exposed the vital importance of ensuring appropriate levels of Equipment Support
(ES)" in an Army that was increasingly reliant upon WMT and tracked armoured vehicles for.
logistic and combat capability. The exercises conducted by the newly formed Mobile Division
in the harsh environment of the Egyptian desert reinforced not only this lesson but also the
significance of well trained soldiers who were able to operate and maintain wheeled and tracked
vehicles in hostile conditions to deliver operational effect.
The shape, size, composition and logistic capability of the BEF had been subject to much
turbulence in the 1930s with the equipment programme an especial issue. The Cabinet position
was founded upon the Treaties of Locarno," which substantiated a basic tenet of British policy
in Europe, namely, 'Limited Liability? British military deployments to the Continent, if there
were to be any, were to be small and more of a gesture than of militarily significance, whilst
the whole concept of engagement and subsequently appeasement, sought to eliminate the need
for any deployments. From the War Office perspective, the period between 1935 and 1939
was one of immense turmoil for the British Army as emerging threats began to crystallize
92
Government of India Defence Department, Frontier Warfare - India, p.144, para 6. These "Service
Squads', comprising
one NCO and six soldiers, were deployed to assist, during intense periods of
operation, LOC WMT units to complete 1st Line vehicle maintenance, thus enhancing reliability and
output. A Service Squad could complete the schedule for a section of vehicles in five hours of daylight
and seven in artificial lighting conditions.
93
Turpin, The Turn of the Wheel, pp. 117-122.
Equipment Support (ES) includes the preparation and repair of equipment for battle and the repair
and recovery of battle casualties and non-combat related failures. HO FS staffs have a vital role i
monitoring the serviceability of critical equipments in a formation to ensure that combat power is
maintained.
See, Army Field Manual Vol 1, Combined Arms Operations, ParsE, Combat Service Support,
95
DGD&D 18/34/44, Army Code No 71344 (UK MOD, 1998), p.viii.
Brigadier H A Fernyhough CBE MC & Major HE D Harris, History of the Royal Army Ordnance
96
'orps, 1939-1945 (London & Beccles: William Clowes, nd but 1967), p.50
The Treaties of Locarnd
were seven agreements negotiated in Switzerland between Belgiu
Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy and Poland in the period 5-16 October 1925
and formally signed in London on 1 December 1925. The treaties were essentially mutual guarantees
of frontiers, but there were hidden agendas and perspectives behind the negotiations, which were to
have unfortunate repercussions in the mid-1930s.
Not least of these, was the belief by the then Foreign
Secretary, Sir Austen Chamberlain, that the treaties reduced not extended Britains continental liabilities.
For further details see: Gibbs, BOH, Grand Strategy, Vol I, Rearmament Policy, Chp 2
Sally Marks, The
lusion of Peace: International Relations in Europe, 1918-1933 (Basingstoke: Palerave Macmillan, 2003
99, notes that, A few men knew that the spirit of Locarno was a fragile foundation on which to build
a lasting peace', See also, Gaynor Johnson (ed.) Locarno Revisited: European Diplomacy Revisited, 1920-
97
1929, (London & New York: Routledge, 2004).
A term used to describe the policy of the British Governments of the 1930s, which focused on keeping
the military Land force commitment to any future continental conflict as small as possible. See,
98
Howard, The Continental Commitment, Pp.96-120.
Nearly 90 years on, appeasement remains a topic for academic study, with arguments in support of
otherwise, hotly debat
The bibliography is certainly lengthy. Engaging is Tim Bouverie, Appeasing
Hitler, Chamberlain, Churchill and the Road to War (London: The Bodging lead, 2019), whilst Andrew
David Stedman, Alternatives to Appeasement, Neville Chambe The Bad ey Head, terma, (London: I B
'Tauris, 2011), examines the wider issues and options.
Cinderella and the Pumpkin
71
and old ones maintained traction." In this respect, the re-armament of the British Army was
conducted in two main phases: the first was designed to make good the deficiencies within
the Army, with no increase in its size, whilst the second sought to equip a rapidly expanding
force to meet a developing threat. 00 The end of the first phase merged with the beginning
of the second, creating stresses on the War Office munitions organization that not only led
to a significant expansion but also its separation into an independent government body, the
Ministry of Supply101 Whilst defence planners wrestled with the potential problems that
a resurgent Germany might present, °2 with all the issues relating to a potential continental
Land force commitment, others in the War Office were more concerned with responding to
more immediate threats 103 Italian actions in the Mediterranean littoral of North Africa, in
Abyssinia'* and the Horn of Africa were a perpetual cause of concern because of the potential
impact upon the security of Egypt and the Suez Canal, ' both of which, were deemed vital to
Britain's economic, imperial and defence interests in India and the Far East. The increasingly
complex security issues in Palestine generated not only a counter insurgency operation but also
rising concerns within the corridors of the Admiralty and War Office about the fragility of the
country's potential role in supporting the development of a Middle East base. 06 The security
and stability of the North-Western Frontier107 of India was almost incessantly dynamic in the
period and operations at brigade plus level, supported by the Royal Air Force, 108 were a feature
of the military Diaspora, generating Air-Land and logistic lessons that regrettably were not
99 For an assessment of the European dynamics, see Williamson Murray, The Change in the European
Balance of Power, 1938-1939 (Yale: Yale University Press, 1975)
100 For a brief analysis of the dynamics of industrial capacity for aircraft and tanks, see, Edgerton, Warfare
101 For a survey of this issue and the creative tensions therein, see, Robert Paul Shay Jr, British Rearmament
in the Thirties, Politics and Profits (Guildford: Princeton University Press, 1977), Chp III, 'Industrial
Mobilization for Rearmament.
102 For an engaging analysis, see, Wesley K Wark, The Ultimate Enemy, British Intelligence and Nazi
Sermary, 1933-1939 (London: I B Tauris, 1985).
103 In a minute to CIGS, Director-General Territorial Army observed: "The commitments away from the
Western Front come and go with every change in the political situation - the Western Front is with us
always and we cannot escape from it. DGTẢ War Office 79/Gen3292 dated 25 April 1938 quoted in
WOOH, Fighting, Support and Transport Vehicles, Part I - Common Problems, p.7.
106 Playfair, BOH, The Mediteranean and Middle East, Vol 1, pp. 13-16
107 1GS, Offcial History of Operations on the NW Frontier of India, 1936-37.
108 For the official military histories, sec, bid and IGS, Official History of Operations on the NW Frontier of
India, 1920-35 (New Delhi: Government of India Press, 1945). For a wider perspective, also see, Alan
Warren, Waziristan, The Fagir
(Bangalore: Oxford University Press, 2000).
• of Ipi and the Indian Army, The North West Frontier Revolt of 1936-37
