404 A Great Feat of Improvisation
ROCs to drive trains on the French network in the BEE's corps areas until after the German
attack, which prevented the requisite training to enhance operational capability.
The most
significant tasks therefore, were focused upon the delivery of railway transportation outputs
in the growing number of docks, depots and sidings that the BEF acquired or constructed,
although some depots were served solely by road, with WMT operating from private or SNCF
sidings to the site; the BEF used 69 such facilities. Others had a rail link into the depot making
it 'rail-served' but internally, WMT moved material to the storage areas.
Others were rail-
operated', with stocks being delivered direct to the sheds or dumps, by rail.
The railway was an integral constituent of several elements forming the BEF's forward and
mobile supply systems. To ensure ammunition stocks were available to combat forces at the
commencement of operations, dumping commenced around nominated Corps Ammunition
Railheads (ARH), whilst six days of RAF munitions and POL were held at Air Component
Railheads. ARH sites were the responsibility of the RAOC ARH Detachments found from
the establishment of Base Ammunition Depots (BAD).® Five Days of Supply (DOS) for
ammunition were held for I Corps and seven DOS for II Corps; the execution of plans for III
Corps was disrupted by the German invasion' but there was approximately 1,000 tons at the III
Corps ARH equating to three DOS. Initially, no combat supplies were held at railheads for the
AASF, but this approach changed in early 1940 when stocks were deployed at the established
Germaine ARH and 82 Advanced Railhead Detachment RAOC was improvised to operate
AASF railheads.10
The BEF GHQ logistic planners were though, much concerned that there would be
insufficient lift at the commencement of operations to replenish what they expected to be
space for 110. TNA WO 167/56: Q Branch L of C.
For the general principles, see, Army Council, Military Enginering, Vol VII, Railways, p. 18-42.
Corps ARHs were initially as follows:
Table 15.1
Corps Ammunition Railheads - Initial
Formation
Initial Deployment
Pre-Plan D
Remarks
Name
Location
Name
Location
I Corps
Evron
30 miles WNW Le Mans
Code OX
Ecoust
10 miles SE Arras
II Corps
Noyen*
AASF
16 miles SW Le Mans
Aubigny
8 miles NW Arras
Code OY
Germaine
10 miles South of Rheims
Germaine
10 miles South of Rheims
Code OZ
*Meslay-du-Maine replaced Noyen as the deployment commenced. TNA CAB 106/235: BEF Ammunition
Supply (Gibson Report), p.4.
of all key Air Service munitions. TINA AIR 35/123: Reserve stocks of aviation fuel, bombs and small
arms ammunition, 1940.
An ARH Detachment had a WE of two officers and 27 Other Ranks.
An additional four DOS for each corps thathers and artet R all through the ARH were dumped
10 Un CO 15742832 dand thel Detachment RAOC, WD. The lat entry hit ANy
1940 pots: All remaining stores salvaged su Detach exe RAbicy eD, The Stores. The later had.
been broken into by French troops and the bicycles misappropriated'.
Riding the Rails
405
high expenditure rates in the opening engagements of a major defensive battle and sought to
create a robust solution. When GHQ adjusted the BEF posture to an advance to a defence
line, the fundamental concept underpinning this approach became irrelevant because leaving
stocks further forward than they would otherwise have been, caused some difficultly during
the withdrawal of the BEF as they were perceived to be inappropriately sited. Some were lost
to the enemy but as it transpired, these dumps proved to be the salvation of the BEF when the
German advance cut the GLOC. Given the doctrinal British focus upon creating mobility, it
may appear surprising that the forward storage solution was adopted but it was the product of
the long GLOC and a shortage of WMT that prompted its adoption.
The French, however, were uneasy about the static stocking of so much materiel forward
believing it to be vulnerable to enemy action" and much preferred the En-Cas-Mobile (ECM) 2
arangement, which the French Army had developed, with the British, during the Great War,
though interestingly the pre-war Field Service Regulations clearly identified the concept and
its application. 13
This was a system based on a group of railway wagons, barges or WMT
kept under load for immediate despatch, although for practical purposes this was mostly
ammunition held on rail.4 By 1940 the BEF had developed this concept to include a range
of combat supplies, vehicles and material held on wheels, both road and rail. The BEF system
consisted of these two components. The rail element consisted of three parts: POL, rations and
ammunition, of which the latter was the most important. Interestingly, one of the reasons the
Bish adopted the ammunition EM was be cause the French objected to the deployment of
stranced ammunition depots, so EM was expanded as a compromise.
The ral ECM plan had two DOS on wagons located within 36 hours of the respective Corps
ARH plus an additional two DOS for I Corps within 12 hours.
Ammunition ECM trains
nite baded with an agreed pack of ammunition natures authorised by the G Staff at GHQ and
ree originally designated Standard Ammunition Trains (SAT) but were re titled Ammunition
Section En-Cas-Mobile (ASE), The SAT concept in 1940 had though, two limitations. First,
wealth cop had the same weapon populations, which in addition, were constantly changing,
and secondly, the ammunition expenditure rates were not sufficiently scientific.
The GHO
Administrative Instruction for Plan D Dyle)" also listed three ration and three petrol trains lo.
1l Bit logistic doctrine directed that materiel with predicted usage rates, such as rations and ciehiny,
should be held to the reairected that matriel ward by daily trains. Items that had more volatile daily
arpenditure or consumption rates, sech a amanunition and liquid fuels, should have an allocated
Component held forward. Henniker BOH Transportation on the Western Front, p. ovi.
5 The pre-Creat war neary ten nik conditi Ts or torming the equivalent of CM in ch mail
criment. This rule darticulate the suditiain toads of supplies or ammunition as the IGC may
dict be kept ready does not a pay to uch ramediate despatch to the troops in case of necesiry.
The amount so it randy a it in it lin ford and should not exced one day's supplies for the force,
served". Army Council, FSP. Part II, Organizatin and Administration Cho VIII, Transport, Secure
Hah p95
r, BOH, Transportation on the Western Front, p.xoxi.
6 TVA WO 197/57. oratation oe of Wer (Plan D Administrative Instructions,
(Northumbrian) Inplay Ed scot formation responsible for rear area defence.
planned to come under command of X (Arras) Base Sub-Area with 23rd
