A Great Feat of Improvisation
Supply Column chain. Whilst the system was effective it introduced unnecessary delay, so in
late December 1939 Postal Port Regulating Centres (PPRC) were established at Folkestone and
Boulogne to manage the mail traffic between these two ports, with mail for units in the corps
areas being sorted at a postal concentration and censorship office at Amiens. Mail for the Base
and the GLOC continued to be handled through Cherbourg, resulting in transit times acros
the Theatre being reduced by 24 hours.?° Letters from BEF military personnel to addresses in
France were permitted but to conform with French regulations, all mail had to pass through the
censorship office at Amiens, which inevitably created delays in delivery.
Soldiers were issued with the Field Service Post Cards?, which enabled them to give their
name, military postal address, and an 'All's Well'? They were also issued with the Green
Envelope'* which was free from unit censorship but subject to examination by the Censors
Office at the Base,75 with a letter taking approximately 4-8 days to travel between recipients
in the BEF and the UK? There were clear regulations relating to the contents all personal
mail, designed to prevent information 'useful to the enemy' circulating in an uncontrolled
manner and correspondence had to be written in plain language with no use of codes, cipher
or shorthand? Whilst units that deployed with the First Contingent of the BEF in 1939 were
culturally embedded in censorship, with even the C-in-C reminding himself and his daughter
of the rules,8 but it was a definitive shock to later arrivals?" It is clear though, that some
soldiers, and Private Gilbert was one of them, did not entirely comply with the regulations,
and he created a code with his girl-friend, Kay Hind, which was opaque to the censor and
presumably to German intelligence " Letters and postcards weighing 2 or and underse the
UK, the Empire and to British Forces abroad including His Majesty's Ships were fre of potal
charges and those greater than this weight were charged at 1%d for the first oz and i per
69
WOOH, Miscellaneous 9' Sereies, Brigadier A D Magnay CIE (Comp, War i 195), 231.
bid, p23.
AFA 2042.
Scaty Council, FSPB Pamphlet No 5, 1939, Intelligence Information and Security (HMS, S 5,
74
The AFA 3078 une Corun Copuricht and anu imitation of it was deemed an infringement thereof. The
Green Envelope could not be sent by registered post not could it be used to send money. lid pla
75
the war, in Coventry are all marked 'Passed by the Censor'
Experience of the Gilbert family, residing at 10 Rochester Road, Coventry.
77
Com Council, FSPB, Pamphlet 5, pp. 23-25, Sect 19, Regulations for the content of concondone.
Colville, Man of Valour, p. 156.
George Blake, Mountain and Flood, The History of the 52nd (Lowland) Division, 1939-1946 (Glasgow:
Lackon, Son & Co, 1950), p.23, records that ly the riga oalin, pend tri i tie.
(as the unit diaries all testify with feeling) the strict censorship of letters home:
havin several examples, I am having a gay tire eason i as even wil in the hit lie
having a very gay time" meant near to, or in Paris, whilst "I am doing magnificently" noted he was in
the Macinot Line This meant near to, or mation Miss in had with codes because she was, during
the woo the do de so So Bet hey Park Tam indebted to Elain
Schafer for bringing these points to my attention.
Mightier than the Sword
249
I trite, it cled rates for postage to other destinations. 2 Parcels were also greatly
hond timen and women of the BEF, with personal parcels under 15 pounds® being
ra through the General Post Office and the military postal systems. A 3 lb parcel carried
te General Post Office cost 1s 3d°* and a 22 lb parcel 6s Od. 85 Private Fred Gilbert estimated
ok: 4-26 days from dispatch from UK to receipt but he, like many soldiers, was delighted
air oft from family and one "very battered" parcel contained manna from Heaven:
this aros. stoplasts, shaving cream, Horlicks tablets, razor blades, book, sweets
late" Private soldiers were not however, the only members of the BEF to welcome
tue rom home because the C-in-C requested his daughter Jacqueline, an ATS officer
ign the a Office, to dispatch to him shaving soap, razor blades, requisites and writing
sies and airmen of the Dominions began to arrive in Theatre, the PSS examined the
rament to establish a system that would provide a meaningful mail service for these men
imal asset be the most effective solution. With many military transport aircraft
it to orations the GHO decided to seek, through the War Office, the support of
it to ThAt MailS cheme," was therefore, based on the Empire Air Routes" and it
it al embers of the BEF, whether British, Indian, Dominion or Colonial. Airmail was
ict home Postal Depot at Bournemouth, for onward transit to Southampton,
ce ral Airways ying boat operations. The one exception to these arrangements
cal han Force K6, which had arrived in France in late December 1939. The
Sitato this armail service was initiated on 1 January 1940," with mail being sent
4. 1 ta so. in A miens before dispatch to the Army Post Office (APO)
cata rement ir to India. Unfortunately, the initial batch of mail was transferred
a in th heft ensor at Liverpool, an outcome that was not exposed to Assistant
or Amy Portal Services (ADAPS) in GHIQ BEF for nearly two weeks and then only by
But PI, the 210 quivalent cost is &0.37 and €0.24 respectively.
- in damin Order No No dated dated October October Appx A. TNA WO WO HQ HQ2nd
him 1406
• Admin Order No 12 dated 6 October 1939, Appx A. TNA WO 167/205: HQ 2nd
alculated using Measuring Worth RPT. The 1939 3 lb price (€3.84) is 29 percent higher
Gar, lete daced 19 April 1940.
Chit, an Valour, .56.
ire promulgated on General Routine Order (GRO) 673 held in TNA WO 167/11: GHQ
Th in a mil ovie between the UK and Australia commenced on 8 December
e mail took 13 days. Three airlines were involved: Imperial Airways, Indian Trans-
to i a a pea miry is thie To handle all of the Empire, but not internal,
