Docks and Stocks
The challenges of building the Base
Organization and ORBAT
One of the fundamental lessons from the Grea+ War was to maintain in an operation Thet
of War, a logistic base, capable of sustaining the forces in the field and the experience from 19h-
1918 greatly influenced it shape, size and composition. The ' Base' was not a single site comin
several units but a conceptual term covering the mainly static component of the GLOC, nhi
encompassed the area of the North and North West of France The LOC was commanded!
GHQ through HQ Line of Communication (LOC), which commanded two districte Not
and South, each of which controlled four sub-areas, encompassing all the relevan titie
located in the Main Base Area (MBA) in the West and the Advanced Base Area (ABA)
the Dieppe-Le Harve-Rouen Triangle. There was also X (Arras) LOC Sub-Area commandi
directly by GH, which covered the Corps Rear Areas and the GHQ Troops Are up i
the Franco-Belgian frontier? X Sub-Area would become live' upon the commence .
Plan D, the advance to the River Dyle, when HQ23rd (Northumbrian) Division, under CHO
command for labouring and vulnerable point protection, would assume command.
What is particularly instructive, given the importance of the Base and the GLOC to the
sustainment of the BEF is that remarkably the Commander in Chif Viennet Cort never
The COC was Major General Philip de Fonblanque DSO (1885-1940). Commission in i di
in 1905, he served in Command and Se Finlanque DO the 5-294) Com dung the Cite Na
Ippointed Chief Administrative Officer of Scottish Command in 1937 he was deployed in Octoker
See also, Map 2, Ground Line of Communication: Sub-Areas
10 to head the British Mision in the suf Sentish Monitorind inhe withdrawal of the Croch Any
Table 51
HQ North District Sub-Areas
GLOC - Command & Control
Bonl
HQ South District Sub-Areas
Dieppe (Medical)
Cherbourg
Le Mand
Marseulles
Rouen
Nantes
TNA WO 167/58: Plan D - Operational Instructions.
Docks and Stocks
149
15.1 Sketch Plan of a Bakery. The Corps
of Royal Engineers was capable of creating
various types of logistic facilities. (Army
Council, Military Engineering, Vol VII,
Accommodation and Installations, 26/
Manuals/1062, War Office, London:
HMSO: 1934)
SKETCH PLAN OF A BAKERY
CAPABLE OF AN OUTPUT OF
100,000/25000LBS OF BREAD DAILY, WORKING 3-8HR SHIF SHIFTS.
her Miter Bolen
undertook an inspection or visit to view
its structure, issues and operations, a point
FLOUR STORE.
forcefully made by the post-evacuation
To hold 7 doys supply
Howard Committee.* In this respect,
whilst his appointment carried many
responsibilities, his apparent failure to
fully engage with the logisticians suggest
Plofform
that he may not have appreciated its
1 Feet
strengths and limitations and the influence
of them upon the BEF's combat capability.
EXPLANATIONS
How much intellectual rigour was
Blocks of 4 Ovens each
expended in relation to the fundamental
Moulding and Dividing Machines. Each set feeds
issue of GLOC security is difficult to
10.11
two blocks of ovens.
2 Sack Dough Mixing Machines, motor driven.
assess from the archival material.
doctrinal position
The
Each machine
serves 3 blocks of ovens.
was
clarified by
Each oven holds
140 - 2velb loaves.
Field Service Regulations (FSR) but the
12.
or 176 - 21b.
Sack Cleaning Machine.
loaves.
threat assessment was almost certainly
Bread Rocks. 7 tiers high. Height of top tray-5'6'
clouded by the focus upon air defence,
with raids' by mobile forces a secondary
consideration' The issue of the position
of the GLOC in relation to the enemy
was however, cogently articulated, the FSR advising that, Where, however, the principal
communications run obliquely from the front or lie behind one flank of the army, the situation
is likely to be comparatively disadvantageous, since the enemy may be enabled to attack the
communications without a corresponding risk to his own??
the BE's perspective, transpired to be to all to prescient.
TNA WO 33/2384: Repott on the Committee on the Evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force
from French Ports Howard Committee), para Il, Command of Lines of Communication.
