328
A Great Feat of Improvisation
P12.1 Railway Construction Training. 152 (GWR) RCC RE, a Supplementary Reserve unit at
Hopkins Bridge LMR in July 1935. Although not Regular units, the RE railway SR companies
were embedded as a core logistic deployment capability in the BEF and were generally well trained in
comparison to other SR units. (WDLMRC: DRMC/V1/141)
mixed trades including 54 Drivers, Railway Engine, 54 Locomotive Firemen, 74 Brakesmen
and Shunters, 14 Traffic Operators, and 26 Railway Checkers and Clerks.30 As the BEP
expanded, the War Office sought to ensure that railway capability kept pace with the task,
an aspiration that sometimes created friction with the Government's Railway Executive
Committee (REC), which controlled the UK's civil railways.
The key challenge always
remained the shortage of trained manpower, a problem compounded by the recognition that the
commercial railways in the UK were critical not only to the economy but also the prosecution
of the war and that mobilizing railway staff from the civilian sector for military service required
careful management." Conscripting the right people however, made a significant diference:
held in IWM/Documents. 21752. Michael Robbins (1915-2003) had a distinguished post- war carer
in London Transport, as a transportation historian and a societal contributor, including originating the
London Transport Museum. Obituary, The Times, 3 January 2003.
The Army was specific about the term Driver because there were several trades including MIT, Hose
Transport and Locomotive
WE IV/1931/18/2, in Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 3, pp.67.
infant beginning of the Great War, thousands of men had left the railways to join the Army, mainly
infantry units, which were ourside their trade, creating shortfalls in key areas, whilst failing to generat
military capability related to their skill ser. By 5 Atugust 014,27,00 airway staff had been marblind!
(Territorial Force and Reserves) or volunteered for must eric. 00 miSprember, the War OfFic
Tracks Across France
329
Super Thomas Brownbill was a Militiaman and a Passed Cleaner on the LMS, but after three
months training at the RE No 1 Railway Training Centre (RTC) at Longmoor in Hampshire,
tequily fund his feet serving in 190 ROC, adapting to 'living on the locomotive' during
orations in France, 2
Concepts and Doctrine
he significance of railvays to British Army operations has declined since the Second World
Wir butin 1939, railvays were the transportation method of choice for intra-Theatre strategic
-ment. Whilst the term C4IRM (Command, Control, Communications, Coordination
latine esource Management) was not in use at that time, the effective utilization
riy asts relied explicitly on these processes. In particular, the co-ordination of the
tin my requirements with the Host Nation railway, the nationalized SNCF,33 was
yin balancing the needs of the BEF with those of the French defence effort and the civil
ed. Dotinaly, ail operations'* were focused upon delivering the key component of surface
sportation from the 4th Line Base? to 2nd Line road units and operated mostly as a
I in stem.' Athough often grouped' for technical command, railway capability was
i on specific to role sub-units: Construction, Operating, Stores, Workshops and Signal
eligh" Railway units allocated to the Base were 4th Line assets, whilst those operating
wend fit, we d Line. The rear element at 4th Line consisted of a rail grouping located
than hi stA ras BA) encompassing dock railways at the Sea Ports of Debarkation
XOD with is sociated sorting and exchange sidings, through to rail-served base depots
i no more Base Marshalling Yards (BMY).
TelY ta tur key tasks: frt, the sorting and marshalling of traffic from the depots, in
it to tal as or formations; secondly, the re-circulation of empty wagons from the
in lit docks and depots; thirdly, local regulation of passenger and ambulance
send thy, corol of export traffic, which could be sent directly to depots. Entraining
i cing a as assigned for unit personnel, reinforcements and vehicles were not
reprint and not therefore, a component of the BMY. A mixture of British
9 at and the Host Nation railway organization usually conducted railvay operating
not outing is not to cept railwaymen unless they had a certificate of release from their
get c, lin Pat rish Raitways and the Great War: Organization, Efforts, Difficulties and
Car rain 5, 0 comotives and 450,000 wagons and although organized in five regions had a
ortment Service (CMS) coordinating inter-regional and international traffic.
y arrangements, see, WOOH, Signal
