Sox 1
A Great Feat of Improvisation
tactical re-supply constraints, a problem later partially mitigated by the introduction of 4x4
logistic load-carriers.
The one logistic component that was absolutely critical to an armoured division was fuel
supply, a subject, which appears to have received little attention and even less comment. British
armoured formations never properly exercised fuel distribution before their deployment to
France, and despite the emphasis which had been placed on the speed and mobility of the
Cruisers, petroleum support at 3rd, 2nd and Ist Line relied on the 4-gallon disposable tin and
reusable can. Ist Armoured Division operations during late May and early June 1940 reinforced
the importance of robust and flexible fuel distribution in manoeuvre warfare, although it
appears that few tanks were abandoned because of a failure in the system, which may explain
the dearth of analysis. The secondary sources indicate that many tanks ran out of fuel and had to
be abandoned but their crews were often captured, and the loss was attributed to enemy action,
rather than ineffective logistic capability. Examination of the unit war diaries in the TINA, offer
a more complex picture, with tanks having technical fuel problems, including blocked filters and
lines, which suggests an issue with fuel quality or maintenance standards.
A handwritten report from Commander 3rd Armoured Brigade, Brigadier Crocker,"
offers some illuminating points upon logistics within the Division. Of particular note, was
the allocation of RASC assets in the form of the Armoured Brigade Companies (ABC),
whilst the Ordnance capability was retained as a divisional resource, Crocker being clear that
brigades should have allocated repair, recovery and OFP sections. He also highlighted the
disruption caused by the excessive separation between Division Forward and Rear. This was of
especial importance because the ABCs became divorced from the OFP and the ammunition
and petroleum sub-parks, an issue compounded by the dynamic operational environment
interrupting co-ordination with the assets available on the GLOC. The outcome was almost a
reversion to pre-Napoleonic operations, with RASC units, including the ABCs scouring empry
barracks, abandoned dumps, chaotic docks and sundry railheads in the search for supplies.
Another key observation was that transport units, especially the ABCs operated from woods or
forests and never urban location, including villages." An obvious deduction from this scenario
was the requirement for 4x4 load-carriers with a cross-country capability, which could reach
86 Brigadier Crocker, Comments on 3td Arm Be Narrative dated 29 July 1940; handwritten document
Born in 1896, John Crocker enlisted as a Private in the Artists Rifles in 1915 before commissioning.
into the Machine Gun Corps (MIC), Ping a a the Are D PO an in 1915 in 1919, Crocker let
the Army to train as a solicitor but re-coming awarded the he Middlesex Regiment in 192029. 0c
April 194, to the Rayal Tank Core i miside indie Middlese Rai College in 192 m
Chasing the Rhino
369
the AFV hides, although there is no suggestion in any report that armoured units should be
supported by a tracked logistic platform.
The evacuation of failed AFVs was another subject that received Crocker's attention. The
role of the HET was one point, whilst the procedures for re-deploying the crews, was another.
Armoured units were well practised in recovering failed or damaged tanks by using the key
capability to hand, which was another tank but there was relatively little capability to execute
recovery to railheads, so immobile tanks were repaired in situ, abandoned or occasionally
destroyed. It was however, obvious that using gun tanks as the primary recovery vehicles reduced
combat power often when it was most needed, but given that a handful of Armoured Repair &
Recovery Vehicles (ARRV) based on the Mark V tank had been deployed on the Western Front
during the Great War this most certainly a pre-war omission and one that remarkably required
the experience of the Western Desert to reinforce.89
Armoured Logistics in Action
Tat here was any logistic support to Ist Armoured Division in France was very much the
real of the dedication and commitment of the practitioners and the efforts of the Staff officers
chrtan the War Office planners. The BEF GHOperational Instruction AFV 1 dated 23
May 1940 directed to GOC Ist Armoured Division, was, in relation to logistics, brief and to
he pit; paragraph 5 reads: "L of C, North District are arranging supplies for your advance?"
Remarkably, given the Luftwaffe's assault on the French rail network, train movement, at least
bring the initial deployment, was robust if quirky, a point highlighted in the 3rd Armoured
Brigade war diary?"
A regimental perspective from the 10th Hussars concerning the move
im Cherbourg around 22 May summarizes the rather surreal conditions:
Between Cherbourg and Caen there is a very long gradient and on this the train
stopped just as darkness was falling. Having heard of the wide ramifications of the fifth
column, many thought that this halt was engineered by enemy agents. The suspicion
was strengthened when it was explained by a railway official, who had overtaken the
trin on a bicycle, that the engine had broken down. The Commanding Officer now
tamined the more intimate parts of the engine ... he formed the opinion that, in view
dí the das of locomotive and its state of dilapidation, which allowed far more steam to
scope into the atmosphere than reach the working parts, it was not capable of pulling
a tria bad of tanks up the rest of the gradient. The opinion had already been formed
Lòy the alva official, who sent for another engine, which arrived in due course and
the reto the journey was completed without incident.?
IN 480, Repore on a visite to armoured formations in the Middle East, Fieb- Mar 1941, cired in
Royal nickilling Dragoon Guards, walk died in Holan is Onybor, 19414. For detail, sce, Smart,
the My rement of 1 AD from Big Wand a vilom I, May 1,1 rend Lessons Lan,
held in TML. Why this was the case is not explained in the notes. but it man hour heen driven by the
concerns about the threat from Fifth Columnists.
