Horseshoes to Sparkplugs
107
106
A Great Feat of Improvisation
RAOC deployment was focused at corps level, with each division being allocated a section!
from a OFP.20
An OFP consisted of two corps sections and two divisional sections plus a
reserve section, the latter holding for emergency issue to units, 2.5 percent of the vehicles
in the corps. There were however, two constraints with this arrangement. First, if a third
division came under the command of a corps, there were insufficient OFP resources to support
all the divisions, unless a third section was allocated. Secondly, whilst the divisional sections
were tasked to support a division, there was a mobility issue because these organizations had
insufficient WMT to move all the boxed stores and vehicle assemblies in one lift. The RAOC
also provided a LAD, detached from an AFW,2 to assist the Divisional HQ & Signals unit
in delivering its Equipment Support tasks, whilst each infantry brigade, divisional cavalry
regiment and artillery regiment was also permanently assigned a LAD.23 The RAOC was also
responsible for the provision of the divisional MBU, 4 although the WET? indicates that it
was effectively an All Arms unit. Capable, in theory, of bathing 120-140 men per hour it was
as important to morale as it was to health and hygiene, * whilst it was also designed to support
the provision of chemical decontamination capability, but the scaled equipment of the day was
P3.2 BEF Divisional WMT. The complex mix of RASC WMT in BEF divisions complicated logistic
planning, load lifts, MT training and Equipment Support. RIB AM RIo)
Whilst there were some limitations to the divisional logistic organization, it also had its merits.
although inevitably, after the withdrawal in June 1940, there were adjustments as a result of the
campaign lessons identified study.
A key point is that whilst the War Equipment Tables (WET) reflected a fixed capabiliy,
the outputs on the ground depended on strength rather than establishment and additionaly
the capabilities of the equipment, which in Fia at hid hot always fully meet the miling
requirement.
How logistic assets were utilized also depended upon planning by the Sat
officers in the divisional HQ, the influence of unit commanders and the skill sets of the soldiers
The operational aspects were equally important because offensive and defensive tasks requirec
a different balance of logistic activity, with the former requiring more fuel and later gre.
quantities of ammunition and defence stores.
WMT to support troop lift, whilst 'breaking clean' from the enemy often generated the nee
An advance to contact usually required more
for significant quantities of explosives for demolitions.!8
18 In this respect, the RASC Load and Vehicle Allocation Lists in the appx to this chapte are but it
example of the logistic saarina detail recuired ood t to fuc
19 In 1940, the RASC used the term 'Section' to describe what was a platoon sized organization and sub-
section' for the smallest RASC
20 Authorise by WEll 4r3. Phison, BEFORBAT; Vol 2, p.73.
21 Ibid, p. 71..
Ibid, p.71. The AFW was authorised by WE III/1931/53/3 and was established for main workshop,
three recovery sections and 15 LADs.
Ibid, p.71.
24 The MBU was transported in 2 x 3-ton lorries and consisted of 20 personnel commanded by a subaltern,
including 1 x barber and 1 x plumber. Ibid, p.77.
Table 3.3
Divisional Mobile Bath Unit - Manning
Appointment or Trade
OIC
Establishment
Corps
All Arms
OIC General Duties
All Arms
All Arms
Remarks
Lieutenant or Second-Lieutenant
Sergeant
Corporal
All Arms
Clerk
Usually RE
Usually RASC
RASC
All Arms
Sanitary Assistant
RE
RAMC
25 WE 1/1931/26/1. Philson BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.71.
In his letters home, Private Fred Gilbert, a Militia soldier of 8th Warwicks, describes the frustration
of rarely having access to bathing facilities, writing in one letter on 20 March 1940 'Baths are few are
