236
A Great Feat of Improvisation
services, * burials, graves registration and the disposal of personal effects. AG OS was also
responsible for establishment Staffing, General Base Depots, civilian labour policy and last but
not least, terms and conditions policy including pay. The Personal Services® Section (PSS) was
responsible for matters related to the individual and covered legal, discipline,® Courts-Martial,
Provost, application of the Geneva Protocols, Prisoners of War (POW) and the compilation
and publication of routine orders. The PSS also led on VIP visits, commissioning, honours and
awards, training attachments and Staff visits to Theatre, whilst the management of the media
was another task that consumed Staff resources. 10
Attachments by officers and soldiers not in
the Force, to units in the BEF, were a key element in the expansion and development of the
Army, which exposed the operational environment, unit structure and tactical experimentation,
all of which were essential preparation for personnel nominated to join the BEF or be posted to
units training for deployment. By 31 January 1940, 850 officers and NCOs had returned to the
UK to support training for incoming units, whilst the same number had been detached to the
BEF to gain operational and logistic experience."
Military visitors included His Majesty the
King, members of the Royal Family, logistic specialists, technical staff, training team personnel,
senior officers and staff officers. Civilian visitors included politicians, civil servants, scientists,
For details, see, Crew BOH, The Army Medical Services, Campaigns, Vol 1, pp. 1-113.
This subject had proved controversial at points during the Great War, with the theft of items from
deceased officers' personal kits in transit to the UK being a particularly sensitive issue, the prevention
of which, took a considerable time and resources to resolve.
See, Captain R Bonham-Smith, Railway
Transport Arrangements in France', JRUSI, Vol LXI (February 1916), pp.59-61.
The 2020 terminology is Personnel Services (PS).
The Assistant Adjutant-General, Colonel (Honorary Brigadier) James Whitehead CB CMG CBE
DSO OSt] ADC late Indian Staff Corps (1880-1955) was responsible for the PSS. James Whitehead
DS 05m/S late Indian Soyal Cept (ent-s main 189 but transferred to the lodin Stit
Corps in 1901 attending Staff College (1911-1912). He served on the Western Front in A staf
appointments during the Great War, being awarded the DSO and the CMG. In 1921, he became
Director of Organisation at Simla and commanded 11th Indian Infantry Brigade at Abbottabad (1923-
1927) Retiring from the Army, he was appointed a Chief Constable in the Metropolitan Police in
October 1927, promoting to Deputy Assistant Commissioner in June 1933. He retired from the
police in 1938 being recalled for service with the BEF in 1939.
After returning to the UK in 1940 he
Documents 6393
commanded the Home Guard in the London District. His Private Papers are held by the IM in
Discipline in the BEF remains a fascinating and controversial subject. For an engaging and incisive
Discipline in thE a demit a asicaping To to Expeditionary Fore, 1939-1 Basingtoke.
algrave-Macmillan, 2015), pp.141-17:
King George VI visited the REF 4
7 December 1939 before moving to the AASF and it was,
unsurprisingly, a busy time for the AG. His Staff was responsible for planning and implementing the
visit programme, and he accompanied His Majesty during it. The Administrative Instructions relating
to His Majesty's visit are in TNA WO 167/11 and make fascinating reading;
Upon AG's return from
Supporting this Royal visit, the files had piled up and the AG war diary of 7 December reported: The
AG now proceeded to pull up arrears of office work'.
Arnold Ridley, who played Private Godfrey in the BBC TV series Dad's Army, was appointed as a BEF
dea Often ate having been commissioned as a second-lieutenant into the General
Listin October 1939. In May 1940, Ridley was evacuated tom Bulge on the destroyer HIMS Viner
Wing discharged from the Army on health grocas upon his return, his serious injuries from the Cret
11
War being a defining factor, although he subsequently joined the Home Guard in Caterham
TNA CAB 120/247: Dispatches
on Operatique of joined this expeditionary Force, France and
Belgium. September 1939 - Mau 1940. First Despatches, para 24.
Mightier than the Sword
237
cate ment and industry representatives and fact finders, families visiting seriously
Mies, members of voluntary bodies and the media. The effective control of Staff visits by
AS became increasingly important as senior officers in particular, sought for professional
rona rest spend time in France. One example was Brigadier 'Boy' Browning, 12
andant of the Small Arms School at Hythe, who conducted a three day visit in January
+ do as with the BEF on 10 May, when the German attack prompted the removal of
rous personnel from the Theatre.13
he is most important tasks was the key lead on the physical and spiritual welfare of the
i do to underpin morale, especially for logistic soldiers. The post-war War Office
guph on morale summarized the challenges:
Jaipace of maintaining morale amongst the administrative troops is not always
malad. Tops in the front line are subject to danger and hardship, but those in the
machet otend with inaction, monotony and boredom. In the front line a higher
acad morale is necessary because any lowering of morale is likely to have more
nois osquences. On the other hand, under some conditions the maintenance of
ind among the troops in the rear may be more difficult.!*
c to our equired access to logistic and financial resources and the PSS created
3 h it hiCH Branch and philanthropic bodies to deliver the leave policy,
i cort of failities and the specific support enhancements for the nurses of
Com Abandras Imperial Military Nursing Service (QAIMNS) and the ladies of the
Com tria Service (ATS) 15 The daily work of the A Staff in the AG Branch was
aries el as engaging but the detail of its tasks, whilst of enormous interest, and
did ring or poure, is, unfortunately, too complex to explain in a single essay essay16
- lt at era rick A thur Montague Browning, GCVO, KBE, CB, DSO (1896-
hi comander of 1 Airborne Corps and deputy commander of First Allied Airborne
hi dig rain MARKET GARDEN in September September He was also an Olympic bobsleigh
n 1928, and the husband of author Dame Daphne du Maurier.
kha Mad, Cord By The Hit Littenant General Si Prederick Browning (Barnsley: Pen 8e
uggests that Brownings
a t ta i sit needed it.
a we recorded for posterity. This is a great shame be mis the han sense of humour: no doe
