40X
A Great Feat of Improvisation
nearby siding. The pre-war doctrine directed that all reserves of POL in the corps areas should
be held on wheels in 3rd or 2nd Line transport in the Corps Petrol Park (CPP) and Divisional
Petrol Companies (DPC) respectively and that there should be no dumped stocks forward of
the Petrol Railhead (PRH) but in the winter of 1939-1940 practicalities overcame the doctrine
and surplus stocks, amounting to several hundred tons of different fuels began to accumulate
at the PRHs. With disruptions to rail deliveries caused by severe winter weather in February
1940, a decision was made to retain these stocks as a reserve, which required the use of resources
from Supply and Pioneer companies to control the static PRH stocks.
These assets proved
inadequate and elements of the CPP, which despite the nomenclature were transport units, had
to be imported to support the task, thereby reducing the capability of the mobile reserve, whilst
still not ensuring that dumped POL stocks were effectively stored and accounted for, resulting
in fuel loss and quality issues.
Another key component of the BEF that was integral to railway output was the Divisional
Supply Column (DSC) of the RASC. The function of the DSC was to lift rations and stores
from the Corps Supply Railhead (SH) to divisional units, over a planning operating distance
of 40 miles. Pack trains for supply items usually consisted of 38 wagons and were dispatched
daily from the MBA on a scale of one pack train per day per two divisions. Rail was also vital
to the strategic movement of the BEF's armour and tracked vehicles, being used extensively
during the BEF's deployment from the ports to the Assembly Area at Le Mans in September
and October 1939 and then subsequently to the Concentration Area. Rail was also critical to
the deployment of Ist Armoured Division in May 1940. Whilst most of these moves were
strategic in nature, rail was also used at the operational level because of the shortage of wheeled
Heavy Equipment Transporters (HET)s. The railheads, which were essential logistic facilities,
serviced the End to End' delivery capability of the railway and commanders and Staff recognized
how important it was to choose them with care. The two key imperatives for selection were
succinctly summarized in a contemporary publication: 'A railhead should, as far as possible,
be protected from bombardment by guns or aeroplanes. The roads in the vicinity of a railhead
should be suitable for the carriage of considerable traffic without liability to congestion?? The
BEF was soon to learn how true this statement was.
Combat and Courant
Whilst railway units are not usually perceived to be at the forefront of operations during May
and June 1940 many were to see a remarkable amount of combat. As part of the German assault,
the Luftwaffe strafed trains and attacked a large number of railway junctions in the Eastern
and Northern Railway Regions, which initially caused considerable disruption to operations
in the BEF corps areas, whilst several trains were captured or destroyed by the enemy. Of 26
ammunition trains dispatched from BADs in the period 10-17 May, only six were unloaded
at constituted ARHs with others off-loaded in ad hoc locations. In the wider round however,
enemy disruption to the BE's courant was clearly less than expected, as the Bartholomew
Lindsell, Military Organization and Administration, p.92
WOOH, Ordnance Services, p. 156.
A courant (literally a stream) is a continuous Row of empty trains to entraining stations, of loaded trains
from them to detaining stations and ot ou hing empy rains to eniain, BOH, Transportation on the
Riding the Rails
409
mitte's Final Report on the campaign in France noted: 'The delays caused by air attack on
Tray junctions, marshalling yards and other centres were often of a temporary nature only,
a diversion could soon be arranged. Damage to running lines at awkward spots, and at a
ne from the repair facilities of railway centres, caused more lasting delays'. 37
5i Railvay Construction Company (RCC) RE moved from Frevent to the SNCF depot
lil, with elements deployed forward with the company suffering three fatal casualties on
Mayin an incident involving a crashed Heinkel 111P from KG2738 A detachment of 153
DC moved forward from Romescamps to Ath in the corps areas as part of Plan D but because
a la Railways initially continued to function, it had little work to conduct, although by
May it had lost five soldiers missing in action whilst tasked to retrieve trains from forward
ton, * 151 RCC and 153 ROC deployed with locomotives, additional tenders for water
supporting wagons, with 153 ROC forming an ad hoc breakdown train, searching for flat-
guns to move heavy artillery and hauling troop and ambulance trains using UK and Belgian
prating in Belgium was a particular challenge because the RE railway units had conducted
naisance, liaison or training with the Belgian Railways, a product of the country's
caly In adition, the operationally dynamic scenario disrupted the flow of information
a chan f command and 153 ROC often received their primary information warning of
aran advances from SNCF. Once the withdrawal began on 18 May 1940, 153 ROC train
i re casingly employed in keeping traffic moving, sometimes under aerial attack.
he operating conditions were challenging, with the whole line from Ath to Lille blocked with
in at ta moving in occasional spasms, a problem resolved by using both tracks under
ng wy working procedures. 153 ROC however, did sterling work, rescuing a stranded
ance ran delivering wagons of 6-inch howitzer ammunition and entraining the 2/5th
sins to by the German seizure of the Channel coast at Abbeville, elements of 153
Created from Bologne on Wednesday 22 May 1940 and others from Calais the
chay at group having been part of an anti tank road block eight kilometres to the
nah the port. s
Western Front, p.xoxi.
TV VO 106/1741: Bartholomew Committee 1940 - Final Report, para 10b.
Hankel 111P (1G+CL) crashed near Ferme Jourdain at Borre Fact of Hazebrouck at approximate
10 LOCAL, It exploderated near later, Kourdrio Bore, rev and three members of 151 RC
1422 Lieutenant John Ross Rhedunes Price aged 28. and ava NICOs Lance-Sergeants. 39413
on. Other bystanders were injuied. Paul; they res details, see, Cornwell, The Battle of France,
NA 167/948: 153 ROC RE, WD, entries May 1940
TINA 167/948: 153 ROC RE, WD, entries May 1940.
WOOH, Transportation, p. 42.
33 ROC operated the Melbourne Military Railway (MMR) in Derbyshire November 1939 - Februar
on of the actions of the various ROC and RC during the Battle for France, see, Aves,
TH PA: 15 80C RY P,P. 48. 52.
