A Great Feat of Improvisation
time consuming task because the numbers of licensed commercial vehicles continued to grov
and by 1939 there were approximately 200,000 goods vehicle operators in the UK with a fet
average of 2.5 vehicles.37
Changes, however, were inevitable as the motor industry introduced
new designs. In 1932, a general performance specification was introduced to replace the more
restrictive construction specifications, the vehicles being tested in an annual trial on a road
circuit in the Welsh hills. 38
The trend in the commercial sector was however, moving away from the preferred military
6x4 medium mobility configuration towards lighter 4x2 lower mobility vehicles with a higher
payload and this process and the findings of the Crosland Committee, resulted in the Subsidy
scheme being withdrawn in 1935. With its demise, the War Office found it difficult to sway
civil design to meet military needs and thus sought to keep niche production capability aline
by placing small orders for specialist vehicles such as gun-tractors and recovery vehicles.
Hiring, which was usually conducted by Command HQs to support temporary local needs
was expanded to support specific activities, many of which were linked to mobilization,
especially of the Anti-Aircraft Divisions, " although the planning was not always carefully
co-ordinated because in 1939 some of the dormant contracts failed as the transport compani
had their vehicles impressed. Another concern to the War Office was the growing number
of government departments seeking to acquire, through hiring or requisition, road haulage
assets from the commercial sector during mobilization.
With the perceived threat of air atack
upon the civil infrastructure growing, the Home Office began planning support for Air Raid
Precautions (ARP) and the Fire Services, whilst the Ministry of Transport focused on the
distribution of essential suppliest The Food (Defence Plans) Department of the Board of
Trade and the forerunner of the Ministry of Food, was one government organization keen to
quantify its road transport needs and in so doing during Santamber 1939 discovered that thi
War Office had impressed some cold storage vans it required to distribute food." Inevitably,
these competing requirements demanded more coherency and the topic was of sufficient import
for the Committee of Imperial Defence (CID) to have directed on 23 November 1937 thạt the
Ministry of Transport should be responsible for the provision, allocation and co-ordination of
all civil road haulage resources and transport services, including those required by Defence,
although the Services had the power to impress vehicles in peace, whereas the Ministry of
Transport could only do so after a state of emergency had been declared. Despite this direction
from the CID, collating the requirements, identifying the assets and producing an effective plan
Savage, BOH, Inland Transport, p.53 notes 218,186 operators and 513,147 vehicles.
WOOH, Fighting, Support and Transport Vehicles, Part II, Unarmoured Vehicles, p.7.
Some of the hiring was planned, through a dormant contract, to support mobilization. Other hiring
was enacted ad hoc
40 In early 1938, the Ministry
of Transport recorded 465,000 licensed goods vehicles and tractor
rime-movers in the United Kingdom; Fourth Annual Report of the Licensing Authorities, 1937-193
20,000.
overnment needs were assessed as tol, Ros. th Armal Report :20,000, ARP: 30,000; Fire Service
I suppliquiptied number were identified as poetiles: 20,000; AP: 30,0, the lo t
esseusial supplies if parts of the railway system were disrupted and to relocate key government and
sets to improve resilience. See, Savage, BOH, Inland Transport, p.54
Office purposes.
NA MA 72/703: Protests against earmarking and implant Tras of tood trade vehicles for Wa
Everybody's Trucking
85
took time and to highlight but one example, the problem of managing vehicle hiring for the
Services mobilization needs was never satisfactorily resolved.
An Impressive Failure?
Meanwhile, the War Office continued to craft its mobilization impressment planning,
developing a scheme, which appeared to have many advantages, with financial savings being
a key imperative. This work had commenced by mid-1935, the QMG Staff at the War Office
identifying that 'at least 12,000 vehicles' would need to be impressed to enable the proposed
Expeditionary Force to deploy.* Utilizing suitable vehicles from the commercial sector reduced
the resources and costs required to operate VRDs, whilst enabling the rapid provision of
vehicles for Home and Overseas service, although as it transpired this solution certainly came
with a series of problems. Nearly all the vehicles required modification for field service, which
included painting, a task usually completed by the unit.43 Additional types and makes were
included, creating un-planned complexity, whilst there was a shortage of spares and a subsequent
necessity to procure, hold and distribute a vast range of them. The regimental history of 208
Field Company RE noted: 'The stores situation was somewhat aggravated because the vehicles
which had been issued were all of different makes, types and dates of manufacture. The spares
to be carried were thus multiplied by the need for a provision to be made for each vehicle rather
than a percentage to cover all vehicles of one make? 4 In addition, workshop tradesmen were not
familiar with most of the equipment and some vehicles required special tools to service them.
The maintenance and repair issues of this varied collection of WMT certainly became
unwieldy and the spares issue almost unmanageable, two outcomes the professional military
road transport operators and engineers had, from the Great War experience, sought to avoid.
An officer of 2nd Lincolns summarized the initial outcome: '...the spare-part problem for so
many types was beyond us. When we landed in France and drove to the Belgian border the
roads of France were littered with these broken down vehicles? 45 There was little improvement
by the end of October, with 4 Division Commander Royal Army Service Corps (CRASC)
reporting that the response to a demand on the MT Stores Depot for spares was a letter inviting
the unit to re-submit the request in 14 days, a solution which of course, further extended the
receipt of any available items. Whilst this was perhaps understandable given that the logistic
42 TNA WO 32/4612: Future Army Organization - 1935, QMG Response dated 16 December 1936 to
CIGS SECRET Paper, Future Reorganization of the British Army dated 9 September 1935.
43 2nd Lincolns noted that one van arrived in the unit lines at Verne Citadel Portland with Swindon
Steam Laundry on the sides. Nigel Hamilton, The Full Monty: Montgomery of Alamein, 1887-1942
(London: Allen Lane, 2001), p.301. This advert, however, fails to match the style of a vehicle allocated
pilots of 5 Squadron were thus able to identify from the air, their munitions transport. See, Walter
(London: ] Whitaker & Sons, 1914).
part played in the Great War by the Royal Air Force,
4) Nong men C. M ugh guard in aman, Ful Man, 300.
TNA WO 167/235: 4 Division CRASC, WD, entry 27 October 1939.
