174 A Great Feat of Improvisation
whilst the RASC fielded a Heavy Repair Shop (HRS)139 and the RAOC, Base Ordnance
Workshops (BOW)140 and Advanced Base Workshops.l41 The establishment of 2 BOW
Nantes was almost as dysfunctional as that of 1 BOD, with an Advanced Ordnance Workshy
(AOW) being initially deployed to cover the task. 142
An ordnance workshop company was
detached from 2 BOW in support and fortunately, the garage facility that had been allotted me
available and the equipment arrived to plan, so a capability was operational from 19 Septemb
Reconnaissance identified suitable buildings to expand to a BOW but the Comite des forger
was reluctant to offer the sites stating they were allocated to the French Army. Eventually in
buildings, with a floor space of 266,000 square feet were assigned to enable 2 BOW to installit
machinery and commence operations.144
Port Workshop Detachments (PWD) were assigned to Brest, Cherbourg, Nantes and.
St Nazairel45 tasked with effecting repairs to wheeled and tracked vehicles thus speeding
unloading from ships and ensuring swift dock clearance.
This was a wise decision because
during embarkation in the UK
several procedures had, in many circumstances, not been
adhered to, the consequence of which, required PWD intervention. For example, ignition keys.
were not attached to the steering column or instrument panel, resulting in PWD personnel
having to 'hot wire' the vehicles. Some WMT had been improperly stowed in holds resulting in.
damage to mirrors, mudguards, radiators, headlamps and tracks rods, whilst other vehicles had
been manoeuvred using the starter motors thus discharging the battery, resulting in delays in
departure from the docks whilst re-charging was conducted 16 The impressed civilian vehicles
were more susceptible to damage than the military ones and repairs were often delayed because
of a shortage of the appropriate spares.
Some of these issues were created by the rules appertaining to the carriage of fuel in vehick.
tanks during sea movement, which meant that all fuel from WMT had to be drained befor
loading, " with subsequent positioning in the hold being undertaken manually, but ung th
starter motors to 'bump' the WMT, especially the heavier types, into the core so as ist
too tempting for tired soldiers under pressure to complete loading.
Tracked vehicles were to
have suficient fuel for manoeuvring in the hold, with any remnants being drained, which va
an additional risk in confined spaces but had to be weighed against the hazard of petrol leaking
onto the deck or the fumes into the hold, * both of which posed a serious menace to the held
139 For a diagram of HRS lay-down, sec, Army Council, Military Enginering, Vol VI, commodin on.
Installations, Plate 106, Heavy Repair Shop Layout.
140 For a diagram of a BOW lay-down, sec, Ibid, Plate 107, Base Ordnance Workshops Layout.
141 For a diagram of an Advanced BOW lay-down, sC, Bid, Plate 109, Advanced Ordnance Dope
Workshops Layout
142 TNA WO 167/1196: Advanced Base Workshop RAOC, WD.
143 The lieds forges or Foundry Committes hap Rech organization responsible the locit
of real estate suitable for workshops.
144 WOOH, Ordnance Services, p.140
145 1 PD Wasigned to Nantes, 2 PWD to Bres, ater transferring to Renes, 3 PWD to Chears
and 4 PWD to Le Harve and Rouen
146 WOOH, Ordnance Services, p.142
147 Army Council, FSPB, Pamphlet No 7, 1939, Movement by Sea, Rail and Air, p.9.
148 Seal and connectors for vehicle fuel lies a, vene ey saRatary reliable for the V Chit
WMT manual to stare Before garaging a vehicle, the driver will any unitabi tot the War Un
leaks ... No vehicle with such leakage of fuel will be garared until the leakare has been rectified or the
Docks and Stocks
175
of personnel and the safety of the ship.49 The vehicles then required refilling, which was a
post disembarkation task that exposed another logistic wrinkle because some of the petrol cans
marked for the fuel had, in UK, been filled with diesel or water, these liquids being poured
into the vehicle tanks in error, which meant the fuel systems had to be drained, Aushed and
refilled. To prevent further damage and to improve efficiency, 1 PWD at Nantes was tasked
with conducting all vehicle movement within the ships' holds, a system that was then adopted at
all SPODs with a PWD, although arguably, given their skills, technical personnel would have
been more gainfully employed repairing vehicles rather than preventing failure, but it was step
in the right direction in delivering more effective and efficient logistic outputs by placing the
task in the hands of specialists. Despite the designation, the PWDs were also tasked to repair
bicycles, typewriters, other AFG 1098 equipment, and rather more bizarrely, to recover crashed
aircratt. "
Conclusion
The development of the Base had a fragile start. The failure of the War Office General Staff to
take the technical logisticians into the planning operational circuit resulted in several dilemmas,
which were only solved through the due process of time and practical experience. The under-
estimation of the ordnance storage requirement was combination of a mis-appreciation of the
demand and the constant expansion of the BEF and was complicated by the issues over the
availability of appropriate Host Nation real estate.
The deployment of Base units, especially
from the RAOC, revealed an inherent mis-judgement concerning the effective readiness and
operational capability of War Establishment only organizations, whilst the manner of their
movement, separating units from their mobilization stores, was a concept waiting to fail.
The insatiable appetite for rail construction to support emerging logistic demands and
engineers. It was fortunate that the RE had foreseen the need and matured a rail capability
that could be phased and flowed to the task. The professionalism of the Corps in managing
this work, especilly given the winter weather and the dynamic environment, was one of the
Key inputs to the enlargement of the Base. The RASC was generally well found in terms of
output, although the rapid expansion of the BEF led to a scarcity of trained technical personnel,
was a fundamental error, moving swiftly to correct it.
I PAND wa the leadin this activity recovering in November 1939 an aireraft that had landed in a field
15 miles from Cherbourg before nosing over onto its back. Tbid, p. 148.
