Acknowledgements
A Personal Introduction
Dennis R O'Callaghan
My Father, Private William (Bill) O'Callaghan, was a pre-war regular soldier and Signallerin
the 2nd Battalion the Norfolk Regiment (2nd Norfolks), which was the first infantry battalion
to be complete in France landing at Cherbourg on 21 September 1939, with its MT party
consisting of 78 vehicles disembarking at Saint Nazaire.
As a Battalion HQ Signaller, my
Father was witness to the successes and failures of the BEF's logistics at unit level, especially
during the period of engagement with German forces in May 1940.
If the reader can imagine, for one moment, what it was like to manage the logistics of
battalions such as 2nd Norfolks, which were constantly moving to new positions and often
out of communication with their brigade HQs and Royal Army Service Corps supporting
units. Delivering to these battalions which were in defence, yet counter attacking both under
artillery and air attack, whilst travelling along roads teeming with refugees and Allied soldier:-
redeploying must have been as the cliche says, a logistical nightmare.
My father was embroiled with these events, enjoying some of the logistic largesse and
suffering the many shortages described in this book, whilst conducting his duties as a Signaller,
a sentry and a sniper, whilst being witness to the ultimate sacrifice of his comrades in the
defence of freedom. In this respect, I am privileged to have been asked to write a personal
introduction to A Great Feat of Improvisation and thus remember my Father, who was only one
of two survivors of the massacre at Le Paradis on 27 May 1940, in which 97 men, many from
2nd Norfolks, were murdered having surrendered to the enemy according to the Laws of War.
May they Rest In Peace.
Grimston
Norfolk
February 2021
I have many acknowledgements to all those who have laid the foundations for this book.
Foremost, I must thank my Mother and late Father and their parents, whose experiences of the
First and Second World Wars were indelibly marked upon their lives. I am in great debt to
those whose personal experiences have added colour to events during the British Expeditionary
Force's (BEF) deployment and operations in France, although sadly all of them have 'Marched
off the Square: John Yeomans of GHQ BEF Signals, John Carpenter' of 522 Company Royal
Army Service Corps (RASC), Frank Nunez of 50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division Column
RASC and Lionel Woodhead of 6 (Line of Communication) Provost Company of the North-
Western Expeditionary Force. I am indebted to Elaine Schafer and Rosemary Duxbury for
their access to the memoirs and letters of their Father, the late Fred Gilbert of 8th Battalion
Royal Warwickshire Regiment.
I must acknowledge the quiet contribution of the many logisticians from the three Armed
Services, whom I have had the privilege of serving with over five decades, and in particular
the late Lieutenant Colonel David Russett, a regimental Quartermaster whose professional
knowledge and astute observations on the importance of supporting the 'Soldier' and the
'Mission' have been a guiding light. Equally, I thank the many commercial logisticians I have
had the pleasure of working with, especially from the railway, road transport, distribution and
civil engineering industries, whose perspectives have added value to the historical assessments
of events which occurred 80 years ago.
My thanks are certainly due to the many staff at the National Archives at Kew who so
efficiently deliver a wealth of research material to one's "bird-box, the operation is indeed a
logistic marvel, and also the Department of Documents at the Imperial War Museum for access
to relevant documents. I am indebted to the Trustees of the Royal Logistic Corps Museum
at Deepcut and its Director, Simon Walmsley, for their constant support, including the kind
offer of photographs to assist in the illustration of this book. My thanks are also due to the
Senior Librarian, John Pearce and his team at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, for their
dedication in meeting my stream of requests for information and to the late Professor Alex
Danchev, fellow Cadet at RMAS in 1978, for his illuminating work on Lord Alanbrooke.3
Located at Worthy Down Hampshire
Alex Danchev & Dan Todman, Dan (eds.), War Diaries, 1939-1945, Field Marshal Lord Alanbrooke
(London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2001).
