60 A Great Feat of Improvisation
War Office planners could rely upon being delivered to effect.?? Whilst the role of sea-power
in its broadest sense was embedded in supporting expeditionary forces in the context of the
Empire and the Colonies, its application in a European continental environment has tended to
be overlooked, despite its vital role in the Great War, which reinforced the simple adage that
if an Army is going to be in the fight, it must get to the fight.
Indeed, the role of sea-power
during the Second World War is increasingly often marginalized or compartmentalized in the
historiography?& and in this respect, its role in enabling British Land and Air Forces to be
deployed and sustained on the Continent is no exception.
The Logistic Revolutionaries
Whilst the corporate body of the RASC led by Cameron and supported by senior officers,
focused upon an evolutionary practical approach to nurture logistic development, he was also at
the forefront of a more revolutionary solution in solving the conundrum of supplying mechanized
forces in the field, particularly in an adverse air environment.
At a Royal United Services
Institution lecture in February 1929, with the QMG to the Forces, Lieutenant-General Sir W
Hastings KCB in the Chair, he exposed the necessity of taking a completely new approach
to the problem, with an emphasis, upon reducing the size and scope of the Administrative
Base.
His concept included the wide dispersion of logistic stocks, the 3rd Line movement
of material by WMT rather than the railway and the replacement of failed vehicles rather.
than conducting major repairs, thereby improving protection, enhancing flexibility, improving
mobility and maintaining momentum. Whilst providing innovative proposals as a component
of his paper, his attack upon the logistic status quo can only be described as ferocious, which
must have brought some of the orthodox members of the audience to the point of apoplexy.
He had some particularly harsh words on the culture of the Base installations and Service
Directorates that supported the concept:
Once these establishments had sprung into being they came to be regarded as natural
and inevitable, as part of experience.
So they have imposed themselves on our
regulations,' and reproduce themselves in every Administrative Staff exercise. One
struggles to cut them down in vain. The reason is that we are dealing with Directorates,
27 John de S Winser, BEF Sips, Before at and after Dunkirk (Gravesend: World Ship Society, 1999),
describes the types and numbers of ships taken up from trade to service the BEF's expanding
requirements, some of which were not fully employed.
One exception to this trend is Phillips Payson O'Brien, How the War was Won (Cambridge: Cambridge
Press, 2015).
29
Held on Wednesday 27 February 1929 at 1500 and published as "The Supply of Mechanized Forces in
the Field', Royal United Services Institution (RUSI), Vol LXXIV November 1929, No 496, pp.744-758.
30 A particular point raised by Colonel Cameron was the potential vulnerability of railheads to enemy
ay qution, encern that matured in May 1940, at thugotential vulnerability of railhead no tigermy
y quickly re-locating the railheads to small country stations rather than larger yards or sidings
31
ction lucidly demonstrated that the BEF's logisticians were able to learn and improvis.
Army Council,
Field Service Regulations
Regulations/189, War Office (London: HMSO, 1930).
(FSR), Vol I, Organization and Administration, 26/
Cinderella and the Pumpkin
very difficult people to treat, since they wrap themselves up in technical mystery like a
hedgehog in its spikes.32
provision of air transport to enable urgent support to small armoured forces? and the role of
the RAF in protecting Army logistic capability.?4 Whilst the group was at one in agreeing the
problems, there was general caution on the proposed solutions, with the QMG in his summary,
perhaps not unexpectedly, proffering an evolutionary roll-out, the absolute need to protect
logistic capability whatever the lay-down and a more constructive assessment of the role and
professional capabilities of the 'the Directors'.35 In particular, the suggestion to eliminate the
to manage during the course of the Second World War, and in this respect it reflected the breath
and depth of intellect and experience of its officers in 1929.
32 COlonel D C Cameron OBE, The Supply of Mechanized Forces in the Field', Royal United Services
Institution (RUSI), Vol LXXIV November 1929, No 496, p.745.
33 Whilst not viewed by the RAF as a key task, the movement and support of light infantry and artillery
journey, and their fighting value immediately after arrival might be impaired? It is difficult to judge
whether the Air Ministry inserted this sentence as a practical warning or to persuade the Army to avoid
the air transport
option. Army Council, The Employment of Air Forces with the Army in the Field, 26/
3 Cameron. The Sup or ohann: HiMse, 13 2h, Pried, RUST Vol LXIV November 1929, No
Manuals/1076, War Office (London: HMSO, 1932),
35 Ibid, p.757, MG Summary. In relation to the Directors, Warder Barraclough in the BBC TV comedy
series Porridge would no doubt have observed that Colonel Cameron was being rather unfair upon a
well-meaning body of men'.
36 Major-General Davies, late RE, responded, With the large volume of supplies to be carried (using
"supplies" in a very broad sense), I consider that railways must continue to play a dominant part in war,
cot alin cuties wire the road are not so god the artin to play a dominas.
