108
A Great Feat of Improvisation
inadequate for the task. In the early months of the BEF's deployment, MBU capability wis:
constrained by resources, whilst once operations had commenced, the tactical situation often
limited or prevented their use.
Whilst centralization at corps level brought some advantages, there was dissonance with
other Services, including the RASC, which had 'divisionalised' to use the contemporary term,
their assets, in order to create greater mobility. This problem was compounded because RAOC
training was separated from that controlled by Director Military Training (DMT), which meant
that the RAOC found it more difficult to develop supporting doctrine and influence emerging
logistic concepts. The RE manned the DPU, responsible for the sorting of all mail to and from
units within the formation. None of the one hundred and six Auxiliary Military Pioneer Corps
(AMPC) companies deployed to France were organic to the division?& most being employed in
the Base, with the depots being reliant on them to deliver outputs, whilst others were engaged
in fierce action during combat operations. Some AMPC units were attached to divisions to
support specific tasks and these had a vital role in supporting engineer projects, defence wors
and dumping programmes.
The provision of logistics at divisional level thus devolved man)
upon the RASC, which, with its emphasis on the delivery of combat supplies? was the major
player.
New Concepts and Old Chestnuts
The organization of the divisional RASC had changed considerably in scope and equipmen, if
not in concept, during the inter-war period.31 In 1918, the Divisional Train consisted of four
Horse Transport (HT) companies, whose function was to sustain units with supplies. One of
these sub-units, the Divisional Ammunition Company (DAC) was a Royal Artillery asset and
it was not until 1921 that the RASC assumed responsibility for the supply of common user
edition tion natures in the divisional area. Motorization generated there chay ges and the 1923)
edition of Field Service Regulations (FSR), Volume I, shows a train headquarters, two Mechanicl
Transport (MT) companies and one HT' company. Between 1924 and 1927, the arguments for
and against commodity companies or composite infantry brigade companies continued, with
27 The DPU personnel establishment under WE 1l/1931/21/2 was 25, and this platoon sized unit was
28
equipped with a Boys A/T rifle. Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.77.
The one exception to this during the campaign, was the three ad hoc light infantry battalions forma
from eleven AMPC
companies that formed Z Brigade, then Diefoght inten lastly C Brigade of
details of the .
29
19395 9 5h deration, ale & Polden, 1960), pp. 49-59
HQ 10 Group with eight companies was deployed to support the RAF AASI
Combat supplies are ammunition, POL and rations.
Ithough the modern term 'combat supt
was not current in the British Army during the period, it neatly summarizes the items that were thi
most important in delivering direct military effect in the front line. Ammunition included, in the
BEF context, small arms and artillery ammunition,
31
mud to p. ront need al liquid fuel, into , eid yed crand nite, in and e
food for personnel and forage for animals, plus disinfectants and water purification chemicals
For a review of the changes to the Divisional RAste anthe in waver pericatise, Major General P
Turpin CB OBE MA FCIT, The Turn of the Wheel: The Hithe inter-warpS 09,9-1939 (Buckingham
Barracuda Books, 1988), pp. 130-133.
Horseshoes to Sparkplugs
109
the former concept gaining ground. The Regular RASC was declared motorized in 1930, when
4 HT Company, the last operational sub-unit was disbanded at Catterick on 31 December
1929, although the HT Training Company in Aldershot was retained until HT was withdrawn
from the TA divisional trains in 1932. Whatever the organizational arrangements however,
RASC divisional logistic support doctrine retained a clear focus on delivering stocks to units,
and to give divisions greater mobility by holding stocks on wheels. Generating this capability
was a key task in the 1930s and is neatly summarized by Lieutenant-Colonel Shaw RAOC
is his book, Supply in Modern War: 'From the foregoing it is clear that the salient features of
mechanized operations will be the dispersion of forces and their speed.
Dispersion implies
decentralization, and this-from a supply angle-connotes some measure of self-containment in
both unit and formation' 32
By 1940, most of the infantry divisions in the BEF were supported by three RASC units
commanded by a Commander RASC (CRASC) from divisional headquarters; there was no
Regimental Headquarters (RHQ).
Table 3.4
BEF Infantry Division 1940
Organic RASC Units
Unit
Ammunition Company
Petrol Company
Supply Column
Personnel
390*
301
458
Task Vehicles
Remarks
*2 x Royal Artillery personnel
89
The CRASC, a lieutenant-colonel, was responsible to the divisional commander for all executive
duties in connection with the supply and transport services. He reported to Director Supplies &
Transport (DST) at corps headquarters to ensure that RASC policy was enacted in accordance
with the regulations. The team consisted of a major responsible for supply operations, an adjutant
and three captains covering ammunition, local resources and requisitioning, and divisional
supplies, supported by a medical officer and 29 Other Ranks.? His spectrum of responsibility
was though, extensive, a situation eruditely observed in a contemporary publication, Britain's
Modern Army: On his efficiency depends the lifeblood (petrol) the endurance (food) and
striking power (ammunition) of the division, and this efficiency has to be maintained under
all conditions of climate, locality and actual battle?.?* One of the key concerns of a divisional
CRASC was the technical competence of the RASC officers in a rapidly expanding army, a
matter partially addressed by the formation of the RASC Officer Producing Centre at Saint
Lawrence Ramsgate, where the training of RASC officers had been centralized.35
32 Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel G C Shaw RAOC, Supply in Modern War (London: Faber & Faber, nd but
1938), .188.
33 Philon, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.110, HQ Divisional RASC, WE II/1931/5/2.
34 na, Britain: Modern Army (London: Oldhams Press, 1941), p. 49.
35 Each of the key courses ran monthly. Two week courses were: ammunition and company commanders,
whilst supply, Brigade RASC officers and workshop officers' courses were one week. Army Council,
