Horseshoes to Sparkplugs
103
Horseshoes to Sparkplugs
Infantry division organic logistic organization in the BEF
Outline Organization
The divisions that deployed to France during 1939-1940 were a mixed bag in organization,
task, equipment and structure! The infantry division establishments? were broadly similar
but strengths differed daily, whilst the type and quantity of equipment varied considerably!
In addition, the scope of deployment, geographic spread and span of command that included
divisions being transferred between corps in the BEF and those under French command, all
generated interesting logistic challenges and resulted in ORBA Ts and structures being adjusted
to suit the dynamics. The OR BAI and equipment of the infantry divisions varied but most of
them had three brigades, each with three battalions plus a divisional cavalry regiment. Artillery
support consisted of three field regiments* and an anti-tank regiment. Engineer support was
provided through three field companies and one field park company, whilst medical support
consisted of three field ambulances and one field hygiene section. The divisional signals unit
P3.1 Inter-war UK divisional logistic capability. An unidentified RASC company at Eelmoor Plain
near Aldershot. Note the respirator haversacks. (RLCM: A1/MT/RASC/NOR)
employment platoon, chemical warfare section and provost company were also integral to the
Within the division, logistic policy was controlled through the AQ Staff headed by the
Assistant Adjutant & Quartermaster-General (AA & MG), a lieutenant-colonel, supported
by the Deputy Assistant Adjutant General (DAAG) and the Deputy Assistant Quartermaster-
General (DAQMG). In the logistic arena, the AA & QMG led on Medical Services, the
production and authorization of administrative instructions and policies regarding ammunition,
Ordnance Services and Supplies, including POL, leaving the DAQMG to manage, with the
Service Directors in the HQ the daily issues relating to movements, railways, ammunition,
Details of the establishment, saling and equipment of divisional units are in Philon, BEFORT,
For example, the personnel War Establishment (WE) of 2nd Infantry Division (Regular) g
13034, and 4th Infantry Division 13,928, whilst that of 42 2nd As langa Divil was 13,123, 50t
3
Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.124.
(Not, BEo) Motor Division was 11,234. The standard in (Rary dision is o 1 173
& Win kition munication divisions, 12th (astern) 237d (Northumbrian) and 46th North Milan
se Vost Riding) were, for various reasons, inadequate ral (V, thumb ran an a Nd gin.
4
support in comparison to other divisions.
Field regiment:
requirements, three gun types were issued:
were planned to be equipped with the 25 dr but because production was behind
howitzer
5
18 pdr, 25 pdr on an 18 par cariage and the 45 indi
The Corps of Royal Engineers also generated logistic output, especially with regard to infrastructur
and Cries cil water alto nested logic on it, pocially and field park company nig
equipment, see, Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, pp. 98-101.
equipment see ring in the form of mobility and clien field co for stabli iments, anone od
102
These officers were not Staff officers but technical advisors and included, Assistant Director Medical
Services (ADMS), Commander RASC (CRASC), Deputy Assistant Director Ordnance Services
DADOS), Senior Ordnance Mechanical Engineer (SOME), Deputy Assistant Provost Marshal
(DAPM) and the Senior Chaplain.
