A Great Feat of Improvisation
unallocated vehicles, equating to 10 percent of the tasked strength, as an operational resent
generating a total task vehicle establishment of 57 within the company and a personnel strength
of 301.63 An AFG 1098 domestic vehicle per section provided a centralized feeding facility
and the section defence detachment moved in a 1-ton lorry. The DPC had four tasks. The DRO
provided 2nd Line transport for the supply of POL within the division, the two petrol sections,
ALPHA and BRAVO each carrying enough fuel for every divisional unit to travel 25 miles by
road, thus totalling 50 miles. Each 3-ton truck was planned to carry 160 x 4-gallon tins (cased),
640 gallons, or 190 x 4-gallon cans (uncased) totalling 760 gallons, thus allowing capacity for
the drums of the six percent quota of lubricants to complete the load. Vehicles of the CPP
brought POL forward to an exchange point in the divisional area called a Petrol Refilling Pom
(PRP). At the PRP, the cans were transferred to lorries from ALPHA and BRAVO sections of
the DPC and the vehicles then moved forward, often via the DPC location, to up to four Petrol
Points (PP).
Most vehicles in the BEF were powered by spark ignition engines, although compresion
ignition power-plants fuelled by petroleum spirit were fitted to some equipments, most notably
the Infantry Tank Mark II,65 and most production versions of the AEC 4x4 Matador Mediun
Artillery Tractor, so there was a small requirement for diesel fuel, and whilst not a may
problem in France, the increase in the numbers of vehicles powered by compression ignitic
engines, created a complication for the distribution of fuel by the DPC.
The distribution of
oils and lubricants using drums and cans was relatively simple consisting mainly of Oil Minerl
2220 For engines, an Oil Compound (OC 600), some simple minersi tils, malia general purpose,
lime-based grease. Oils and lubricants were distributed on a planning quota of six percent i
the volume of the fuel, although the usage varied between vehicle types.
CHARLIE section was responsible for the movement of blankets"" and greatcoats" in bulk
for all units of the division, less the artillery. The reason for this rate ana rearagement val
Ibid.
Remy Council, FSPB, Pamphlet No 9, Supply and Replenishment of Material in the Field, 1939 pl
Re avering the empty tins, a 3 ton lory could lit a calerishmer ureal in the into li
Ibs and each full 4-gallon tin, 33 lIbs
the A23 had 2o he Infantry Tank Mark II, were deployed to France. Armed with a 2 pdr Am ga,
speed of had frontal armour of 78mm, weighed 26.3 tons, to France. Armed with ad had a main
spy of th 5mph; with these characteristics, the A12 was proba powered by diesel ale tank posed by
any of the combatants in 1940, with perhaps the exception of the French Somua 35. All the A12s ver
on the establishment of 7 RTR and were lost in France.
For more details read, David Fletcher, Th
Great Tank Scandal! British Armour in the Second World War Part London: HIMSO, 1989) Ch 2
66 By 1945, the types of Allied Oils and Lubes inventory had Pat 1 tonde point that a on Asocial
Services Lubricant Panel was established to recommend pationatoation of American, British aol
Canadian grades; the Panel succeeded in reducing the product range from
The ratios for standard vehicle
361 to 118.
types are shown in Army Coural, IS B, Pamphlet No 9, Spy and
Replenishment of Material in the Field, pp. 5-16, dally Consumption of Petrol and Lubricants.
In the days before the issued military sleeping bag, the humble blanket was an eccential in o
Cruiser tank used oil at 15% of the fuel requirement and a 3 ton lorry, 4.5%.
equipment for the soldier, although some purchased civilian bags.
A 3 ton lorry could lift 825 x damp blanket in baed corian 80o in bundles of 10, or 800 lose dan
precaried. 42,00 ground sheets in bundles in tale 1f25 a 00 in bundles of 10 ere diy more ou
be carried. Army Council, FSPB, Pamphlet No 9, Supply and Replenishment of Material in the Fil
Horseshoes to Sparkplugs
115
that the mechanization of Ist Line transport in units created sufficient lift for soldiers' baggage
and greatcoats but not their blankets.
The DPC thus became, for administrative reasons,
responsible for the carriage of unit blankets, although from an operational perspective it was not
the most inspired decision, especially as it required 10 x 3 ton lorries to conduct the carriage.?O
Equally importantly, CHARLIE section was responsible for the carriage and delivery of the
division's Anti-Gas Equipment (AGE), which included a reserve of clothing, equal to 25 percent
of unit scales and for the Cape, Anti-Gas", equating to two percent of divisional personnel
establishment, tasks which matured from a decision by the Taylor Committee to divorce AGE
and reserve clothing from the Supply chain the DPC became the convenient choice. 2
Vehicles of the CPP brought AGE forward to the PRP where it was transferred to lorries
from CHARLIE Section of the DPC and the vehicles then moved forward, often via the DPC
location, to potentially four Petrol Points (PP). CHARLIE section was also responsible for
back-loading this clothing, in gas-proof bags to the PRP. Finally, the DPC was responsible
for the technical supervision and maintenance of the affiliated RASC operated transport in the
divisional and brigade headquarters, the three field ambulances and the field hygiene section, so
the workshop section was therefore, larger than the vehicle establishment of the DPC required."
Divisional Supply Column
The Divisional Supply Column (DSC) was organized into a headquarters, a workshop and
two echelons. The echelons were identical, comprising a headquarters and four sections. Each
echelon was designed to carry one Day of Supply (DOS) for the division consisting of rations,
which, included forage if appropriate, ordnance, and engineer stores, plus the delivery of mail to
the DPU. An echelon was also responsible for the back loading of items for repair and salvage,
and the return mail. To enact these tasks, the DSC was established for 458 personnel?* and a
mix of task vehicles, which were 26 x 12 cwt vans, 10 x 1 ton, 15 x 30 cwt and 48 x 3 ton lorries.?5
The function of the DSC was to provide 2nd Line road transport for food and stores from the
Supply Railhead (SH) in the corps area to divisional units, over a distance of 40 miles, with
each echelon delivering on alternate days. Pack trains for supply items usually consisted of 38
wagons,™ and were dispatched daily from the in-Theatre Base. These trains ran to a SRH at
70 Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.119, WE II/1931/13A/2.
71 Not on individual issue but available to decontamination teams, was the Suit, Anti-Gas, Light,
consisting of over-boots, trousers, jacket, gloves and a hood.
72 This task required 8 x 3 ton lorries. Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.119, WE II/1931/13A/2.
73 Ibid.
75 bid, p.113.
Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.111, WE 11/1931/15/3.
items included: food, forage, POL, solid fuels, disinfectants and hospital supplies. Army
cil, FSPB, Pamphlet No 1, Glossary of Military Terms and Organization in the Field, p.11
77 A 10 ton railway wagon could transport 430 cases (each case of two 1-gallon jar of rum jars, or
usually lift nine tons of frozen meat, which thus required three x 3 ton lorries for onward
Sect 4, Transport Load Tables, pp. 12-14.
novement. Army Council, FSPB, Pamphlet No 9, Supply and Replenishment of Material in the Field,
