Marrying the Driver
131
130 A Great Feat of Improvisation
Table 4.2
BEF First Contingent Deployment
Phase
Grouping
Remarks
Advance Parties
Base and GLOC units
Anti-Aircraft units
Air ComponentS®
AASF - 1st Echelon'
Fighter Wing (Hurricanes)
Bomber Command
GHQ BEF
II
I Corps
1st & 2nd Divisions plus Corps Troops
RAF Component
Main Body
AASF - 2nd Echelon
1st Flight
II Corps
III
3rd & 4th Divisions plus Corps Troops
RAF Component
Balance
AASF - 2nd Echelon
2nd Flight
The RAF Component" was under command of GHQ and consisted of two bomber squadrons
four Hurricane fighter squadrons commanded by 60 Wing and six army co-operation squadro
The AAS" was the forward based element of Bomber Command comprising ten light bont
squadrons in five wings, equipped with the Fairey Battle' with a mission, to assist the FRENCH
in resisting a German advance into France, Belgium and Luxembourg!" Whilst GHO i
not control the AASE, the Army was responsible for delivering significant transportation ani
infrastructure support for it, thereby exposing the paucity of pre-war financing, programmi,
and planning in this arena because the Army was not resourced to support the outputs.
50
Upon the formation of HQ British Air Forces France (BAFF) in January 1940, the Air Comp
BEF was renamed Royal Air Force Component British Expeditionary Force (RAFCBEF).
Movement plans for the Ist Echelon are contained in TNA AIR 14/444
Airy Council, The Employment of Ai Fo on tained AT A AR 1/1 War Ofic, 98 vets ohi
Air Component. The Air Staf but however, with the domy in the reth Verm ar in the tie it.
53
offer the impression the Arm had a'are, tem and it a shot ta hu the mom the an RA
For details of the deployment and operati is arman it substitute hy the A45, e, Vital.
Binshan, Bitzed: The Battle of France, May-June t the Rew Caden: Ait Research Publication, 19.
54 Pp. 15-26.
te ay observations relating to the combat capability of the Fairey Batie are pond t
Battle, A Reassessment
BalAR 35/115: Operational Roles of Aircraft bat capability of the eig Baugh, T it,
55TH AIR 3544-ASOneration Instition No one A hit.
t of its RAF Career (Stroud: Fonthill, 2017).
neutralization of enemy air capability by attacking bases and airfields
achieve a solution, the GHQ BEF utilized a combination of Host Nation resources reinforced
by diverted military logistic assets, although the demand always lagged behind availability,56
Another issue that the Host Nation assisted the BEF to overcome during the initial deployment
was the provision of rationing by the extensive use of local purchase of food through the French
Army Intendance Service. In addition, as a contingency to mitigate the interruption of movement
schedules, the War Office issued three days of emergency rations to the soldiers, which created
a perhaps not entirely unforeseen consequence. As the official report noted, "it was found that
even well-disciplined troops find it difficult to eke out their rations over three days and cases
came to light of men consuming the bulk of their rations the first day and/or giving food away
to FRENCH civilians. A lesson from this is that it is important for Commanders to ensure that
the men do not eat or give away their rations without the orders of their officers. 57
The War Office plan to use the French Western Ports only came to fruition as a result of
a development in the mid-1930s of the leisure industry because the key rail line Rennes to
Nantes and Saint Nazaire via Masserae and Redon had been single, only being doubled in order
to promote greater holiday traffic to the Brittany coastal resorts. Without this additional rail
capacity, the proposed GLOC would have been incapable of delivering the required levels of
traffic to support either the deployment or the consequent sustainment. As it transpired, the
GLOC struggled from the start of the operation to meet the planned outputs, a problem created
by restricted access to port capacity at Nantes and Saint Nazaire. Placing the SPODs so far
to the West to mitigate the effects of the assessed air threat also created two transportation
constraints. The first was the additional distance from the Sea Ports of Embarkation (SPOE)
in the UK, which increased the shipping loop times, thereby generating a need for more ships,
whilst also creating complexities in convoy routing and protection. The second was a GLOC
nearly 500 miles in length, which meant that the BEF had to place more reliance on rail at 3rd
Line from the Base to the corps and divisional areas. The British base marshalling yard for both
the rail Centre of Gravity at Rennes, the GLOC ran 220 miles through Alencon and Rouen to
railheads in the Arras area.58 Given that in 1940, railways were vulnerable to attack from the
air, this arguably laid the BEF open to the very danger than the planners had hoped to avoid
by placing the Main Base far to the West, although in the event the French railway system was
much more resilient than had been expected.
Allied Forces had used some of the selected sites during the Great War but many buildings
were by 1939 unavailable and the deterioration or removal of railway track decreased their
operational value. The proposed site for the Engineer Base Depot at Nantes for example
had been an American hospital in 1918 but now consisted of a few concrete roads and several
dilapidated huts with the nearest railay 0.75 miles distant, a problem compounded by the
impracticality of constructing effective rail facilities in the location.
Such failures were
56 See, AMOH, Air Publication 3397 (CONFIDENTIAL downgraded UNCLASSIFIED, March
1966), Maintenance, CD 1131 (Air Ministry, 1954), pp. 54-70.
TNA CAB 106/211: Notes on the Q Organization of the BE' dated 16 January 1942, para 3.
58 For details of these rail facilities, see, Aves, Supporting the British Expeditionary Force.
59 TNA CAB 106/211: Notes on the Q Organization of the BEF' dated 16 January 1942, para 5d.
60 WOOH, Works Services and Engineer Stores, p. 103.
