104 A Great Feat of Improvisation
Ordnance Services, equipment, clothing, Salvage, Postal Services and the provision of watc
The two logistic tasks the DAAG was responsible for was cookery and billeting.®
In supporting combat power, logistics was focused at divisional level, with no formed unit
organic to the brigade.
Whilst this solution concentrated resources at the appropriate lerd.,
inevitably there were occasions when by design or default, brigades operated outside of the
divisional umbrella, which was an appreciable support challenge because the Q construct was
not organized to meet this requirement in dynamic manoeuvre environments, although in
planned deployments such as Force W to the Saarland, the Q Staffs were able to create the
necessary logistic 3rd and 2nd Line ORBAT, with the provision of the 3rd Line corps sire
the most complex problem. The organic divisional 2nd Line logistic component was comme
across nearly all of the divisions, although the armoured formations had differentials drive
by the dispersion of combat formations. A fundamental arrangement of the divisional logisti.
structure was the key role played by the RASC, with only the Light Aid Detachments (LAD)
and Mobile Bath Unit (MBU) of the RAOC and the Divisional Postal Unit (DPU) of th
Corps of Royal Engineers (RE) not being cap-badged to it.
Table 3.1
Infantry Division - Organic Logistic Units
Unit
Number per
Division
HQ RASC
Divisional Ammunition Company RASC
Divisional Petrol Company RASC
Divisional Supply Column RASC
Total
Personnel
3510
390
301
458
Remarks
Total divisional
RASC
1185
Light Aid Detachment (Light) RAOC
Light Aid Detachment (Heavy) RAOC
Divisional Postal Unit RE
Mobile Bath Unit RAOC
Total
52
91
25
20
1.372
13 personnel per
LAD
7 Major-General Sir W G Lindsell SO OBE MC ide pse, Military Organization and Admirit
8
(Aldershot: Gale & Polden, 23rd Edn, 1941), pp. 40-41.
The DAAG's main effort was people.
He was thus responsible for discipline, courts-martia, POli
battlefield clearance of personnel and burials, Proves, ensemonial, leave, casualties, reinforcemen
9 Gun Buster rather understating thediary, bited, In a mechanise army, their importance an un
claims, working parties and the war diary. Ibid, p.40.
10
s considerable', Return via Dunkirk, p.67.
The WE was 26 inclusive of the medical officer RAMC, thus 35 x RASC, See, Philson, BEFORET
Vol 2, p.110, HQ RASC WE II/1931/5/2.
Horseshoes to Sparkplugs
105
Organic divisional logistic capability was supported by corps 3rd Line RASC assets including
the Corps Ammunition Park (CAP)" and Corps Petrol Park (CPP), 2 and three Army Field
Workshops (AFW) and an Ordnance Field Park (OFP) from the RAOC. This meant that only
9.3 per cent of the personnel in the division served in logistic units, with the majority, 1,185,
86.3 percent, serving in the divisional RASC.13 In addition, there were another 245 logistic
personnel, nearly all badged to the RASC, serving in the division undertaking support tasks in
the brigade HOs, field ambulances or AQ technical appointments in the divisional HQ.' These
figures do not include logistic personnel integral to units at 1st Line and badged to the regiment
such as drivers and cooks in infantry battalions, which as the table below illustrates, were not
insignificant, representing 14.8 percent of the battalion manpower establishment.
Table 3.2
Infantry Battalion - Logistic Tradesmen and Non-Tradesmen'6
Tradesmen
Qualification
Blacksmith
Bricklayer
Carpenter
Driver Mechanic
Equipment Repairer
Mason
Motor Mechanic
Technical Storeman
Total
No
Non-Tradesmen
Qualification
Butcher
Cooks
Drivers IC*
Postal
Quartermaster
Transport Control
Storeman
Water Duties
Remarks
55
*Internal Combustion!
Including QM and RQMS
Sergeant
88
Total personnel: 116
12 The corps troops ammunition company and corps troops supply column were 2nd Line assets operating
at corps level to support corps units and were not usually tasked to directly support divisional operations.
13 Percentage calculated from figures in Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 2, p.124.
provided 59 personnel for each field ambulance, thus totalling 177, plus 40 drivers for the
ivisional HQ and two Fitters. In the HQ the RAOC filled two technical officer posts and eight
derical ones, whilst the RASC provided a catering advisor and a RASC clerk. The three A Staff
also provided five posts in brigade HQs and the
Total logistic personnel in HQ appointments and units thus 1,642; 11.1
4ộ, The com it rato tie i dies in the Administration Platon, 35 of which vort
alcated to the rifle companies. IC was an Army term to identify the soldier as a Driver, Motor
Transport rather than Driver, Horse Transport or Animal Transport.
