Factory to Fire Trench
Factory to Fire Trench
Conventional ammunition supply for the British Expeditionary Force deployedto
France 1939-1940
Industrial Dimensions
One key component of logistic operations, which was essential to the capability of the B),
was the supply of ammunition' to deployed ground forces, and 'common user' munitions, aud
as Small Arms Ammunition (SAA) to elements of the Royal Air Force. The importance i
ammunition supply was clearly understood in 1940, the experience of the Great War haris.
been enshrined in many publications.
Field Service Regulations, Volume I, Organization au
ministration, 1930, stated that: "The fundamental principle of ammunition supply is it
ammunition must be passed systematically and automatically from rear to front to replace that
Expended in battle. Troops in action should never have to turn their backs on the enemy fet
further supplies, before significantly noting that, A commander's power of maneuri angel
dependent on ability to keep his troops supplied with ammunition. Careful ranges st.
ammunition supply, must therefore, form part of every plan of operations.
In comparison to fuel planning for the BEE, there was a strong focus upon capital investors
in production and storage in the United Kingdom. In 1935, production facilitie ve oct.
Ahe he Royal Small Arms Factory Enfield, Royal Gunpowder Factory (RCP) Walthan bi
the Royal Arsenal Woolwich Arsenal, with minor activity at the Coreat War National fles
Factory (NPF) Hereford, whilst the cartrid minse activiry at firey and the explain sit t
This chapter examines the supply of conventional munitions.
munitions storage and movement, see, Chp 14, 'Operation FLANNELFOOT.
For an analysis of Gas Warfare (GW)
Common usage antions were those not specifie to Are Cheer induded items such as SAA
Ardy Council, FSR, Vol I, Organization and Administration, p. 252.
1940 1: Land Service Munitions - UK Munitions Production Sites and Ammunition Depo 19-
TNA SUPP 5/1260: Historical Notes on the Royal Ordnance Factories.
Do one after Bullingham and known the Ror Orderwas During the inter war peril in di.
only one of the Great Wi. NEE ate he decome eye Elled Army anter warpedo 1900% 20.
200
naval mines in the 1930s and was also used to store munitions. ROF Rotherwas closed in 1967 and is
ow an industrial estate.
TNA CAB 27/604: Royal Ordnance Factories - Miscellaneous Committees.
TNA CAB 27/604: Royal Ordnance Factories - Miscellaneous Committees.
NameD Corot, Dangerous Energy, The Archaeology of Gunpowder and Military Explosives Manufacture
(Sindon: English Heritage, 2000), p.215.
TNA CAB 102626: History of the Royal Filling Factory Swynnerton, D Mack.
12 Se, Mike Nell John Roberts & Jack Smith, A History of Royal Ordnance Factory, Chorley (Lancaster:
Carmegie Publishing, 1999).
TA CAB 102/273: Munitions Factories - Location and Siting.
I Bridgend commenced operations in early 1940, ceasing production in 1945. The factory buildings
were demolished, and the s
site is occupied by the Bridgend Industrial Estate. The administrative site,
in in riginal ROF HQ in art deco moderne block style is the HIQof South Wales Police.
" To road hate did aming safa Wolich, which not with cod peption.
nment, which directed that the Office of Works should take over the project. Experience
rved that the Woolwich assessment was correct.
Patries and Plant (London: HIMSO, 1958).
