Conclusion
For the most part, the BEF logistic structures stood the test of the French 'experience', although
the shape, scope and size were adjusted to enhance effectiveness, agility and response. In this
respect, culture was equally as important as systems.
The BEF logisticians were cognizant
that the expanding scale of the operation in France demanded consistent planning and sound
preparation but were often pressed in the delivery of both by the dearth of resources to meet
the demand especially across the GLOC where the jam was thinly spread. People were equally
important as the culture and the systems, and in the logistic environment, the adage that 'a
good planner is worth more than a good plan' remains as true now as it did in 1940. Whilst
this approach reinforced that logistic coherency and effectiveness depended upon the concept of
'Le Diable dans les Detail' equally, strong capable leadership made the difference between failure
and success. The courage of logisticians was tested and sometimes found wanting but for every
occasion of fragility, soldiers, Regular, Reserve, Militia and Volunteer, had stepped up to the
plate with gallantry, determination and innovation to save the day, whether that was fighting
the enemy or feeding their comrades. Their deeds, rapidly fading into the mists of time, are
however, enshrined in stone by those who remained in France forever in 1940.
Often forgotten, the ability to deploy and sustain the Land and Air Forces in France was
fundamentally underpinned by the logistic ability of the Merchant Marine to deliver the lift
capacity and the RN, assisted by the RAF, to protect the passage. In this respect, after the initial
deployment of the BEF, the demands of British naval and marine operations across the Globe
constrained War Office plans to maintain the BEF solely through the French Western ports,
prompting a reluctant General Staff and GHQ to engage in establishing an Advanced Base
Area to reduce the requirements for RN escorts and logistic shipping lift. The reinforcement of,
and evacuations from, the French North Channel Ports, firmly emphasized the significance of
Britain's maritime strength, and sometimes limitations, to military operations on the Continent,
the capabilities being even more apparent in supporting the North-West Expeditionary Force to
Norway' and the evacuations from Western and Southern France. These were conducted over
much greater distances and were maritime operations which, for the most part, the Germans
were unable to prevent or effectively interdict.? The post-withdrawal attrition of shipping
that had supported the BEF, through enemy action, navigational error and meteorological
Joseph Moritz, Towards a Wider War, British Decision-Making and Military Effectiveness in Scandinavia,
939-40 (Solihull: Helion, 2017)
Winser, BEF Ships, describes the types and numbers of ships taken up from trade to service the BEF'S
evacuation requirements.
Conclusion
533
ins, was another unmistakeable and continuing reminder of the key and fundamental
ship between the Maritime and Land dimensions, the failure of which, for a nation
ig military forces beyond its shores, could have catastrophic results. In these respects,
role of British salt-water capability in enabling the BEF to fight in France has been
i neglected, but sea-power in its broadest sense was as important to the BEF on the
it a it was to the Eighth Army in North Africa or the Fourteenth Army in Burma.
undations of logistic support to the BEF were, given the circumstances, remarkably
though there was a high level of improvisation required. The structure though, failed
ach because of the rapidity of construction but because the architects failed to account for
e storm, although a post-war official logistic history was surprisingly supportive of the
and logisticians, observing: That the BEF was starved of the majority of the necessary
reapons and stores of war was not the fault of the administrative staff in France, neither
ameworthy that the principles upon which they had built up their organization were
obe unsuited to 'blitzkreig' warfare? The importance of training across the logistic
a a writ large from the deployment to France and yet the burden was imposed upon
through rapid expansion, commanders and Staff as a body, being all too keenly aware
ificance. The Citizen Soldier brought however, enormous value to technical logistic
roided of course, the Army employed the individuals in the appropriate posts and was
cile in the manner, in which they were managed, mentored and encouraged.
amoring labour were understood, if not always deliverable, although the issues relating
ding since and intelligent capability were an obvious experience from the time in
sit dionships with the Host Nation were vital to delivering combat capability
endoubtedly worthy of a detailed study. Whilst inevitably there were frictions, some
+ came more obvious as the Allied strategic position unravelled, the arrangements
i on did foundations; had they not been, much of the BEF's logistic infrastructure
auton ability would have failed to operate, with the relationship with the French
a try SNC.F, being of especiali to operate, At the tactical level, there were spats
elation of real estatc, BEF vehicles speeding in towns, ammunition and fuel stored
a fal reto follov Host Nation movement and logistic procedures but relations
itary and civil agencies in France were generally professional and cordial, although
tradia prations involving the destruction of logistic stocks and facilities caused
tions from French military and civil authorities, a response British offiers had
Sit manage with sensitivity. Units certainly praised the industry and commitment
French liaison officers and interpreters. who were assessed to have been essential to
i race with the comple components of the French logistic machinery.
to Vicount Got in the logistic soon deserves further analysis. His failure to inspect
→ int latin or which tic ory desponsible appears unprofessional from a 215t.
military perspective but may well have been the product of his military experience,
al develonment and demandino responsibiliton 4 Whit Field Sonin Pooulations stated
OH, Maintenance in the Field, Vol 1, p. 57.
omery, never a great admirer o moose a bing appointed
in-C and an Army Commander, Gort was being asked to undertake the impossible. Colville,
532
