450
A Great Feat of Improvisation
to prevent the Germans seizing it.% This was unfortunate because the chain of command was
acutely aware of the need to support the local economy and not to engage in rapacious activity
upon it but it is clear that occasionally during the withdrawal to the coast, BEF units treated
the resources and inhabitants of France as if the country was a conquered enemy® rather than
an Allied nation.®8 The officers at the War Office in Supply & Transport 6 however, could
little have imagined that in the midst of the chaos of war, soldiers would dine in bizarre ways,
occasionally giving physical and mental sustenance to those fortunate enough to participate
in them. At Dunkerque, with the evacuation in full flow, the scribe of an ad hoc Squadron of
4th/7th Royal Dragoon Guards recorded of Sunday 2 June, 'All took our lunch down to the
beach for the day ... Found the only tin of Ration Biscuits on the beach. Unfortunately, they
didn't last long, as the Officer on Guard over them slept at his post. Riley produced a bottle of
Red Wine - not quite the right temperature but very welcome? 8 1st Berkshire were evacuated
from Dunkerque on the MV Royal Daffodil, the regimental history recording that once the
ship was out of range of German artillery, immaculate stewards served lunch; and after it,
unbelievably, presented the bill!?91
No Opportunity for Sleep
The pressure on the logisticians was beginning to mount.
III Corps A&Q recorded, 'G
plans have little relation to the administrative situation and it was necessary for QMG to
intervene.....the very limited reserves of petrol are rapidly being exhausted. Medical stores
are running short. ...Orders are changed more rapidly than units can keep pace with, and this
in turn is exhausting troops and reserves??3 In this respect, the Staff officers at HQ III
Corps at least understood what units were grappling with. Those tasked with combat operations
immediately upon arrival in Theatre certainly found it particularly difficult to adjust to the
rigours of a dynamic fight during mobile operations. OC 13 TCC summarized the challenge
86
TNA CAB 106/204: BEF Unit Narratives, 2 DPC.
Equally, officers and soldiers believed that it was better they had the rations rather than the Germans.
See, Gun Buster, Return via Dunkirk, p. 103.
88 The regulations appertaining to the acquisition of resources were clearly articulated in FSR and were
subject to additional controls in friendly countries. FSR, Vol I noted In the utilization offocal resources
direct contact between troops and inhabitants will be avoided as far as possible'. Ibid, p.279, para 5.
89 This squadron was attached to the 5th Dragoon Guards. See na, Actions of the 4/1th Dragoon Guards,
of 21 knots, launched in January 1939. During Operation
reapacity of 2,073 and a maximum speed
AMO. the Roval Dattons evacuated
7,461 personnel in seven lifts before being damaged by a bomb on 2 June 1940 but was
to recover British soldiers and civilians from Guernsey during Operation AERIAL.. The Royal Daffodil
as the distinction of evacuating more personnel than any
other ship during Operation DYNAMO.
Winser, BEF Ships, p.61. She was scrapped in 1967, her last voyage, to Ghent for breaking, being
shown on BBC TV
Blight, The History of the Berkshire Regiment, 1920-1947, p.208.
This comment refers to the Ill Corps situation as GHO recorded that. "The petrol situation, fortunately
93 TNA CAB 44/67: The BEF in Belgium and Artois, 10 May - 3 June 1940, entry 23 May 1940.
Worst Job of the Lot
3 ty Dunes 2019. Carrying water, rations and ammunition from the barges at the water's edge
was a dangerous and manpower intensive task. (Author)
oto HQ after one week of deployment and it dispels any notion that the logisticians
* BE had it easy and how quickly logistic capability could be eroded.*
Since its arrival in FRANCE on the 14th Mav it has been continuously employed dav
ed night on Troop Carrying duties. Many miles have been covered and the drivers
the had ratically no yingtunies for sleep. The unit has frequently been bombed
so chine uned and iphumoved at such speed and over such a wide area that it
i to ben possible to maintain equate touch with the supplies and petrol... I me
ity short of equipment ... My officers and dispatch riders have no pistols ... There
te only four maps in the unit ... and some 50 drivers are unaccounted for. Briefly
whiles are required?'
is Unit needs rest, the vehicles are urgently in need of maintenance and replacement
Soldier from 13 TCC, Driver Stanlev Patrick ared 19, was one of only two survivors from the 640
577
105
12
