A Great Feat of Improvisation
A reconnaissance for the establishment of the Base was conducted in 1938, which, in accordanc
with the guidelines in the Manual of Movement (War),® produced the 1st Key Plan, allocating
two areas around the Sea Ports of Disembarkation (SPOD) at Brest to create a Northern Bis
Area,' and at Nantes and Saint Nazaire to form a Southern Base Area.
Within each of thes
areas, there were two components: the Docks, which were doctrinally, solely a transit facility!
although logistic planning and execution compromised this purist approach, and the depo
facilities, which included 4th Line supply, ordnance and workshop installations, reinforcemen
camps, and medical facilities including hospitals and support units.
One of the key aspect
to the planning and development of the Base depots was the scale of the real estate that was
required for each site, an issue that not only generated practical challenges in site selection but
also complexities in negotiating the detail of the requirements with the Host Nation. Evenin
1933, when the manual was published, the scope was extensive and grew as the Army became
increasingly more reliant upon complex equipment, which required more support.
Growing concerns about the vulnerability of the depots to air attack generated creative tension
between the need for appropriate Ground Based Air Defence (GBAD)" and the imperative to
greater dispersion and thus a need for more estate, a dilemma influenced by the requirement
to keep the construction of internal depot railway infrastructure to the minimum. By 1939,
the shortage of field and Host Nation GBAD to protect the Base resulted in dispersion bring
the solution, whilst the need for more Base depots to support a two corps deployment with,
subsequent expansion to three then four corps generated concomitant requests to the French
for more real estate, which inevitably created frictions, especially as some of the ini basing
assumptions were too conservative and had to be up-scaled." That the Secretary of Sat
War was pressing for IV Corps, comprising four divisions, to deploy to France in Spring 194)
undoubtedly exacerbated the challenges of managing this problem.!4
8 Army Council, Manual of Movement (War), 26/Manuals/ 1297, War Office (London: HMS, 195)
pp.54-64, Sects 52-58.
Map 6: BEF - Northern Base Area at Rennes: First Key Plan.
Army Council, Manual of Movement (War), p.59, Sect 56.
i comesidered the air threat so serious that it suggeSted that air defence assets should pete.
12
Army Council, FSR, Vol III, Operations - Higher Formations,
deployment of the mai s OBEMC pac RA, A Q or Military Administration in Man Alert
the need for substantial rail infrastructure consust sive Air Deten By 1939 it had become anot
more significant issue, with dispersed sites using external railheads to service the operations.
f/ Minnition and POL., access to the railway network and the planned requirements for expanse
14 RJ Minney, The Private Papers of Hore-Belisha (London: Collins, 1950), p.254.
Docks and Stocks
151
Table 5.2
Real Estate Required for Base Depotsi5
Base Depotio
Acres
500 - 1000
Remarks
Safety distances a key driver
Engineer Stores
Ordnance
Supplies
100 - 200
100 - 200
250 - 500
100 - 200
Covered storage required
Included POL and rations
Rail connection essential
As the size of the BEF and its concomitant support expanded, the type and scope of the dock
areas, warehouses, accommodation, field storage sites and railheads, which, had been allocated
under the original plan became by December 1939 wholly inadequate and effectively the Base
remained in a constant state of development until the evacuations began in late May 1940.7
In this month, enormous resources were dedicated to sustaining the BEF, although there were
several interesting dichotomies, not least of which, was the effort expended in storing in-Theatre,
60 days rations for 400,000 men, whilst some critical Mechanical Transport (MT) spares were
dues out, a situation amply illustrated by the fact that on 30 April 1940, 1 Base Ordnance Depot
(BOD) had 17,000 indents unsatisfied and demands were arriving at the rate of 1,400 per day!8
Spares for tanks were also in short supply. On 1 January 1940, the stock for the 50 Infantry
tanks in France consisted of 16 pairs of tracks and no sprockets, whilst to support the 123 Light
tanks there were in Base stores, 137 pairs of tracks and 136 pairs of sprockets!" This example
illustrates the creative tension caused by the logistic services being expected to deliver outside of
the envelope without the relevant industrial outputs.20
increasingly motorized and mechanized Army deployed to conduct mobile expeditionary
operations? Whilst most Base assets were logistic and medical, the BEF also deployed
Infantry, Royal Armoured Corps and General Base Depots for personnel reinforcements, light
infantry battalions for point protection and manual-handling tasks and the 3rd Anti-Aircraft
Division was located in the Rouen Sub-Area, whilst two brigades of 46th (North Midland
& West Riding) Division were assigned to the Rennes Sub-Area and one brigade to Nantes.
Most of the Royal Engineer units in the Base, except those in divisions allocated to the GLOC,
generated logistic output, with a focus on transportation, including movements, docks and
15 Table compiled from information in Lindsell, A & Q, or Military Administration in War, p.41.
18 WOOH, Ordnance Services, p. 153.
19 Ibid, p.151.
20 The shortage of tank track and vehicle spares was not confined to the BEF, the German Army being
qually tested during the Polish campaign in this respect during autumn 1939. Forczyk, Case White,
21 For a detailed list of all the units and the establishments see, Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 3.
