324 A Great Feat of Improvisation
challenge in the winter months was undoubtedly the weather, which disrupted construction,
movement and training, whilst creating additional rigours for soldiers living in the field and the
arrival of the spring was greeted with much relief. Whilst the logisticians did their best to keep
the wheel turning during these three months, there is little doubt that the harsh conditions bent
the logistic development programme out of shape.
The logisticians, however, made, for the most part, good use of the time, particularly in
maturing relations with the Host Nation at every level, although there were inevitable frictions,
especially with local civil authorities and agencies. These were usually resolved with positive
intervention from logistic commanders through the French liaison officers, but it was a task
that required careful management and positive inter-personal skills. Interaction with technical
military and civil logistic organizations and Commands were usually professional and cordial
but required shaping to ensure the most effective use of resources, with the influence of national
military logistic culture often being a challenging issue, the fuel can subject in Force W being
an example. The demands upon WMT were relentless. This resulted in not only sometimes
ruthless measures to create efficiency but also an adverse influence upon tactical, technical and
military training in logistic units, an issue compounded by the provision of WMT support to
the Host Nation civil authorities.
The supply, fuel and ordnance components of the BEF's logistic system were well practised by
April 1940, albeit in a non-operational static environment, whilst the ammunition element was
the most fragile. The key logistic planning work was devoted to maturing the administrative
plan and supporting instruction to enable the movement of the BEF's corps to the defensive line
on the River Dyle. The documents were constantly being revised to take account of changes in
the operational plan, new logistic information and the arrival of reinforcing combat and logistic
units but the key challenge was the apparent paucity of current information from Belgium.
There were presumably some unofficial contacts with the Belgian railway authorities and
other material may have arrived from War Office intelligence sources and the British Military
Attaché, but all this is opaque in the logistic documents and requires a study to examine the
extent to which logistic planning was degraded by this situation.
Traks Across France
Rainy perations during the preparatory phase September 1939 - May 1940
Tea anand oRBAT of the BEF and the A AS had a strong in fluence upon the requirement
ring it and their structure, training and employment. The Royal Engineers, the
i pot for outing British military railway operations, had significant experience
spring bal deployments, especially during the Great War. In June 1918, on the
can i, alway Operating Division (ROD), was employing, 18,235 operating
i rich personnel, with another 14,080 involved in Standard Gauge Railway (SGR)
tom and maintenance, supporting the operation of 1,247 SGR locomotives, increasing
1. 4 ember This key pool of capability, whilst greatly reduced, had not entirely
can in cat a soldiers serving in the Regular Army, Regular Reserve, Territorial
a poetry Reserve (SR).? The War Office and RE planners were also cognizant
a a day it alway prating and construction units to France in August
hit t the a grement between the British and the French that the Host Nation
ale oil for all alway operating for the BEF.
i a mistake at the Staff were not intending to repeat, so in addition to the three
Sit in mais a Office had created seven SR companies, each of which
i road and to of the Big Four' commercial railways Indeed, one of
h, posa pula, a potion on the Western Front. For railway operations
8% in out scs dior General H L. Pritchard (ed.) The History of the Corps of Royal
Than a me a an asid tay in the Pi, Vilian A T Aves, ROD, The
i die in pring a Flave morement is examined in Chp 9, White
a man on dad&S coti, London && North Eastern and Southern.
325
