238
A Great Feat of Improvisation
P8.1 Supporting the Combat Soldier 1. 5114456
Private Hugh Maginniss Royal Warwickshire
Regiment. Evacuated from France before
service in UK and India. KIA on 19 February
at Saye in Burma whilst serving with 2nd
Norfolks. (Courtesy Mary Maginniss)
This chapter focuses therefore, on one area
within the PSS, which, has had almost no
public assessment since 1940 and yet even
80 years ago was a significant aspect of the
Staff's work, and has certainly not declined
in importance today: the welfare of the
Soldier.
Two fundamental problems the PSS faced
were the varied types of engagements upon
which soldiers in the BEF were serving,
their different military experiences and
their diverse civilian backgrounds.
There
were Regulars and Territorials, Regular
Reservists, the Army Officers Emergency
Reserve,
Supplementary
Reservists,"
Militiamen, volunteers, and the ATS. Each
group had a different comprehension of
military life, and the cultural, welfare and
discipline process that supported it, and
varying expectations of the outcomes, whilst the latter three groups in particular, brought with
them an ever-expanding culture of 'civvy' street. In addition, there were the Indian troops of
Force K6, comprising the Indian Army animal transport companies and supporting units," of
the Royal Indian Army Service Corps (RIASC). The expectations of each group were different,
and the PSS Staff had to have a clear comprehension of this complex, and in some cases, roughly
hewn jigsaw. If though, there was any doubt in the perception of senior staff or regimental
officers, about the importance of the PSS, their minds must have been focused by the words of
Leslie Hore-Belisha, Secretary of State for War, who, during his Parliamentary Introduction
17 One of them was Signalman John Yeomans (1919-2002) who served in the GH Comple in Ars
and I am indebted to him for his knowledge of the daily routine of GH. One of the social military
gems he highlighted, was the fact that there were no separate Oficers WCs, which meant that humble
soldiers had the opportunity to mix with the Great Men, and so offer, 80 years on, a different perspective
on the military commanders of the day. At the mention of Viscount Cort, his lively response, with
sparkle in his eve and in no
way dulled by nearly intervening 60 years, nor the significant difference in
2410, was "Oh you mean Fat Boy!" Interview, with John Neoman sea, over try, 24 October 19, YIC
241099.
TNA WO 167/1433: HQ Force K6, table Arrival of Force K6 at Marilles from indi, nd burt
probably 26 December 1939.
Mightier than the Sword
239
te Amy Estimates on 8 March 1939, stated: 'The Army is being mechanized. I hope it is
lime to lighty
ars major projects, the formulation and implementation of the Theatre leave policy was
nati do diven by the AG personally, and its profile is illustrated by the 14-page
ladam on the subject in the file of the GHQ AG war diary. The task was a formidable
c trage of tasks that the Staff had to undertake, in order to bring to fruition a leave
ime for members of the BEF, was amazing, and some of this work will be examined.
ments aspects were a major consideration and the average daily transport of soldiers
dest illustrates the level of activity. As the Force grew, it rose from 1,700 in each
sin dring December 1939 to 2,20021 in May 1940 and was projected to reach 2,500 by
i din, the movements system also processed RN and RAF personnel, as well as
Sia on atachment to the BEF, attending courses in UK, receiving medical treatment in
home Base, Staff visits and those posted as trickle reinforcements.
a it at the PS Staff had to tackle was the creation of a clear and coherent leave
in at generated the starting point by agreeing to 12.5 percent of the force being
(ig and compassionate leave at one time, whilst the A Staff proposed that soldiers
a come it for rilege leave after 2½ months in France. Consultations with other
dis in d, produced a basis for the length of leave, promulgated as 10 days? between
cilt ali pot and the return to an English port for re-embarkation to France.24
ch titants dis ere away from their units for two weeks because movement to
2 to days ach way?' Dispensations were granted to those domiciled in Eire or
no a its ada f the UK, which could extend the period away from the unit to
here it trel v a disrupted.
don ang was ased on six monthly periods since the arrival of the BEF in France.
a ta ta oa to er 1939 to March 1940, and the second, April - September
14. Re sod prod generated changes to leave policy, including a maximum of seven
Non Pirate Papers of Hore-Belisha, p.179.
Ho ta, as say ferred to by its codename: BRASSARD.
it co ones, OC LOC, OC GHO Troops and the Heads of Services.
i ma that ben in the Great War BEF in the period November 1915 to
the 197,5S e iair eneral Sir James Edmonds CB CMG (Comp.) History of the Great
+ a on a a names, mu. Douglas Haig: Command to the 1st July:
