520 A Great Feat of Improvisation
of Effort'157 in a manner rarely seen before or since; most observers would describe it as the
'Dunkirk Spirit'. The plan had clarity with each phase having an obvious main effort.
The post-war monograph Administrative Planning published by the War Office in 1952, is
clear about why the operations were successful:
The plan itself bore the stamp and hall-mark of good planning - it was simple and
flexible, and it made the utmost use of the resources available. Perhaps the speed
at which it evolved was in some part responsible for the absence of any tendency to
over-elaboration.158 There was certainly no opportunity to add, as Pooh Bah did,
'corroborative detail intended to give artistic verisimilitude to an otherwise bald and
unconvincing narrative' 159
The foresight of the logistic Staffs enabled the necessary resources to be activated in sufficient time
and given the initial paucity of information, they made economic use of the assets. Simplicity
was the central element to the plan, and it was this, which generated the inherent flexibility that
was so important in effectively conducting such a major and seemingly impossible operation.
Close co-operation with the Royal Navy and the civil sector, particularly the railways and the
voluntary agencies, was fundamental to the execution of the mission. None of these factors
alone though, had sufficient weight to see the operation through to a successful conclusion, and
had it not been for the character, courage, commitment, dedication, and initiative of the many
who took part, the military position of the United Kingdom would have been much the poorer.
Duty and Service were a vital component of logistics in 1940 as indeed they are now; we neglect
such traditions at our peril.
157 Army Doctrine Publication Vol 2, Command (UK MOD, 1995), para 0213, states that unity of effort is a
tenet of both Mission Command and the British doctrine for operations, providing a focus for separate
but co-ordinated actions by subordinates. This certainly summarizes the recovery operations in May
and June 1940.
158 TNA WO 277/1: Administrative Planning and Organization, 1939-1945 and WOOH, Administrative
Planning, Colonel H W Wilson OBE TD (Comp.), (War Office 1952), p.5.
159 WOOL, Administrative Planning, p.172.
flection and Retrospect
nishment of the Innocent?
squiry or Inquisition?
i efore the last ship carrying BEF men and material arrived in the UK, a series of reviews,
vts and investigations at every level had been initiated into operations in France, with
ricular emphasis on Lessons Identified, the presence of an enemy only 22 miles from the
gish coast providing a very strong imperative to ensure this work was completed in an
irate and timely manner. The War Office work was embedded in the Bartholomew Report,'
it interviewed 36 officers, 25 of whom were brigadier or above' and took written evidence
opinion from three more, one of whom was Major-General Bernard Montgomery. Only
to these officers held a logistics appointment, Lieutenant-General W G Lindsell, the BEF
IG, although through his rank and influence, logistic threads, with the exception of those
is pertaining solely to operations in the Base, were exposed. The effect of air attack
The Bartholomew Committee was chaired by General Sir William H Bartholomew GCB CMG DSO
18971962) late Royal Artily and recently retired from the post of GOC Northern Command
(937-1940) before which, he was 5 India (1934-1937). There were four members, tv a nd for-
geral, one of which was CC Walden, Director Military Training at the War Office, and two
rigadies. The Terms of Reference of the Bartholomew Committee were 1. To consider lesso trif the
ent campaign in Flanders which can be applied usefully to our present organization and training
2. To ugst the modificationhich can be appation, training and equipment which should be mad
problems with which the British Army will be faced in the event of an attempted enemy
rain of this country INA 10611775: Bartholomew Committee - Report on lessons to be
manded the BEF Air Component in France. Blount was commissioned into the Queenis
PRops Ver Sure the Bi At Sepomber in Trans Bling to the Royal Flying Corps in in but
100) Bomber use in is As And 22 am int operation Group, he was killed ines ir
he SV corner of Sain Must after taking Churchyard Essendon, Hertfordshire.
ash on 23 October 1940 just after taking off from RAF lo-operation Croup, he was and he rests in
521
