A Great Feat of Improvisation
chance through the dedicated enquiry of the NCO in charge of APO Marseilles. ADAPS,
recognizing the potential sensitivity of the outcome, reacted with commendable speed to resolve
the problem, arranging with the Chief Censor at Liverpool to expedite the movement of the
mis-directed post by air, whilst also informing GHQ Branch, noting 'As there is likely to be
some complaint as regards this failure it is thought that "Q" Branch should be made aware of
the facts'?"
There was in 1940, no military 'bluey', and soldiers used surface mail envelopes, either writing
AIR MAIL on the top left-hand side of the envelope or applying a blue AIR MAIL label. The
service was not free, a surcharge being applied by weight.
No airmail service was established
for personal mail to and from the UK, although consideration was given to creating one to
support the widely dispersed AASF.'3 This suggestion was not pursued because of the perceived
adverse infuence on morale within the BEF but had it not left the Continent in June 1940, it is
possible that one might have come into operation for the whole force had suitable aircraft been
made available?* The crucial importance of mail from home is summarized by an entry, on
18 May 1940, in the diary of Gunner Allan Barratt of 2nd Survey Regiment Royal Artillery:
'And how wonderful, that in all this chaos we had a delivery of mail so that at least some of us
are able to forget the war, the bombing, the refugees, if only for a few wonderful moments as
we read the letters from our families and friends'?' Whilst receiving a letter from family and
friends, there was a rather less positive aspect in respect of its retention. Private Fred Gilbert
dutifully destroyed, after he had read them, all the letters he received from family and friends, in
accordance with the instructions given by his chain of command." For soldiers who obeyed this
directive, this must, in many cases, have been a tough call. Presumably, this order was to ensure
that the authors at home did not give away operational details from UK such as the locations
of AA sites, Passive Air Defence arrangements, details of munitions and aircraft factories, port
activity and unit deployments," which then might be accessed by the enemy should the soldier
be captured, as indeed, was Private Gilbert.?8
92
TNA WO 167/1433: HQ Force K6, GHR ADAPS, letter APS 3/40, "Correspondence for Indian
Animal Transport Force (K6)' dated 15 January 1940.
It is probable that some members of the AASF and the Air Component made private arangements
for mail to carried on RAF flights returning to the UK, which were then posted to the GPO system.
WOOH, Miscellaneous Q' Services, p.233.
Quoted from Nicholls & Washington, Against All Odds, p.80.
Gilbert, letter dated 19 April 1940.
As the war progressed, the control of the flow of information from the UK became much more
important and the relationship between Fred Gilbert and Kay Hind is a microcosm of this important
issue because she went to serve at Bletchley Park, a fact unknown to the family until after she pased
98
an in 2014 aged 93, ine as ort well Kept. of Korentje in Belgium, whilst defending the Vire
away in 2014 aged 93; it was a secret well kept.
Comines Canal Line, a story told in his unpublished nok, For You the War is Over. Private Gilber
say being shot in the hand as he surrendered, and Second-Lieutenant Prat, ver later avard tic.
MC, whilst Corporal Bennett received the MIMI. Marcus Cuchtle, History of the Royal Waneidin
Regiment, 1919-1945 (London: William Clowes & Sons, 1956), p.44.
Mightier than the Sword
a The Military Forwarding Organization (MFO) controlled by QMG 14 (a) in the War
ti, a om February 1940, Q (Movements) 3 (d) was responsible for the inter-Theatre
-hon of comfort items.00 Shipping space was arranged through the Ministry of War
potor the Government Shipping Agents, Messrs Hogg, Robinson & Capel Cure. MFO
Let to move cases between 15 pounds, the limit for the postal service, and 56 pounds.
alient the War Office controlled ACD, assisted the MFO in meeting this remit
mahirts donations from private or regimental organizations often exceeded the MFO limit
It CHAG war diary highlights the difficulty the PSS had in convincing the offenders
a te game. As in the Great War, the MFO was also responsible for the movement, from
a t of the personal effects of deceased, injured and sick personnel. Soldiers'
are is ached to the relevant regimental Records Offices, whilst officers' effects were
so late liverpol Depot of Messrs Cox and King's. The latter activity proved to be
mistry ragement because Cox and King's, apart from suffering wartime staff
ngs, did not have the facilities available to the War Office for tracing officers' relatives.
mutined Army?
ice to triest st soldiers who were classed as very seriously ill'101 Given that the
ayat a and the BEF was in a military Theatre of Operations, it was a courageous
chin th War Office, and one that was prompted by PSS.02
The concept was not
not, a milar stem had been enacted during the Great War, although in that
in is he CA ich was responsible for patients relatives!04 The scheme only
it rag ta sit if the soldier was in a General Hospital, and it was initiated by
girl ding gam to PROELICAS in London, which then made the necessary
grant it Movement Control to move the relative to France. Visitors arrived at London
to try ca, re rife by the Railway Traffic Officer's staff, and then entrained
(in man airation in the Pield, .8. The FSPB refers to the MPO as the Military
i rati, aly abrated to VSI, was defined by the War Office as a condition of a patient
was of such severity that life was imminently endangered.
Correspondence on
he one te come or odiers whose next of kin had either died, were
at he Coal relatives understood the correct process to make
gut i stin day to returning a soldier to the UK. TNA WO 167/1096: 2 LOC
a Company RASC, WD, entry 13 March 1940, refers for example, to a driver whose daughter
196 London: Macmilan, 1932), p.140.'
