496 A Great Feat of Improvisation
British; like us, they are great organizers!'? It is therefore, the intention of this chapter to correct
this lacuna in the historiography of the BEF and indeed of British military operations.
Planning the Priorities
The War Office was accused of many failures during the Second World War but in planning
and executing the evacuation of the BEF from France, the logistic planners showed nothing but
industry and foresight and logistics, which although not much in the headlines, was of crucial
importance, the tasks at home being different but no less formidable than those in France.
The outcomes were even more remarkable given that the War Office was juggling with eight
dynamic operations, four of which were not connected with the BEF. Whilst operations in
France held centre stage in May and early June, the stunning German advance turned the
attention of the War Office to the increasingly pressing matter of Home Defence. Initially
none of the intelligence agencies* had a firm handle on what the Germans were planning but
strategic wisdom indicated that invasion' was not improbable and that some form of air campaign
was likely to precede it. Overlying the intelligence outputs there was always a suspicion at
many levels of command, which was very understandable given the events in France, that the
Germans might have an innovative surprise in store. An assault from the sky, whether from air
attack, parachutists or air-landed troops, was perceived to be a distinct immediate possibility,
and planning for these situations had a concomitant effect upon the logisticians.
Support to the dispersed Anti-Aircraft (AA) divisions, which were an integral component
of the Air Defence of Great Britain (ADGB)º involved the RAOC furnishing AA personnel
2 The German general was played by Paul Dawkins (1918-1979). See Dad's Army, Columbia Pictures,
1979), pp. 159-190.
5 For a comprehensive explanation of German invasion plans, capabilities and equipment, see, Peter
Schenk, The Invasion of England 1940 (London: Conway Maritime Press, 1990).
6 Air Intelligence initially overestimated Luftwaffe strength and thus its offensive capability.
Perate analyats he ever, assessed that it would treeth ave thus in milenine capability. the
s capable of mounting major operations against the UK from captured bases.
In late
June, low grade SIGINT, the Enigma and Photographic Reconnaissance
were able to confirm this
8 1945, pp. 34-435. This is certainly a subject that would benery froe Rudl.
the Observer Corps, were under command HQ Fighter Command at Bentley Priory; AA Command
was under operational control.
Back in Blighty
497
with Small Arms, 1º so detachments could be given a ground defence role against parachutists,
whilst the RASC AA divisional companies wrestled with the complexities of operating with
impressed lorries" and the growing multiplicity of AA ammunition natures.2'
The rapidly
«panding Home Guard,', driven by the threat of air desant forces, * was another growing
ativity that concerned the logisticians, as the War Office Staff debated who would be responsible
for supporting the new organization.! With the best of the Army's formations returning from
france bereft of equipment,l the reorganization of the Home Defence divisions! became a
priority, whilst a major task was the maintenance of the expanding Army, including quartering,
equipment, unit formation and movement, challenges which were complicated by sustaining
the recruit and trade training of the 275,000 men who joined the colours between June and
August 1940. As if all of these tasks were of insufficient magnitude, there were four additional
perations ongoing or developing. The maintenance and then evacuation, reception, dispersion
and reorganization of the North Western Expeditionary Force (NWEF) from Norwayl8 is a
The War Office released 4,000 LMs and 32,800 rifles from stock for issue to AA units. See, General
Sir Frederick Pile, Ack-Ack: Britain's Defence Against Air Attack during the Second World War (London:
George G Harrap & Co, 1949), p 118.
Upon the outbreak of war in September 1939, the AA Command released many of its War Department
pattern vehicles for service with the BEF and they were replaced with a variety of impressed or hired
equipment. A shortage of spares, the enactment of driver training and some unsatisfactory soldiers,
were just three of the problems faced by the RASC in attempting to effectively support AA operations
In June 1940, AA Command was
ra trans and the 303 ch GiL with 15 inch trace pit rinch do he Bodire)
of an anti-tank round for the 40 mm Bofors. The frustrations he met in pursuing this matter are
summarized in Ack-Ack, p.127. It is surprising though, given the anti-armour performance of the
German 88 m in France, that more attention was not paid to the anti-tank capability of the 3.7 inch.
1S The Home Guard was formed on 17 May 1940 by a Defence Order in Council, as the Local Defence
Volunteers, with the abbreviation L.DV, said by many to stand for Look, Duck, Vanish. Some small!
para-military groups in rural arcas had been informally active well before Eden's radio announcement
on 14 May 1940 and that the Cavernment intended to create an official force was a decision, which
i geared the Bastic, the aprility to deliver light lorces by glider, parachute and aircraft.
Military History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995). Interest in the Home Guard continues to
ground defence commanders were righty concer light foues by glider, porachute and acoat.
The ac many Home to parvent them securing Drop Zones and airfields, c
apability of such forces to prevent them securing Drop Zones and airfields.
For a
I The return of the BEF to the UK, added the manpower strength, but not the combat capability, of 12
Revie, No 124 (UK MOD, Spring 2000), p.69.
Stoneleigh Home Guard Platoon Group in the Defence of Middle England, 1940-1944', British Arm
dions to the Home the eK, aed C mier, BOr, The Eyeue of the United Kingdom, p.119-
or deal of divisional deployments in the UK in May and June 1940, sce, lid, p. 127-134.
Se, T K Derry, BOH, The Campaign in Norway (London, HiMSO, 1952).
