194|
A Great Feat of Improvisation
Base units that formed only on mobilization were planned to receive AFG 109833 equipment
upon arrival in France, a solution almost surely doomed to fail and, when it did, had a directi
and adverse impact upon unit operational outputs.34 Inevitably therefore, logistic coherence
in Base and GLOC units was initially low, and in some cases non-existent, which manifesth
conflicted with the need for a swift crafted entry to France, supported by a resilient GLOC
capable of delivering combat support to the infantry divisions. In this respect, it was fortunate
that logisticians had time to bring order to the organization.
Defence of the Base and the GLOC was embedded in the plan, with the Host Nation leading
on the provision of capability to protect vulnerable points on railways and roads.? The War
Office also provided two infantry battalions for port defence duties at Brest, Cherbourg, Nanter
and Saint Nazaire. 36 Given that the establishment of the Base in the West was driven by the
concern about the perceived effects of air attack,? the British allocated few assets to active
air defence, preferring to rely upon the passive aspects of distance and dispersion to achiere
the effect. 38
For active GBAD the BEF deployed the 3rd Anti-Aircraft (AA) Brigade
but otherwise initially relied upon Host Nation ground and aerial assets, 40 with the French
guaranteeing A A units to defend Brest and Saint Nazaire, " although the seaward flank of potts
on the coast posed a serious challenge for GBAD because of the lack of depth in deploying
AA guns and balloons, 12 One aspect that has not been generally considered is the influence
of Gas Warfare (GW)*3 on the location and operation of the Bases. In April 1940, the BER
GHQ Chemical Warfare (CW) Staff drafted a paper entitled Scale of Gas Attack to which the
33 The AFG 1098 was the Mobilization Stores Table for each type of unit and was suffixed with code.
number and letter (eg 33C) to identify each organization.
34
INA WO 167/51: GHQ Services, Transportation, DG (Tn) dated 11 October 1939, 'Lessons.
35 Plan W4 First Maintenance Project, p.3, para 8.
TNA WO 197/2: First Maintenance Project
36 One battalion was assigned to Brest, with one company detached to Brest. The second batalion wo
Reception of Forces in France and system of maintenance in the initial stages
detailed to Nantes and Saint Nazaire. TNA WO 197/2: Plan W4 First Maintenance Project, pal,
para 24.
38
TNA CAB 106/21: Notes on the 'Organization of the BEF dated 16 January 1942, para 3.
An official record summarized the position: The anti-aircraft defences of the base areas was gight.
The FRENCH originally undertook it, but we hant tackaft defences mately and there was ve it.
protection'.
See TNA CAB 106/211: Notes on the Organization of the BEF* dated 16 January
1944. Dara 14 (111
39 TNA WO 197/2: Plan W4 First Maintenance Project, p. 3, para 9 and Ellis, BOH, The a i Find
and Flanders. p.366
195a resume of RA and French air operations in the period, see, Robert Jackson, Air War Fine.
1939-40 (London: lan Allan, 1974) and in detail, Cornwell, The Battle of France.
Army Council, TNA WO 197/2: Plan W4 First Maintenance Project, p.3, para 9.
FSR, Vol III, Operations - Higher Formations, p. 15.
In 1939, Chemical Warfare (CW) was defined as those aspects concerned with the offensive t
defensive use of gas, incendiary and smoke munition shand aspse defence measures required to poin
British Forces. GW related specifically o humpions, ant those defy operation, yan ai die.
chemical substance, solid, liquid or gas that was playment, in hailitary openis or iran aft, up.
the human body, and this included tear gas a for detail to haVe it, Special Weapons and Tie,
1938), p.2.
Docks and Stocks
weapons, and in particular high and low level spray, were assessed to be the greatest threat to the
BEF's operations, although this analysis was based less on hard evidence of German capability
degraded by the distances, dispersion, air defence assets, pre-attack measures and the weather.
The key concern was GW attacks on the ports, which were relatively easy to find and had
little overhead protection for stocks. Base areas were generally dispersed and more difficult to
identify but initially the shortage of covered accommodation for materiel made them vulnerable
to contamination with blister agents, with rations, especially fresh food, an particular problem.
The initial Base ports of Nantes and Saint Nazaire were each expected to handle 3,000
tons per week but the output was half this figure, which immediately unbalanced the War
Office intention to import 8,000 tons weekly in order to meet daily requirements and build the
planned reserves t6 As it transpired, developing the Base proved to be a much greater challenge
than had been assessed, with insufficient rail facilities, shortage of covered accommodation
and a dearth of labour being the key issues. Suitable buildings for the Base Supply Depots
(BSD) were essential for the preservation of stocks but only 33 percent of the need could be
provisioned, the French civil sector opposing the requisition of additional premises.
The
formation of an ABA was the obvious solution to this problem and the key initiator to do so
Field Service Regulations, which noted that 'If the line of communications is very long, it may
sometimes become necessary to establish the base nearer to the scene of operations? 48
beginning of the deployment and the port was used for berthing the hospital ships, whilst
Le Harve had been used to a limited extent to import personnel and vehicles. The French
hovever, were keen to avoid attracting the attention of the Luftwaffe by greater use of the
Northern Channel Ports and it was October 1939 before the air defence issues were sufficiently
resolved for authority to be granted, although in anticipation of a positive response from the
Host Nation work was begun to establish an ABA in the Le Harve-Rouen-Dieppe Triangle,
TNA WO 193/717: Scale of Gas Attack to which the British Expeditionary Force may be subjected.
1 Pet of this asement was driven by Brtish work on Hiph Level Spray (Hl.S) and latterly on Low
Level Spray (LLS). In 1939, the RAF's Air Delivered Gas Weapons (ADGW) consisted of two generic
variants. Mustard was the chemical of choice for the creation of casualties and the contamination of
47 WOOH, Supplies and Transport, Vol I, pp. 110-111
