514 A Great Feat of Improvisation
haversack rations. As an example of those heady days in late May and early June 1940, the
victuals at Headcorn Station 21 offer an interesting overview. The RASC provided some of
the food, 19 cauldron cookers and 40 soldiers to cook and distribute the hot food, including
beef spit-roasted in trenches, whilst local bakers produced 2,500 loaves daily but it was 50
determined and doughty ladies from Headcorn, 22 who, working in 8 hour shifts for 9 days,
prepared the sandwiches in a barn at Rushford Manor. 23 The food was then carried across
a field, now covered by the houses of Rushford Close to the Up Platform for distribution to
the troops. Headcorn would appear to have missed out on the issue of wax-paper cups, so
the equivalent of 100,000 cups of tea were offered to the troops in large tin cans.
The final
destination of this tea was also catered for, the LNER for example, erected temporary ablutions
on the platforms at Leicester for the use of soldiers on the 242 troop trains, which halted there
during the mid-summer of 1940.
In summary, a no more erudite, although not complete, conclusion to the dispersal operation
can be found, than that written in The Times on Monday 3 June 1940:
More than a word of admiration is due, not only to the staff work which has directed
the miracle, but to the untiring civilian volunteers who have victualled and the railways
which have transported the troops - especially the Southern Railway, which has
conjured up at short notice a smooth and seemingly endless succession of trains and
has lavished upon the emergency its great and peculiar experience in the handling of
masses 124
One interesting food services challenge presented to the staff of ST 4, was the provision of
rations for the 112,000 French troops brought to England. With a little ingenuity, a suitable
ration was assembled with the exception of red wine.
Not being experts in this area, ST 4
sought guidance from the War Office Wine Advisor,25 who arranged for casks of a suitable
vintage to be acquired from suppliers.
Operationally, it was fortunate that the Luftwaffe concentrated their aerial assault on
the port of Dunkerque and the embarkation beaches: attacking the ports areas of Dover
and Ramsgate and some of the key points on the railway system instead, could have caused
great disruption to the operation.
The coastal section between Dover and Folkestone,
and other parts of the network, contained tunnels, 126 cuttings, embankments and
121 Headcorn Station on the South Eastern Railway route from London to Dover was opened in 1842.
It is unlikely that any commuter offers a thought for those nine days in late May and early June 1940
when the village railway station was the scene of such historic drama.
122 In recognition of her work in organizing the refreshment at Headcorn, Mrs Joan Kempthorne was
awarded the BEM.
123 The Manor House in the High Street is extant but sadly the barn has been replaced by housing of
Rushford Close.
124 Nock, Britain's Railways at War: 1939-1945, p.87.
125 By custom, a member of the wine trade acted as the Honorary Advisor to the Director Supplies &
126 There were four major tunnels between Dover and Folkestone: Martello, Abbot's Cliff, Shakespeare
and Arch Cliff.
Back in Blighty 515
wwalls,27 all of which were vulnerable to air delivered weapons, although free-fall bombs,
lich were the only type available in the summer of 1940, were not the most effective systems to
ack precision targets. Nonetheless, a successful strike on a tunnel entrance could have closed
oute 28 causing significant interruption to the schedules.
The production of contingency
as for road movement, to ensure access to the rest of the rail system, were therefore, wise.
level strafing of troop trains had the potential to cause heavy casualties, and with these
ris being very difficult to intercept, might have meant a reversion to night movement only.
th barely eight hours of darkness available, this would have had a massive impact on the
arance of troops from the ports.
The bombing of troop trains in France were infrequent events but potentially very damaging
morale and capability as was clearly exposed at Rennes on 17 June when there 177 British
lities and many wounded.129
Fortunately, the Luftwaffe operations staff had their minds
sed on other matters and with events moving rapidly in France, were unable to seize the
tunity of creating or supporting this campaign. 30 Nonetheless, whilst the strategic position
ld have been unchanged by such action, the operational impact could have considerable.
ale to take trains from the ports, thousands of soldiers would have been camping out in
ins and fields with little equipment and even less sustenance.
No doubt the redoubtable
wives of Kent and Sussex would have stepped forward with tea, sandwiches and plenty of
tout the sight of the remnants of an evacuated Army littering England's green and pleasant
a would not have raised morale. In this respect, the logistic capabilities of the Army and the
sin firmly demonstrated to its citizens that focused and constructive operations were being
darted. The soldiers of 9th Queen's Royal Lancers reflected upon a mix of emotions as they
ailed by train from Plymouth to Warminster: 'All Ranks were pleased and surprised to see
ing crowds lining the railway almost without a break as long as it was daylight: we felt like
is utile remembered we were part of a defeated army...131
e was more time to plan the recovery of the units returning by Operations AERIAL and
WE with the nine arrival ports spread from Liverpool in the North-West to Southampton
* South coast. The execution of the plan also had, generally, a more leisurely approach than
porting Operation DYNAMO as the 9th Queen's Royal Lancers discovered:
577
Hip track subsidence in the section between Abbor's Cliff and Shakespeare Tunnels closed the route
In the period Saturday 25 May-Tuesday
18 June 1940, the Luftwaffe mounted, mainly at night, a
mber of uncoordinated and sporadic raids with small numbers of aircraft. The targets, mostly in th
na a in dad ariadic or is wist a all as, and although several residential propertica
velor damaged, the railay or indu sa lorea, and altauan sevoral residential propertic
aid, see, Winston G Ramsey (ed) To potem was not the focus of attack. For a dany tain Print
national Limited, 1987), pp 96-98.
hight t in Queen's Royal Lancers, 1936-1945, p.23.
