176 A Great Feat of Improvisation
Split Equipment Support responsibilities were a feature of the pre-war Army, although it was
obvious to many logisticians that with an increasingly technical Army, radical reforms wouldbe
necessary to ensure combat capability. In this respect, 'Cap-Badge politics' had an adverse effect
in delivering a different approach, with for example, the RASC, a mature Corps in the forefront
of combat logistics that had refined its machinery, understandably reluctant to handover it
internal Equipment Support capability to another organization.
Equally, the Corps of Royl
Engineers was determined to retain the specialist integrated railway Equipment Support
assets, and unlike the RASC, successfully defended its corner, although different imperatives
influenced the outcomes. As the motorization and mechanization of the Army progressed, the
centralization of the vehicle repair and stores systems was a natural corollary, but the concept!
was overrun by the complexities and dynamics of the rearmament and expansion programmes
thus delaying the formation of the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (REME) until
1942. From the BEF perspective, a transformation of the Equipment Support arrangement
would certainly have been of benefit, but the timing of the delivery would have been crucial to
minimize disruption to output.
In summary, given the hand, which they were dealt, the logisticians proved to be remarkably
adept in delivering the requirement, although the inadequate production of spares from
industry proved to be consistent complication.
Base structures and systems, whilst sometimes
roughly hewn, gradually became more robust as constant daily practise ironed out the wrinkles,
soldiers gained 'On the Job' experience and innovation started to emerge. As time progressed,
logisticians began to feel confident with 'Scale, whilst relearning the importance of detail and
delivering right first time'. By early May 1940, the Base was ready to effectively support combi
operations and did so, although had the Germans not invaded, it is probable that senior logistic
officers would have progressively turned their attention from effectiveness to efficiency to ensure
that resources were not squandered, 52 but it took manoeuvre operations to reinforce the pict
that the Base had to integrate agility with capacity.
Leakers and Fillers
The supply of Petrol Oil and Lubricants to the BEF
152 The importance of the War on Waste is brilliantly exposed in an Open Circular entite Enmili.
1 Corps ADOS, I Corps CRO 30 dated 5 December 1939.
1l Rank oned by Brigadier J C Hasted OBE MCpuse din a On CiColas. T/NA WO 16714.
Inter-War Developments
A critical, if not the defining task, in the supply of the BEF was the provision of Petroleum,
Oil and Lubricants (POL) for its motorized and mechanized army, without which, the capital
invested to create mobility was effectively worthless!' In comparison to ammunition, in which
there was an increasingly strong Defence investment in industrial production and military
storage infrastructure, the War Office was able to utilize commercial facilities in UK to deliver
the storage and turnover of POL stocks and reserves,? thereby driving down costs, whilst
diering capability. Indeed, in creating what was thought to be a cheap, effective and tactically
Rexible fuel distribution based upon the non-returnable disposal tin can, excessive parsimony
led to the introduction of one that that was logistically fragile, fraught with safety issues, created
a major requirement for manual labour and upon the deployment of the BEF, required the
employment of new capital equipment to ensure resilience.
The logistics of providing petroleum support for motorized and mechanized forces was the
subject of many debates during the late 1920s and early 1930s, with the RASC at the forefront
if the proces, a though the RE played an increasingly significant role in constructing and
maintaining, sometimes in conjunction with contractors, bulk fuel installations in the Base
and at Rear Aerodromes, and to a lesser extent in the corps areas? Of particular significance,
is the growing demand for petroleum products as cavalry regiments and infantry battalions
vite mechanized during the 1930s, the dynamism being highlighted by a 1934 Royal Engineer
manual highlighting that the acreage and tonnage quoted in it for a bulk petrol depot might
Be inadequate in any particular case?* In 1930, an infantry division required 6,400 gallons
1 QNG ) in the War Office was also responsible for planning the acquisition, transportation and
King a Pol product for this porced ine deployment of the A..
Air Component of the BEF and RAF assets from Fighter
Army Counci, Military Enginering, Val VII, Accommodation and Installations, p.21.
