SS0|
A Great Feat of Improvisation
and maintenance in BSAs.
The intermediate element was a Main Line component, which
might consist of several allocated routes usually operated by SNCF. The third element was
the Railhead Sub-Area (RSA) usually consisting of a Regulating Station to control the flow
of traffic and several railheads in the Corps Rear Area, often allocated to task: pack supplies,
petroleum products, ammunition, engineer stores and ambulance trains. Operations forward of
these corps' railheads were usually the responsibility of the Host Nation during the deployment
phase but were assigned to a BEF RCO*0 or ROC once active operations had commenced. "
This enabled railheads to be pushed forward to the divisional rear areas if the logistic situation
demanded it and the tactical scenario allowed it.
Civil Railway Engineering
In a re-run of the deployment of the BEF to France in 1914, the SNCF initially handled all
British Army traffic and was responsible for maintaining and upgrading the private and SNCP
sidings used by the BEF, either using SNCF staff or through contract. 12 The BEF focus was
therefore, on constructing rail access to depots with most of these works being conducted by
the RE or civilian contractors supervised by them, with the exception of the switches and
signalling for connections to the French network, which was a SINCF responsibility 43 Railvay
infrastructure design and assessment was vested in two railway survey companies, * whilst
construction was the responsibility of the RCC supported by AMPC labour and occasionally
supplemented by RE general construction companies. Whilst RCCs could deliver construction
and repair capability in the combat environment, AMPC and Host Nation civilian labour was
critical to the progression of major projects and effective in increasing output in smaller ones.
The construction of railway facilitiest to support British military and air operations was a very
significant task that continued to expand throughout the period of the BEF's deployment, with
SNCF and French Army engineering assets supplementing British resources.
Tracks Across France
331
39 A railhead is a transhipment point between rail and another type of transport, In 1940, a railhead ve
defined as a point on the railway along the line of advance or withdrawal that was deemed to be the
terminus for rail operations and at which transhipment to another mode of transportation was enacted;
this was usually by WMT: By doctrinal definition therefore, points along the railway at which unit
trew personnel, material, supplies and ammunition were not railheads. See, Army Council, Military
401
Engineering, Vol VIII, Railways, p.97.
n May 1940, the task was given to 153 ROC' SR because the Regular unit, 8 RCO was, in late Ap
940, withdrawn from France to the UK, in anticipation of a deployment to Norway, which the
matured. TNA WO 167/906: 8 RCO, WD.
Memorandum of the Agreements concluded with the Delete Comicion Control de SNCF
GHQ Transportation Service
NA WO 167/51: GHQ Transportation Service
The 29th, a Regular company and 165th, a Reserve unit.
For a contemporary resume of the technical aspects see Arm Council. Military Enainarina Vol VIl.
Railways and QMG, Notes on Military Engineering, Part 1, Survey and Part II, Enginering (War Ofice,
PD Ritay Dama. Training did not always mature as planned. A toppled self-propelled steam
come a icil in he LMR. Repair and re-railing skills learned in the inter-war period were
invaluable during operations in France. (RICM: A2/MT/RLCAB/0001918/1)
Te car port or works vas establishing the Transportation Stores Depots (TSD),
S a reines, constructing rail spurs and sidings to serve the expanding Base
ops, rig opal i digs for ambulance trains and lastly, installing feeder lines to the
to raid i othern France to enable the delivery of the thousands of tons of sand,
agit and cement needed to complete these RAF infrastructure projects for which the
- ng he , was responsible. These tasks required such prodigious quantities of
cit tim met as the only meaningful solution and had the additional benefit
i to titak a complete the railvay could be used to deliver munitions,
ter tapi. at tetaly not least, was the repair of BEF and SNCF railway
Kis aged by acident or enemy action.
- in i he fesosa cal for which, the Corps is renown, started work in short
i pay it taylor companies of the AMPC. 150 RCC commenced
1 of Rail Served Depots at Appx to Chp 12 summarizes the key projects.
he no time a prof his ask was the need to have sufficient WMIT
