310
A Great Feat of Improvisation
accessing telephonic and telegraphic services to conduct commercial business, the concept of not
being able to rapidly communicate with the 'movers and shakers' was completely alien to them;
these officers and those in GHQ Petrol from the oil industry were a particular example, brought
the paucity and fragility of the BEF's communication systems into sharp relief." In the Base,
communications relied mainly upon the Host Nation civil telephone and telegraph networks,
supported by local military field systems at depots and docks, which were often supplemented
by the bicycle to enable inter-personal action. DRs were an essential component of the logistic
communication matrix, ensuring the relatively rapid distribution of detailed written orders and
information, supported by the Army Postal Service, which was rather slower. At the tactical
level, the issues were worse, with, for example, RASC Troop Carrying Companies (TCC)"
not being routinely issued with wireless equipment, which given the critical role of the TCC in
mobile operations, was a failure that significantly eroded operational flexibility.
Developing the relationship with the Host Nation at every appropriate level was critical to the
logistic capability of the BEF. Strategically, given the logistic lay-down and the BEF's limited
WMT and fuel resources, the deployed corps relied almost completely upon SNCF to provide
the rail transportation at 3rd Line that was vital to sustaining the Force on the Franco-German
border, although as the Advanced Base developed, the rail resources required to support the
BEF reduced.
Co-ordination with the Host Nation was essential to secure the additional
infrastructure needed to expand capacity,' and to move to new sites offering improved access to
railheads or enhanced productivity.60 There was also the question of resolving real estate legacy
issues, relating to access to port and storage facilities, which had emerged during the deployment
phase."1 Relations between the BEF's logisticians and their Host Nation counterparts were
generally professional, usually cordial and, when time permitted, especially social, although
inevitably, the competition for resources sometimes generated creative tension. Language was
sometimes the greatest barrier, especially at unit or sub-unit level, unless liaison officers with
the appropriate linguistic skills had been appointed. Some units were fortunate to have officers
and soldiers whose knowledge of French enabled technical logistic business to be discussed,
with OC 2 DPC being particularly fortunate in employing a Driver Ferrari of the RASCas
interpreter.63
November and December 1939 were months of consolidation for the logisticians. The priority
was to ensure the wheel kept turning in delivering the Maintenance Project Plan (MP),"
57
TNA WO 167/1076: GHQ Supply (Petrol), WD, entries, September 1939 - May 1940.
Each GHQ Troops TC was capable of lifting 225 tries, September 193 maMay 1940 sonnel of an
infantry brigade with each section carrying one infantry battalion, the TCC could be allocated to
divisions for specific operations.
See Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 1, p. 154, WEIII/1931/44/1.
For an engaging analysis of the BE's communications systems, 01, a 154, kof/em, sec, Smalley, The
British Expeditionary Bore, 1939-40, pat-un. the impreof tragile communications upon logistic
operations both in the Base, and at corps level, is certainly worthy of exploration.
INA WO 167/1168: 1 BOD/2 dated 22 September 1939
TNA WO 167/1076: GHQ, Supply Directorate (Petrol), WD, 12 November 1939.
TNA WO 167/1115: 1 BSD RASC, WD, September 1939
The son of Ranieri and Pia, T252233 Daniele Ferrari hailed from Leyton in Essex. He was killed on
28 May 1945 as a result of an accident Italy.
TNA WO 167/212: 2 DPC RASC, WD, entry 26 October 1939
64
TNA WO 197/2: First Maintenance Project: Reception of Forces in France and system of maintenance
in the initial stares
Sharpening the Sword
311
Pil. riftin Construction. Whilst not on the Gort Line in France but on the GHQ Stop B
Lie a Raham Surrey (SU 866463), this FW 3/28 pillbox for a 2 pounder anti-tank gun
Dates te at of material and labour required for construction, often in locations with poor
transportation access. Photographed in 2002. (Author)
tina fused on importing sufficient stocks to sustain the BEF, whilst building the vital
i tea a res amunition, fuel, supplies, equipment, stores, vehicles and spares
/pain maor combat operations. The provision of rations was the most stable of these
in ut s. reson were fixed. With no combat consumption, ammunition
sit in in receptions, continued to rise, with only training issues, banned batches
(dogs mind dain on the inventory. Deteriorating munitions however, plagued
i pricularly during the winter because much of the ammunition was stored in field
c can, a mute or mangement, climatic conditions and non- waterproof
nice ca coat to ammunition oving through the reverse supply chain
i cat in do, pot campaign report observing that, Much had to be
can cut a age caused by carelessness or ignorance. "s
MI CAB 106235, BE Ammunition Supply (Gibson Report), .10.
