Nomenclature
Armed Services. The Armed Services are always spelt thus, Royal Navy (RN), Am
Royal Air Force (RAF).
Army Forms. Army Forms are abbreviated to AF, followed by a letter descriptor and a nur
for example, AF G1098. The spacing of the form designator in publications and
varies, so to create consistency references to Army Forms are shown thus, eg AFG 10
British Expeditionary Force Organization and Order of Battle.
The six volume ser
Alan Philson has been abbreviated in the footnotes to BEFORBAT, quoting the rel.
Capitalization. Capitalization has been applied to named units, for example 5 Dirt
Ammunition Company and types of unit that are abbreviated in the text, for ins
Army Field Workshops (AFW). Generic units not in these categories, such as int
battalion, field regiment, ordnance company or ammunition park use lower cas,.
confusion might result, for example, divisional train, a RASC unit and not a railva a
thus shown as Divisional Train.
Dunkerque. The French spelling of Dunkerque is used in preference to the English Du
which is a village between Canterbury and Faversham in Kent.
The exception to
descriptor is where 'Dunkirk' is quoted from documents and books or is used by orga
tions in titles, for example Dunkirk Veterans Association and the Dunkirk Memoria
Formations and Units. In the text formations are described in full, for example 5th Din
In the tables and maps, symbology is used to create clarity. The BEF as an Army ish
as XXXX; Corps, XXX; Division, XX and Brigade, X.
Base is always spelt upper
whilst corps and divisions use lowercase unless specified, for example II Corps or R.
Army Service Corps, or are a title, for example Divisional Ammunition Compe
are shown thus in an original document. The following nomenclature has ben uit
throughout the work, except where contemporary document references are quote dad.
different. Examples shown:
Army - by number: Third.
Corps - Roman numerals: III Corps.
Division - number and where appropriate role: 1st Armoured Division.
Brigade - number and where appropriate role or title: 4th Infantry Brigade.
Units (Cavalry & Infantry) - by number and abbiele: 4ch ite: 10th Hussars or Sia
Norfolks.
Units (Artillery) - by number and title: 7th Field Regiment.
Units - (Engineer & Logistics) - number and title:
RASC
522 Ammunition Company
xxxiv
Nomenclature
хХХи
RAF Wings and Squadrons - Number and title: 12 (Bomber) Squadron.
RAF logistic units - by number and title: 28 Maintenance Unit.
Nationality - assumed to be British unless noted: 1st (Canadian) Division.
Field Service Pocket Book. After introduction, the Field Service Pocket Book, 1938, is abbre-
viated to FSPB. Although the base document publication is date 1938, the supporting
pamphlets were issued dated 1939 or 1940.
Gort. John Standish Surtees Prendergast Vereker, 6th Viscount VC GCB CBE DSO & Two
Bars MVO MC (1886-1946) is referred to as Viscount or General Gort unless referenced
documents use Lord.
Gross Vehicle Weight. The term 'Gross Vehicle Weight' which was used in 1939-40 has now
been replaced by 'Maximum Authorised Mass' but to ensure continuity of historical accu-
racy, the former terminology is used throughout the manuscript.
History of the Second World War. The British Official History of the Second World Word
published for sale by HMSO is abbreviated after introduction to the series to BOH (British
Official History).
Line of Communication. When reference is made to the Line of Communication in the main
text or footnotes, the abbreviation LOC is used, except where it is in reference to a contem-
porary document eg HQL of C Movements 22/4 dated 5 May 1940. To provide clarity
GLOC is used to describe the Ground Line of Communication and SLOC, the Sea Line
of Communication.
Logistic Units. Logistic units, including Royal Engineer units undertaking logistic tasks, are
shown initially in full but are then abbreviated. For example, 8 Railway & Construction
Company is 8 RCO and 3 Base Ammunition Depot, 3 BAD. The Divisional RASC units,
eg 5th Divisional RASC are shown as units without the 'th', thus 5 Division RASC. BEF
Corps logistic units are identified thus eg II CAP rather than 2 CAP, to prevent confusion
with Divisional elements.
Numerics. Numbers are written from Zero to Nine in letters and then 10 in numbers. The
exception is where confusion might result. For example, 55 divisions might be interpreted
as 55 Division and thus is written as fifty-five divisions and to provide clarity, for distance
a decimal is used eg 2.5 miles, whilst for time, a fraction, eg 2½ days.
Operations Record Book. In the footnotes, the Operations Record Book of RAF headquar-
ters, organizations and squadrons is abbreviated to ORB. The ORB comprises two parts.
RAF Form 540: 'Summary of Events' and Form 541: 'Details of work carried out? In addi-
tion, appendices may also be present including operational orders, administrative instruc-
tions, miscellaneous reports and telegraphic messages.
Publication location. Official Publications that were not intended for public purchase or access
are not ascribed a Place of Publication.
These documents were almost exclusively published
under the auspices of HMSO, Air Ministry or the War Office.
Ranks. Upper case is used for ranks referring to individuals, for example Corporal Smith or
appointments, thus Major-General Administration but lower case for non-specific refer-
ences. To conform to the convention of the period, hyphens are used in specific ranks, for
example, lieutenant-colonel, except in relation to modern authors or where the contempo-
rarv document differs from it
Ships. The names of ships, whether naval or merchant are shown in italics, eg HMS Rochester
or SS Clewbay.
