512 A Great Feat of Improvisation
the roster. After concluding that the focal point of the operation would be Redhill Junction, 108
the Southern Operations staff, led by their Superintendent of Operations, Mr Wheeler, decided
to centre the key logistic tasks of coaling and watering at Redhill Junction Yard. This in turn
produced some interesting problems, not least of which, was the need for additional coal trains
to service the bunkers, and wagons to collect 300 tons of ash. Approximately 450 loaded trains
passed through Redhill Junction in nine days, 10' each of which, because of the layout of the site,
required a second engine at the rear of the train. 10 Add to this the empty stock movements,
special coal trains and shunting operations, it is easy to see how much of the railway operation to
support Operation DYNAMO was hidden from the military planners' view. There was also the
task of salvage and refuse collection from the halte-repas stations where the tracks were strewn
with wax cups and grease-proof paper and the platforms piled with cardboard and wooden boxes.
A Word of Admiration
The rapid influx of 300,000 British troops and another 147,000 Allied personnel to the United
Kingdom posed major challenges to the food services staff of the RASC. As the soldiers poured
ashore from the evacuation ships, catering became a crucial activity because many of the troops
had not consumed a substantial meal for several days. With the remit to ensure that the move of
the BEF from the SEP was executed expeditiously, any plan to provide hot food on the dockside,
or to halt trains for long periods for the purpose of victualling, would have created unacceptable
risks and delays. Supplies & Transport (ST) 4, the Staff branch in the War Office, responsible
for designing and issuing the food services plan, generated a simple but effective two-phase
operation.
The first part was buffet feeding at ports but with the provision that trains must
not, under any circumstances, be delayed. " The second component was the 'feeding stations',
an idea, which had been successfully enacted during the deployment of the BEF in France. 14
stations were designated as 'feeding halts' called halte-repas"? and time was allocated in the rail
schedule for the train to stop for a sufficient period for each soldier to be issued with a haversack
ration. The typical meal consisted of sandwiches, containing meat, cheese or jam, a meat or fruit
pie, a hard-boiled egg, fresh fruit, plus cigarettes and matches. 13 In some places, the local fare
included rolls, sausages, jellied veal and sardines, with the food being carried on large wooden
electric or electric. Sections of the SR commuter network were electrified in 1940 but it was steam that
108 For the
was the mainstay of motive power during the operation.
junction diagram, see, Harman & Nichols, Atlas of the Southern Railway, p.89, Map 64A -
Redhill & South Surrey Enlargements.
109 Tatlow, Return from Dunkirk, lists all the trains, which ran through Redhill Junction. The first was
Dover to Fleet arriving Redhill, Monday 27 May at 0952 and departing 1003. The last, on Tuesday 4
June, ex-Folkestone to Tidworth, arrived at 1625 and departed at 1634.
110 Traine eat ar baked locomotive coupled at the and departed i tea See Arin: 2p, a comprive
engine is defined as Assisting. See Royal Corps of Transport
Evacuation from France.
112 TNA WO 197/134: Evacuation from France and Quartering of the BEF - Activities of DST in the
Evacuation from France.
113 TNA WO 197/134: Evacuation from France and Quartering of the BEF - Activities of DST in the
Evacuation from France.
Back in Blighty
513
kers trays or pulled on platform trolleys. Water for tea was obtained from the water columns
vated at stations to fill locomotive tenders, with the tea served from large urns on the platforms.
he lite detail, and in logistics the devil is always in the detail, which could have been a show-
ipper, was most fortuitously not overlooked; the provision of cups. Most of the troops had lost
eir utensils, but a thoughtful individual had arranged for the acquisition and distribution of
upaper cupsl14 and where no cups were available, the tea was often served in tins.
The Army contribution to catering at halte-repas was undertaken by staff and students from
itary catering schools'15 but they were ably assisted by many volunteers from numerous
gnizations, 16 their numbers swelled by the many house-wives living line-side, who, seeing the
ration blossom at the bottom of their gardens, soon integrated themselves into the ORBAT.
hit much of this was spontaneous, there had been precedent in early September 1939 during
planned much larger evacuation of children from the cities, involving the movement by
in 3,823 trains of 1,334,358 people," when many voluntary bodies had been involved in
iding refreshments en-route. Sifting through the analysis of many campaigns however, it
Kfult to find a finer example of 'Unity of Effort' from so many different organizations,
so little time to prepare and relatively few written orders. To assist this great endeavour,
AFT provided 120,000 bags of fruit and chocolate, whilst many commercial companies also
de valuable contributions, often in conjunction with public donations. At Addison Road and
dock Wood, Horlicks of Slough issued supplies of malted milk, whilst at Basingstoke, where
oficial system was initially baulked by a funding problem, the publicly spirited citizens
kad 500,18 of which, the staff of the Thornycroft Works contributed €100; a major catering
ration was then mounted, which included 100 ladies, the local fire brigade, Rotarians and
uch members.
ion sch as Basingstoke, Headcorn, Paddock Wood and Tonbridge were, for a short
i, bereft of their commuters!"' and became places of frenetic military, catering and railway
ity, the likes of which, have rarely been seen before or since 20 The pressure the refreshment
is were under can be assessed from the timings allocated at a halte-repas; a train of 600
would draw in, and there would be eight minutes in which to serve refreshments and the
The are seen in many of the contemporary photographs.
Six teams of instructors and students and supporting catering equipment were deployed. Four from
the London School of Cookery and two from the Emergency Cookery Training Centre at Guildford.
Exacuation from France.
INA WO 197/134: Evacuation from France and Quartering of the BEF - Acted stora.
These included the Woman's Voluntary Serion /WUS) the Britich Red Crose the Salvation Arms
and the YMCA. Although there is no specific reference to them in the files consulted in the TNA the
ming taft the raila hem is nos pif aference to them in the operatin
Paced on the RPI this equates to €26,820 in 2018.
hilst not all passenger services were cancelled, there was inevitably disruption. Notices, which would
- anita to the 215t eury rainera traveller appeared at many stations
The notices at Redhill read:
Saturday 1st June.
celled. Buses will be provided between Redhill & Tonbridge Redhill & Guildford
The train service between Rechill & Tonbridge & Rechill & Reading are sic
- but the ci may ed between Ry telling Darwin, War on the Line, p. 28-30, o pe bive
factivity at an one station muet have been ho the do marte of an estimated 40.000 mal
on York Station in the few hours following the Papal Visit in 1982.
577
505
12
