524|
A Great Feat of Improvisation
The lessons to be learned from the evacuation from the area south of the River Somme
after the 10th June 1940, with special reference to the possibility of whether the
evacuation of arms, equipment, vehicles and stores, both of the fighting formations and
on the lines of Communication, could reasonably have been increased under existing
circumstances, and to report.23
The Fall Guy
Given the dramatic events which were occurring, one might have thought the efforts of the
Staff might have been better spent on anti-invasion or reconstitution planning but identifying
key lessons from what was seen by some as more of a shambles than a success, demanded an
appropriate investigation. The Committee thus proceeded with its work,24 and fortunately for
historians produced a comprehensive report given resources and time, although the pressure
of events soon told on the members' time and energy, an issue compounded by the maritime
officials only attending the later meetings and the colonel being posted, leaving only Lieutenant-
General Howard and Brigadier Dendy to conduct the task. Surprisingly, the Committee pulled
no punches, being highly critical of the War Office and HQ LOC, before placing culpability
firmly on the shoulders of the GOC LOC, Lieutenant-General Karslake.
The Committee's
focus was the fact that he had failed to execute his instructions, namely: 'You will prepare
plans ... for the evacuation of personnel and important stores, to prevent them from falling
into enemy hands' 25 That plans were initiated and enacted is clear because despite all the chaos
and confusion, significant stocks of material were evacuated to the UK, whilst considerable
numbers of vehicles and stores reached the docks but were abandoned on the quayside. If
the charge was based on the 'you will prepare plans ..., then arguably the Committee was
probably on strong grounds because it appears that Karslake had little, if any, positive influence
on their development or execution, if only because of the many other distractions in which
he was embroiled 26 The instructions Karslake received on appointment were clear but the
developing situation quickly overtook them and the logisticians and the Staff were never able
to square the circle.
In general, the Staff were remarkably pro-active, but they and the logistic units were often
thwarted by changes in strategic direction. Given a clear mission to evacuate and the provision
of sufficient shipping, there is every probability that much larger quantities of materiel could
have been returned to the UK, although labour and transportation? in France would probably
the Ministry of Shipping. Captain J C Masterman, later Chairman of the Twenty Committee co-
23
ordinating the information being fed to the German intelligence agencies, was the Secretary.
TNA WỎ 33/2384: Report on the Committee on the Evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force
from French Ports', hereafter, Howard Committee Report.
24 The Howard Committee interviewed or took written
n evidence from 53 officers, who, in contrast to the
more senior ranl.a
interviewed by the Bartholomew Committee, were generally ranked between colonel
TWO 32: 3/23 me Cer: eRe, An of Lines of Communiction,
For an examination of the challenges Karslake faced, see the examination by his eldest son, Karslake,
1940: The Last Act.
The decreasing out-turn of SNCF was noted by the Howard Committee. TNA WO 33/2384: Howard
Committee Report, Appx B, Ammunition, Petrol, Ordnance Stores, Supplies, para 5b.
Reflection and Retrospect
525
01 Remembering the Logisticians
19. 50th (Northumbrian) Division
ISC 60th anniversary mobilization
moration dinner invitation card.
(Author
50th, NORTHUMBRIAN
ROYAL
IT
DIVISION,
T. A.
SERVICE CORPS
60 th
Anniversary
been the constraining factor;
ocal missions, with a main effort,
Dinner
sential to effective and successful
operations. 28
Lieutenant-
-al Brooke, recently returned from
ras Commander of the 2nd BEF,
shred the growing mania about
522 Ammunition
Sue on 20 June: 'Apparently the
hat we did not get off more stores
524 Supply
Col
552 Horse Cavalry
Brest is now looming far larger
the fact that if I had followed out
or wishes at the start they would
st both the Canadian and 52nd
sons besides all stores and L of C
rel Whatever the facts, the
149 Field
150 Field Ambulance
FRIDAY 3' SEPTEMBER 1999
«d Committee must though, have
7. 30 p. m.
LONDESBOROUGH BARRACKS
lie to a bubbling witch's brew
LONDESBOROUGH STREET
ling a political hot potato and
HULL
de, an ex-India 'dugout'3 was a
at a pendable scapegoat. That he was never called to give evidence is perhaps an
tor of where the tide was Howine for him vat it wae the came tense that carried Bento
stingy but perhaps not surprisingly, the Committee did not restrict its investigation to
is strid in the TOR, stating that, Failure to make full use of the respite between
o a June 10 was the main atuse for the abandonment of so much equipment?? This
t had all the hall mask of 20/20 vision but also the use of the term 'respite'
simpso that the Base had few tasks to conduct when preparations were in train to
a porth three corps in the BEF when the LOC was re-established. Once it was
ired to all officers in the category, with many bringing critical military experience and specifi
he sonal and management expertise, to the Army and the BEF.
an- General Sir Alan Brent KES, the Armyewed by the Howard Committee. TNA
0 372384: Howard Committee Report, Appx A, Officers Interviewed by the Committee
LINO 3234 Card on Repet, Apt, para TV, Salvage of Equipment.
