A Great Feat of Improvisation
Operation FLANNELFOOT
387
Pramp had become another Channel supply port.? Frustrated by the continuing debate, DSD
W wrote a stinging note, in which he expressed his view that there were no major difficulties
a moving this stuff" and that shipment should commence at the earliest opportunity, a point
rinforced by the Deputy Director Military Operations.58 In this, he was supported by the
Caretary of State," who was becoming increasingly concerned about the slow rate at which
SV would arrive in France and abandoning a little of the previous caution, stated that: The
i must be taken owing to the vital importance of our army being equipped for defensive [ie
talatory purposes.60 The result of this lengthy discussion was that full identification and
eard markings were removed from all crates and boxes, although the shells, bombs and SCIs
rained their grey paint.61 Asset tracking however, remained a key issue and at Air Ministry
istence he SCis had a blue band painted around the case with a stencilled shipping code,
rich was tagged to a SCI serial number denoting the SCI type, the agent, and the factory
i do charging. In the covering letter of a SECRET annex, the Ministry reinforced the
aprace of matching the serial numbers to the ships codes: 'It is essential that these weapons
aud not lose their identity and normal markings should be restored at the earliest opportunity
sistent with the maintenance of security 62 The arguments under-pinning this long running
that were though, lucidly exposed four years later In Italy on 2 December 1943.63 The normal
triatin and hazard markings for a SCI crate are shown below. The colour of the crate was,
i in it he convention, grey. HIMF/R was the abbreviation for the charging factory,
P14.1 A Significant Logistic Risk? Newhaven Harbour was utilized for the dispatch of GW weapons
and the receipt of the BEF's hospital carriers. Photograph taken in 2002. (Author)
involves the risk of casualties, but this must be accepted. Stevedores must however, be warned
that they are handling dangerous matrial!"S In addition, he believed that all markings must be
obliterated during transit but that the captain of the ship must be informed of the cargo. Director
Movements took a different view. He believed that SW must be marked, every ship and train
should have a decontamination squad, special ships should be used for transit to France, soldiers
should replace stevedores, and that all those involved in SW storage and movement should carry
their respirators in the 'Alert Position. DMI argued that this would give the game away, so
he suggested that the decontamination squads and their equipment should remain out of sight
unless they were required to clear a spill.
Director Movements replied, noting that in his opinion, the French decision to allow only
Fecamp to be used to in-load SW stocks would arouse herman interest. " DSD (W) then trod
on Director Movements turf by proposing that other materiel be brought in, to indicate that
TO YO 193/716: Despatch of Gas and Equipment to the BEF; Note in MO4 B/M 1/182 dated 14
November 1939.
Treme: 192/16: Despatch of Gas and Equipment to the BEF. Note in M04 B/M 1/182 dared 14
- tre mut have been some compromise on this point because according to a post-war Wan Ofice
graph, ammunition, to the sum of 18,000 tons was received into the port at Fecamp, much of
hich came through Newhave WOOH, Movements, p.201, Annex D to Chp 10 -
Approximate
Tomage of Stores Shipped to France for the BEE, September 1939 - June 1940.
do cast man medical evacuation reception port in the LUK for the BEF did not prevent its use
r che ta-shipment of conventional and gas munitions.
TV NO 193/16: Co Entise and (MOST SECRET) dated 15 November 1939.
L No 1el/721: Chemical Warfare, Strategy XIli: Gas Policy and Despatch of Supplies, Note
WОН, Моеь, p. 8, Novem In December 1939, it was at Newhaven that the first shipment of
tom MO & P BM of 13 November 1939.
a bit wa bad he cures in December 199, econ with the cargo being so successful that
ng d to nov the nature of the stores they were handling
TNA AIR 35/131: Holding of Gas Weapons (Policv), Air Ministry S.2187/DDWO dated 13 April
On this date, a German air attack on the Italian port of Bari illustrated the hazards of failing to
or t cret thort at of the lealia patel for, a major chemical spill from a ship or
- Amongst the many ties khe olived, vas th
4 100 tons of 2,000 American M47A1 Mustard bombs. Those who me fon harvey, with a wer
American Liberty Ship John Harvey, with a cargo
ng the raid, and as the contents of the bombs were released, no alarm was given, and the
nyu in dus the contink on. the hong the etion, over 1,00 Alied milary peby thi
The Battle Magazine No 79 (Plaistow: Battle of
