286
A Great Feat of Improvisation
early October for winter items and although stocks were dispatched from UK, a perfect storm
started to brew with withdrawals of summer clothing which needed to laundered and stored,
clashing with receipts and issues of winter clothing.
These initial shortages were so acute that
some soldiers, even in regular divisions, deployed wearing the 1922 Pattern Service Dress.8
The effective prosecution of these tasks was complicated by insufficient suitable storage and no
time to generate a sustainable issue plan, a scenario exacerbated by the failure to provision a
BEF military laundry capability when it deployed to France, the necessary equipment being
awaited from production. Hastily arranged local contracts were therefore, the only solution,"
although the Royal Engineers were capable of constructing a suitable facility and installing the
equipment and supporting utilities.?1
From an organizational perspective, the most prolific users of the service were the Dieppe
Medical Base Sub-Area (MBSA) and the general hospitals, although the Returned Stores Depot,
which handled considerable quantities of clothing, also required support. With little available
commercial capability accessible in the Main Base Areas and the transport arrangements
adding to turn-round times, a laundry in Rouen was contracted to support the MBSA, washing
200,000 pieces weekly. Another laundry in Le Harve delivered a similar output, whilst smaller
laundries were either contracted or staffed with RAOC personnel.?2 In early January 1940,
the GHQ Ordnance Directorate began planning for the seasonal withdrawal of approximately
1.6 million items of winter clothing including woollen underwear, leather jerkins, greatcoats,
sheepskin-coats, third blankets and Boots, Rubber (Knee &t Thigh), all of which required
cleaning and maintenance in preparation for storage and future reissue? Selected to undertake
this task was the largest of the dry cleaning companies in Paris, Blanchisseries et Teintureries de
France located at Boulogne - Billancourt, a suburb of Western Paris and equipped with moder
plant.* Clothing arrived by rail at a siding adjacent to the works, and although the commercial
company undertook all the dis-infection, cleaning and repair operations, which was extended to
web equipment, a RAOC Laundry Detachment of 26 was responsible for conducting checkson
standards and controlling all receipts and issues at the ras responsible for conducting cupation
of Paris became imminent, all the stocks of clothing and equipment were rendered unusable by
the application of caustic soda. 75
68
Division 167/364 HQ th Infantry Brigade, WD, entry 15 October 1939, 9th Bied was in bod
Division, II Corps, Ellis, BOH, The War in France and Flanders, p. 362.
69 Some items, notably woollen gloves, were not available for general Christmas issue. WOOH, Ordant
Services, D.145
70
Local laundry facilities in Nantes had been recorded in No 2 Key Plan from information deind
durn the reconnaissance in September 193 ceasi ira pie Cy Papa i was malan focused
WOOH, Ordnance Services, p.147.
1940 WO 197/42: Saar Force Administration, Force W Area Routine Order RO No 8 dated 18 April
1940, Ser 3, Winter Clothing.
Oil heating stoves were also withdrawn.
To create resilience in case of the beating stoves were ale devichdran dormant conta a lt with
another company, Blanchisserie de Prenelle, we disabled or dest ded aul the deaning requirements
75
except for leather jerkins. Ibid, p.154.
Ibid.
Taken for Granted
287
Another key improvement to morale as well as being essential to health and hygiene and thus
perational capability, was access to effective bathing facilities. In this respect, the provision
or sometimes otherwise of this amenity, is a microcosm of the differentials between the logistic
piti the corps areas and those in the Base and the role of support in sustaining the
Sile. Whilst even at corps level it had taken until March 1940 for I Corps to receive and
solicit. op Trops Mobile Bath Unit (MBU) in four locations," at No 2 Base Infantry
Depor," Private Fred Gilbert of the Royal Warwickshire Regiment wrote in the same month,
ba, Bah are fev and far between..... we have to wash in water from a pond instead of a
w! The RAOC was responsible for the provision of the divisional MBU, although the
«saint table indicates that it was effectively an All Arms unit.? Capable, in theory, of
behing 120-140 men per hour, the MBU was transported in 2 x 3 ton lorries and consisted
d/20 personnel commanded by a subaltern, and included a barber and a plumber. 2 MBU
be ben prational since 1 December 1939 working closely with 8 Field Hygiene Section
RAMC" to ensure effective bathing and disinfection facilities 2 The OIC 2 MBU, Captain
Ron, had by carly January 1940, arranged the establishment of a number of fixed civilian and
temporary military bathing venues in the Doullens area, although one of the latter erected
1a contractor was found to be unsuitable because the sullage water flowed through a private
zug it the treet." By mid-month, 2 MBU held 1,000 sets of underwear, winter stockings,
dit datest ensure every soldier had a clean set of clothes to wear once they had
had he shortage of spare clothing, including boots, was exacerbated by the cold wet
motions and the often, thick mud in which, some defensive positions were constructed, the
i demo paring as cary as late October 1939, with some units purchasing Frenchmen's blue
donators, a quisition considered to be 'invaluable 85
With ether distured some of the construction activities, interrupted troop movement
a ter, at ay unit bathing periods were very numerous, " with the facilities
i brout working a full capacity and across the 2 MBU sites, 8,787 men took a bath or
orite tv co arch 1940.7 Despite this output, the delousing rate was running
to an 1,00, ich provided an imperative to complete the dis infestation facility
« iout, ich was anned to handle 21,000 soldiers per week and issue them with clean
6 TNA NO 167/1395: 7 MBU RAOC.
TN NO 167205. HO 2nd Division A8Q_ 1 Corps Admin Order 113 dated 10 March 1940, Sect
1) in hi dont was RET because it gave the grid references of the MBU sections and
he ch chi in su likely however, that most soldiers considered their bathing activities a
1 NO 6 23 8 any pa WD, December June 1940. 2 BD was located at Firerux.
Uru dad 20 arch 940 from Private Fired Gilbert to his girlfriend Kay Hind in Coventry.
TH IN 1671391:2 MBU RAOC, WD, 4 March 1940.
, WD, 23 March 1940.
A TH NO 1671391. 2 MBU RAO, WD, 30 March 1940.
