500 A Great Feat of Improvisation
oil, events in France had initiated the requirement to move troops and casualties from the SEP
and by the time Operation DYNAMO 2 was ordered on 26 May 1940, 21,410 Army and RAF
personnel, 4,992 casualties and 1,534 Allied soldiers and refugees totalling 27,936 people had
had landed at Dover, Folkestone, Newhaven and Southampton. 33
First, the planners believed it would probably only be possible to recover soldiers and their
personal equipment. 4 In the event, this was the case, and, in the evacuation from the French
Northern Channel Ports, almost certainly inevitable 35 Salvage parties from the RAOC3 were
deployed at the SEP debarkation ports but contemporary observers were unimpressed, if not
dismayed, by the scale of the abandonment of arms, ammunition and equipment.38 There
was consequently much less reclamation than expected, with the main items being blankets,
rifles, revolvers, grenades and Small Arms Ammunition (SAA), although many of the weapons
had been exposed to sand and salt-water and required reconditioning. Units may not however,
have been entirely at fault in failing to recover what the chain of command expected.
50th
Division, evacuating from Bray Dunes, recorded that its units were ordered to make every
effort to return automatic weapons and optical instruments, especially for the artillery, the
divisional history noting that, 'When the time came, no unit in the Division failed to salve
the machine-guns and instruments' 40 The regimental history of 3rd Medium Regiment Royal
Artillery noted: 'small arms, wireless sets, dial sight, binoculars and compasses were saved, and
these were carried with a great deal of trouble onto the ships. The Navy stepped in at this point
and threw them all in the sea'4 Lance-Corporal Gillian of the regimental Signal Section
showed much greater determination in returning a type-writer, saving it from the water when
the rowing boat he was in. sank 42
32 For the official naval history of Operation DYNAMO, see, BR 1736 (32), Second World War, Battle
Summary No 41, The Evacuation from Dunkirk, Operation Dynamo. See also, ADM 234/360: Operation
Dynamo.
33 TNA WO 197/134: Evacuation and Quartering of the BEF, para 7 and Tatlow, Return from Dunkink,
35
PNA WO 197/34: Evacuation and Quartering of the BEF A Short Account, para 3.
Unfortunately, initially at least, this concept was transferred to the planning of the evacuations from
South of the
Somme, with the consequential loss of otherwise recoverable material, although this
outcome was also the result of late decisions, poor intelligence and weak communication
36 TNA WO 197/134: Evacuation from France and Quartering of the BEF - Activities of the Directorate
of Ordnance Services in the Evacuation from France.
37 On occasions, soldiers had an excellent reason for not disembarking in the UK with a firearm.
Signalman John Yeomans was questioned on arrival on the quay in UK as to the whereabouts of his
rifle, to which he had great pleasure in replying that he had never been issued with one. JIC 241099.
38 The War Office official history commented: Those who can recall the deficiencies of rifles in the
39
Zuydcoote Sanatorium, Bray Dunes and La Panne (Belgium).
40 Major Ewart Clay MBE,
The Path of the 50th: The Story of the SOth (Northumbrian) Division in the Second
World War, 1939-1945 (Aldershot: Gale & Polden, 1950), pp. 25-26.
na, The History of the 3rd Medium Artillery Regiment Royal Artillery, 1939-1945, p.62
Ibid, p.66. Regrettably the author does not offer
' any vicihilit
upon its operational state after its
immersion in sea-water but there is little doubt a RAOC Workshop would have refurbished it.
Back in Blighty
Perhaps because of the poor results from the salvage parties during Operation DYANMO,
ley were not widely deployed to the South-West ports to receive the ships from Operations
YCLE and AERIAL.
This was a missed opportunity to bring some early order to the
quipment issue at Command level because many units withdrawing from the Western and
ormandy ports seized the chance to enhance equipment stocks, often from materiel abandoned
res disciplined units. Whilst every man in 5th King's Own Scottish Borders returned with
ile, the Regimental Quartermaster greatly enhanced the battalion's holdings by salvaging
andoned weapons from the quay at Cherbourg, so upon arrival at the Reorganization Station
i Ramsay in Huntingdonshire, the main shortage was blankets and personal ablution items,
anties of which were kindly donated by local people. 43
The 9th Queens Royal Lancers regimental history identified not only a pertinent command
id control issue but also a downstream Quartermaster problem, which whilst initially
nefiting the regiment caused wider problems for the Army. When the ship SS Lady of Man
nging from Brest arrived at Plymouth, Orders to disembark resulted in an indescribable
de; much equipment including arms and ammunition, was left on board, an omission
lich was probably due to the fact that most of the troops were stragglers and not formed
dies? * This opportunity was too good to miss and an inventory check at the regiment's half-
mpleted camp near Warminster discovered that, 'we had brought with us rather more than
restablishment of small arms: 'A' Squadron for instance, had thirty-six Bren guns instead
the five to which they were entitled. 45 One logistic unit fared rather less well despite
ir best efforts to retain their equipment as the system began to effectively collate materiel,
RASC 2 Division reporting that his soldiers arriving at Halifax in Yorkshire were without
ap, files and respirators, which he discovered had been removed from them in the Reception
Tea camps. 46
Secondly, an assumption was made that the number requiring reception would be
ound 300,000 British soldiers 47 whilst it was deemed unlikely that unit coherence would
* maintained so the reception process would need to reform units in a later phase.
This
al from this assessment was the creation of a three stage process, involving an initial
me from the port to a Reception Area, thence to Divisional Redistribution Areas and
aly to Reorganization Areas The evacuation of French and Allied contingents was also
ined." Whilst the planners had no idea how many Allied soldiers might require evacuation,
ment, accommodation and rationing, an estimate was generated based on the numbers
forcin personnel thought to hainingnce, although it was expected that French military
ad aval personnel would beo be triatrate rance it shipping permitted. Planning for the
Capan Hugh Gunning, Borderers in Battle: The War Story of the King: Own Scottish Borderer, 1939-
1945, Berwick-upon- TWeed: The Regiment, 1948).
* Bright, The Nihy elived: The Regim935, 9483, p. 24.
Id. p.25. 197/210: 2 Division CRASC, WD, entry 7 June 1940.
TNA WO 197/134: 2 Dictation RAScan of y unE A Short Account, para 3 (iv).
NA WO 197/134: Evacuation and Quartering of the BEE, A Short Account, para 3 (i).
A it raspired, 147, Evacuatied ped Queerined in the UK. WOOH, Movements, p.202, App E to
