358
A Great Feat of Improvisation
all the division's tanks were fuelled with a single fuel type, petrol.3 Secondly, there were the
disparate types and quantities of ammunition; four natures for the main armament and two for
the secondary armament. The difficulty was not bulk or weight but the complexities of detail,
a problem compounded when armoured regiments were issued with a mix of tanks, which
made distribution within squadrons more challenging.
Bulk storage and transport had some
flexibility because all of the 2 pounder ammunition was solid shot, the 3.7-inch projectiles being
smoke and High Explosive (HE). The Close Support (CS) A9 and 10 tanks, equipped with a
3.7-inch howitzer, were established in HQ squadrons" to provide smoke cover because the 2
pounders mounted on the Cruiser tanks only had a solid-shot armour piercing round. The 3.7
could also fire High Explosive (HE) rounds against soft targets but the stowage plan, 36 rounds
smoke and four HE, plainly illustrates its primary role. The concept of procuring a tank for the
purposes of firing smoke seems bizarre now but was believed necessary when the design was
progressed. 38 Indeed, in France, with all the other divisional tactical limitations, the provision
of an effective smoke-screen, especially to cover withdrawal, was often vital.
Practically, dedication and diligence created carefully crafted establishment tables with a
theoretical balance of suitable logistic equipment but the efficiency and effectiveness so vital
to manoeuvre operations never had the opportunity to develop within a doctrinally robust
environment.
Nonetheless the logistic thinking and application driven by the RASC was
certainly sound. Each echelon of the Division Su app Colom driven ly had one section
dedicated to Divisional Troops, whilst the other three were allocated to brigade support. The
RASC divisional logistic concept was designed to have a clear focus on delivering stocks to units
thus offering greater mobility by holding stocks on wheels. Generating this capability was a key
task in the 1930s and is neatly summarized by Lieutenant-Colonel Shaw RAOC in his book,
Supply in Modern War: From the foregoing it is clear that the salient features of mechanized
operations will be the dispersion of forces and their speed. Dispersion implies decentralization,
formhis from a supply angle - connotes some measure. Dispersion immint in both unit and
Transportation and Recovery of Armour
Two critical loristic shortfalls in the 1st Armourad Division were the franchort and recovery
of tanks. The BEF had a considerable number of vehicles, both military and civilian, " many
36 The 1 (Marida 1) and A12 (Marida ID were desirenated as Infanty Tank and veron, not
on the establishment of 1 A wits. The A11 had a Ford 70 ho petrol mains and the A12, unusually
for the time, was powered by diesel - two AEC 87 hp bus engines, totalling 174 ho. In France, an
Independent Infantry Tank Squadron 7 A Cos hus engines, to aid 170 red Brigade,
squadron probably consisted of 4x A12 ) as formed and assigned to 3rd A mis Formation of the
1940', Unpublished, TML, 1 AD, Box 1.
1940, Tank Squadron Placed Under Command 1. See, RK Hug Eins Ton, Bi, France, May June
See, WET, WE 1/1931/5E/1, Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 4, p.12
Some publications suggest that the CS tanks were fitted with a in tier the A10 CS example
in the Tank Museum at Bovington has a niks were fitted with a 3 inch howine; shred it.
Shaw, Suppost 5 military and 336 civilian 10 ton variants in France and some of these assets were
taken into German service See WOOH Fighting Suddent and Thanchort While Dart IT Unarmoured
Chasing the Rhino
P33 Armoured Operations Enabler 2. Scammell Pioneer 20 ton Tank Transporter Snow White'
ria Cust negoriates the refugee trafic in the market square in Le Neubourg on 9 June 1940.
Te its botage of these vehicles critically restricted the operational manoeuvre capability of 1st
Armoured Division. (Tank Museum: 4256/B4).
thin a a railers, that were capable for transporting armour with a Gross Vehicle
Kit ich a nor in exesat were cops. Most of these equipments were allocated to
i can i knA id tachments (LAD) for the movement and recovery of the Light Mark
hit i ate only one in the B is the enory weighing 10 tons or less.!? The BEF
hi 61, Appx B I Approximate Losses of B Vehicles by Types in the Evacuation of France,
w of these vehicles were designed to move tracked vehicles, most proved to be capable of
the was (London: HMSO, 1991) Chp 9 and Fletcher, The Great Tank Scandal. British Armour in the
has an excellent electronic archi. afa. le charactariatio
