56 A Great Feat of Improvisation
UK, there was little opportunity to develop and practice on any substantial scale, potential
future options for delivering capability in support of major operations at corps level or greater,
which expeditionary warfare on the Continent demanded.
The second factor was the relatively recent operational large-scale war-fighting experience
of the logistic services, which was based upon the organizations determined by the Great War.
Perhaps inevitably, the Western Front was the driver for most of the lessons, a reflective that
became more pronounced as attention turned to the possibility of a significant Land Force
Continental commitment. It was unfortunate therefore, at this juncture, that two issues blunted
the potential for greater intellectual rigour in assessing for the shape and lay-down of future
logistic support in this environment.
The first, was the perception that the initial strategic
start-point would be similar to 1914 and the second that lessons identified from operations
out-with the Western Front during the Great War had little or nothing to contribute to future
deployments to Europe. As it transpired, whilst there were differences, especially in resources
and terrain, mobile operations in the Eastern Desert, ® Palestine and Mesopotamia generated a
number, of very pertinent outcomes, particularly in relation to the security of the Ground Lines
of Communication (GLOC). The inevitable inter-war evaporation of the coherent corporate
knowledge of logistics 'at scale, which was so hard-won in 1914-1918 was another aspect of
the post-Great War period. The thousands of soldiers who had created this capability were
demobilized and the British Army effectively returned to the pre-Great War focus of colonial
operations, although in some cases, the deployments involved appreciable numbers and intense
actions. There were of course, military logisticians who continued to serve in the Regular and
Territorial Army and shared their Great War knowledge skills with the fresh blood, whilst
others who retired returned to the fold in 1939. Whilst perhaps no longer in their professional
military prime, their experience of scale was a positive contribution to managing the logistic
support to what was a rapidly expanding organization by early 1940.
The experience of the Great War certainly influenced the leadership and the planners in their
response to emerging issues, sometimes positively and occasionally negatively, but equally this
Ordnance Directorate (War Office, 1950), p.x, states for 1939 a figure of 2,500 All Ranks, reinforced
upon mobilization of a smaller group within the Territorial Army.
In 1935, 80% of the RASC units were in the UK and 92% of the RAOC. This does not reflect in detail
the deployment of personnel but clearly indicates the focus on the Home Base; percentages calculated
from information in Cmd 5104, pp.32-33. The disparity, with, for example infantry battalions, is
explained by the logistic arrangements overseas. In India, where 45 infantry battalions were deployed,
the Royal Indian Army Service Corps (RIASC) delivered much of the capability, whilst locally engaged
logistic units and contractors usually supported static garrisons in colonial stations.
The outline global distribution of the British Army on 1 January 1938 was 106,704 troops based in the
UK; 55,498 in India, including Burma; 21,187 in the Middle East and Mediterranean; 12,143 in the
Far East and 1,806 in the West Indies.
War, 10 February 1938.
TNA WO 33/1502: Memorandum by Secretary of State for
The term 'lessons' in the military environment requires clarification. Lessons Identified' are those
lessons from an exercise, operation or campaign, which are assessed to have relevance to the future but
have not been executed. 'Lessons Learned are those lessons, which have resulted in changes in policy,
organization, structures, establishments, planning, training, procedures, drills or equioment.
Cinderella and the Pumpkin
57
should not detract from a growing comprehension of the emergence of new threats and military
systems, the concerns of which, in certain instances, and the risk of aerial attack against Home
Base munitions sites is a good example, became almost a phobia in the minds of some Defence
planners in all three Armed Services. Indeed, in the period 1936-1938, Home Defence became
such an acute issue that the delivery of Ground Based Air Defence (GBAD) capability in the
UK started to bend, albeit relatively briefly, the Army's organizational, logistic and equipment
programme out of shape," General Ironside recording in his diary: 'The decision to form six
A A divisions seals the fate of the Territorial Army as an Army able to go into the field. All our
guns and money and energy will be expended in making these divisions?
The third factor was the influence of colonial operations, which were a feature of the inter-war
period.2 Mainly small in scale, imperial deployments did however, provide officers and soldiers
alike, plenty of opportunity for field service, not a little action, and a raft of lessons, not all of
them relevant for every deployment in the future, in much the same way as Afghanistan has
done in the early 21st Century. These operations reminded the Army that no matter how small
a task, careful logistic planning and execution were essential in enabling successful outcomes
but some of the lessons from these interventions were not fully applicable to substantial force
deployments on the Continent of Europe. Mass however, was critical but not utilized to support
colonial operations, resulting in an erosion of logistic capacity 'at scale to deploy and sustain a
Field Force of two plus divisions. Fortunately, the Royal Engineers, the Corps responsible for
delivering the Army's rail operating and movement capability, not only retained appropriate
Regular assets but were forward leaning in expanding Reserve units.!3 The RE also invested
in developing and improving a central training facility at Longmoor in Hampshire, 4 which
included the Woolmer Instructional Military Railway (WIMR),5 thereby enabling All Arms
9 For a senior logistic officer perspective on this issue, see, TNA WO 32/4612: Future Army Organization
- 1935, QMG Response dated 16 December 1936 to CIGS SECRET Paper, Future Reorganization
of the British Army dated 9 September 1935. Remarkably, the documents in this file remain in the
original cream War Office folder from 1935.
1940 (London: Constable, 1962), pp. 46-47.
12 The locations of these operations included Iraq, Kurdistan, Palestine, Persia, and the NW Frontier of
India. Sce for example, the following Indian Official Histories: Indian General Staff (IGS), The Third
Afghan War, 1919, Official Account (Calcutta: Government of India, 1926) and Operations in Waziristan,
1919-1920, 2nd Edn (Delhi: Government Central Press, 1923). For a comprehensive recent study of
these campaigns, see, the excellent Brian Robson, Crisis on the Frontier: The Third Afghan War and the
Campaigns in Waziristan, 1919-1920 (Staplehurst: Spellmount, 2004).
13 In 1932, the RE had seven Supplementary Reserve railway companies; three construction, two
RTC ceased operating in 1969 and the rails have long since gone, some of the track-beds can be traced
15 Pohe 935, the Longmor Military Railway: The WIMR tie ensured that ways described i i the
WillI t Move Railway. For an early 1930s account see, "The Woolmer Instructional Military Railway',
The Railuay Gazette, 25 November 1932 and for a one volume history, D W Ronald & R J Carter, The
Longmoor Military Railway (Newton Abbot: David & Charles, 1974).
