A Great Feat of Improvisation
largest commercial vehicle manufacturers, also lay militarily dormant until 1939. In this respect,
the War Office had not approached the future need for logistic load-carriers from a strategie
perspective, relying upon impressments and hiring for immediate and short-term needs and an
assumption that the motor industry had surplus capacity and could fill the production gapit
required?" Unfortunately, the failure of the War Office to cogently identify its future industrial
need in this arena resulted in the factories being re-allocated to other munitions manufacture
and in particular, aircraft production.
During the Munich Crisis, with the Army's major vehicle deficiencies clearly in the minds of
the War Office planners, they seized upon an offer by the General Motors Corporation (GMC)
to hold the sale of all their load-carriers in global stock, in order to give the British Government
first refusal on their purchase.
The proposal was not taken up, but as a mark of appreciation,
Treasury approval was obtained for the purchase of 500 GMC load-carriers for the Middle
Fast.
With an eye to the future, the Director of Mechanization had held meetings in the
Spring of 1939 with Vauxhall, to establish MW production rates, and was informed that 2,000
might be built in the first 6 months, rising to 3,000 per month in the long term. By the end of
September 1939, Vauxhall had orders for 27,000 vehicles, 11,000 of them the MW?
As rearmament gathered pace, there was increasing competition for industrial capacity and
strategic resources, and by early 1938, the War Office supply organization was struggling to
keep pace with the changing demands. Various proposals examined how the War Office might
improve their systems but during the year, the Centre of Gravity in the debate shifted, and
the argument was no longer about what steps the War Office should take to put its supply
organization on a rearmament basis but whether supplies for the Army should be handled by the
War Office." There was much inter-departmental discussion over the merits or otherwise of a
Ministry of Supply?" with both the Admiralty and the Air Ministry opposed to inclusion in the
75 How this matured is difficult to understand, given that the analysis of the Middle East option
76
suggested that military vehicle war reserves would need to be enhanced. WOOH, Fighting, Suppor
and Transport Vehicles, Part II, Unarmoured Vehicles, p.13.
By the end of the war nearly 66,000 MWs had been built in several different models, of which the
following were the most important:
Table 2.1
Model
Bedford MW Variants
MWD
Kole
Remarks
GS Truck
MWC
Water Bowser
MWG
200 gallons
AA gun carrier
MWR
20 mm Polsten
Radio Vehicle
MWT
MWV
Anti-tank gun carrier
Fitted For Wireless (FFW)
77
Enclosed van
2 pdr portee
When Sir Hugh Elle' term as the Master-General of the Ordnance ended, the appointment lapsi
78
and his department, under a newly established Deputy Master-General, passed, on 1 January 1938,10
the control of the Director of Munitions Production.
Fee: Do Sonation R the background to the formation of the Ministry of Supply and its so 190,
pp.68-78 and Chp 10.
see: J D Scott & R Hughes, BOH, The Administration of War Production (
Pondon: HMSO 1955)
Everybody's Trucking
91
new body. The Army though, had little choice, and the relevant elements of the Staff, inclusive
of the Contracts Branch, were transferred en bloc to the new ministry on 1 August 1939. One
of the positive effects, was to end the cumbersome system of 'parts contracts', in which up to ten
separate agreements were required for each vehicle covering the chassis, body, cab, tilt and in
sole cases, the tow hook.
The rapidly changing profile of rearmament and the political perspective which supported
it, left the planners with no opportunity to create a balanced vehicle fleet, resulting in the
British Army employing a mixture of types," both military and civilian, built by a number
of manufacturers, although the 3-ton (4x2) was the predominant load-carrier, making up 53
percent of the fleet by quantity. The balance included older military specials, such as the Leyland
Retriever 3-ton 6x4 lorry,° dating from 1933, whilst others, like the Bedford 15-cwt 4x2 MW
did not come into service until 1939. By May 1940, there were eight generic types of military
specification WMT vehicles in the 1-10 ton range in field service with the BEF, produced by 16
manufacturers and the list below summarizes the range and diversity of the types.81
79 The load capacities of the 15-cwt - 3-ton generic vehicle systems are shown below:
Table 2.2
15 cwt - 3-ton
Generic Load-Carriers - Rated Capacity
Type
Personnel
Load
Remarks
(tons)
Truck 15-cwt 4x2 GS
1.0
Bedford MW, Ford WOT2, Guy Ant, Morris CS8
Truck 3-cwt 4x2 GS
1.51
Bedford OX, Morris CS11, Thornycroft
Truck 30-cwt 6x4 GS
Morris (CD series)
Lorry 3-ton 4x2 GS
Austin K3, Bedford OY, Commer Q4, Leyland
3.0
Lynx
Lotty 3-ton 4x4 GS
AEC Matador, Albion FT11, Bedford QL.,
Thornycroft Nubian
Lorry 3-ton 6x4 GS
AEC Marshal, Karrier CK6, Leyland Retriever,
Thornycroft Tartar
80 Tank Museum, Data Book of Wheeled Vehicles, Army Transport, p.67 (67).
For a resume of technical details, see, Data Book of Wheeled Vehicles and Vanderveen, Historic Military
Vebides Directory.
