A Great Feat of Improvisation
Soldiers who were unsure of their formation, were sent by Arm or Service to a Reorganization
Area, an operation, which started on 8 June. In this respect, the RASC, operating its own
mobilization centres was particularly well placed to ensure a timely flow of personnel to field
units. Phase 2 placed a special burden on the RAOC and the NAAFI, for the provision of
tentage but by 30 May, accommodation under canvas was available at Aldershot for 20,000 men
and at Tidworth for 10,000.87 These tented camps®® were but a small proportion of the canvas
requirement in July 1940, which the War Office estimated to be 412,000 bed-spaces,8 although
the requisitioning and enhancement of civilian buildings, led to a substantial reduction of
tented sites by December 1940.' Until units were issued with field catering equipment, the
RASC was responsible for organizing 1st Line catering services.
No Written Instructions
The story of the BEF in most narratives, finishes on a railway train, 'somewhere in England'
with exhausted but relieved soldiers leaning out of windows, smiling, waving and drinking tea
but the engaging account of how the rail movement was planned and executed is rarely exposed.
The reception and onward movement of the BEF was a complex and challenging operation,
which involved a wide range of agencies, not least the War Office and the railways, and planning
between these two organizations commenced formally on 21 May when representatives from
the Directorate of Transportation (DGT) met with the Superintendent of Operations of the
Southern Railway?" The railways were and still are, used to moving large numbers of people on
a daily basis, so the potential demand to entrain 300,000 soldiers at the SEP with a maximum of
30,000 per day was less dramatic than it might first appear. In addition, the Big Four Railway
Companies of the period, directed by the REC had considerable experience of the planning
for, and execution of, military mobilization, the BEF's deployment to France and civilian
evacuations 93
87 WOOH, Quartering, p.19.
88 Many soldiers felt psychologically uneasy in these camps, especially as much of the canvas was white.
The regimental history of 9th Queen's Royal Lancers obs
served, we felt very vulnerable under our new
white tents after the weeks of concealment in the woods of France. Bright, The Ninth Queen's Royal
Lancers, 1936-1945, p.23.
89 WOOH, Quartering, p.22.
Few new camps were constructed between May and December 1940 because it was much more
effective to improve existing facilities. Thus, most of the available Nissen huts were used to enhance
the capabilities of requisitioned sites. For example, a large country house with stables and outbuildings
would be supplemer
ited with 10-12 Nissen huts for additional accommodation and 2-3 for offices,
by January 1941
respectively. WOOH, Quartering, p. 3C
of these, soldiers serving with A moment canvas in the lik Tess and 8,39%
92 TNA WO 197/134: Evacuation from France and Quartering of the BEF - Activities of DGT in the
Evacuation from France.
93 To support the civil evacuation in September 1939, the railway companies ran 3,823 trains, 1,577 of
which, emanated from the London Civil Defence Area, to move 1,334,358 people. For details of train
movement by area, Nock, Britain's Railways at War: 1939-1945, p.16.
Back in Blighty
509
The greatest difficulties they faced in planning for a possible recovery of the BEF, was
firmation of the ports that would be used, the DGT staff only suggesting that it could
ay from Margate to Brighton," whilst initially information on when the trains would
required, and the destinations, was even less defined.
If there is one organization more
sed on DQUAD than military logisticians it is the commercial railway and inevitably the
may HQs were hungry for information to enable work on the task to commence. Operation
NAMO planning soon indicated however, that all the SEP plus Harwich would probably
-he SPODs with Dover as the most important, although the number of trains run from each
I not be planned in detail.? For the later evacuations South of the Somme, the key SPODs
*. almouth, Fowey, Southampton, Plymouth and Weymouth but Operations AERIAL and
LE created fewer problems for the railways because not only did they involve less troops
the planning and execution time-scales were longer.
generate the lift required, the REC co-ordinated the provision of 186 train sets from the
our. Each set, held in a pool and capable of carrying 600 men, comprised 10-12 coaches,
consist could be handled by any locomotive that was likely to draw it. The GWR provided
why, he LIMS 44, the LNER 47 and the Southern Railway, 55.% Initially, the hand-over of
i to the Southern Railway took place as follows: GWR at Salisbury, LMS at Kensington
dion Road) and LNER stock at Banbury and Reading. As 80 percent of the soldiers were
red to move to areas within the territories of the Southern Railway and GWR, these two
mies, and the former in particular, became the focus for the operation.
The initial routing
sept as simple as possible:
Table 19.4
Operation DYNAMO - Train Routing®7
SPOD
Ner & Folkestone
Route
Redhill - Kensington - Reading
Destination
Mainly Aldershot & Salisbury
Plain
sie & Ramsgate
Reading
Mainly Aldershot & Salisbury
Plain
Chichester then Salisbury
Mainly Salisbury Plain
Sex Ports
Chichester then Salisbury
Mainly Salisbury Plain
wed ran working, the GWR ran some trains to Redhill Junction using its own locomotives;
imposit to go further because route restrictions on SR lines in the South-East precluded
te. To simplify movement control, four Regulating Stations were selected, to which
•SPOD ver identified as: Brighton, Dover, Eastbourne, Folkstone, Harwich, Hastings, Margare,
charen and Ramsate aN A righton, 134, Evacuation from France and Quartering of the BEF -
Re our o Bout Evacuati resuled in few troops landing at SPOD: West of Folkestone,
Arties f ST in the Evacuation from France.
top alties on hospital carriers evacuated to Newhaven.
ires from Nock, Britain's Railways at War: 1939-1945, p.84
de colated from intrina Ronin Talow, Return from Dunkink, p.73.
