Docks and Stocks 153
152
A Great Feat of Improvisation
SECTION
'Companies AMPC'?5 The AMPC also managed the Foreign Labour Training Centre? and
Italian, Prestataire and Palestinian?® Companies.
A Brewer's Drayman
Chronologically, the logisticians sought first to meet the daily maintenance demands,
whilst seeking to create a working margin to mitigate failures such as contaminated fuel or
transportation disruption, with the outcome being the generation of operational reserves to
meet unforeseen contingencies and major kinetic combat. The greatest challenge to output
on the GLOC in the deployment and initial reinforcement phases was the considerable
reliance on improvised logistic units, an arrangement strongly contrasting with the Regular
and its associated Reserve components in I and II Corps. Whilst authorized through a War
Establishment Table (WET) few of these units existed in peace and they had to be mobilized
using personnel from the Regular and Territorial Armies, Supplementary Reservist and Militia,
who paraded with varying standards and levels of military and technical knowledge and field
operating experience. This was exacerbated by the failure to train most of these personnel in
their war roles, a point concisely summarized by the experience of a Railway Traffic Officer,
who described the initial capability of his team: 'A brewer's drayman, a tinsmith, a train-
driver and a painter - not a semblance of clerical experience among them'?30 Director-General
Transportation (DGT) BEF, Brigadier D J McMullen" was scathing in his post deployment
report, writing that the Docks Groups were 'thrown together' at the outbreak of war and were
consequently unorganised, a damning comment on such a critical asset. Some Regulars were
aware of their mobilization tasks and conducted pre-deployment preparation but this work
became nugatory when allotments to posts were amended. In addition, many of the logistic
P5.1 Racking and Stacking. The initial shortage of skilled staff, MIHE and racking caused serious
disruption to BOD operations and thus to the distribution of many key spares. (RICM: RAOC/
Trades 6560/2)
railways, with the majority of the latter, covering survey, operating, construction, stores an
repair. The RE also deployed an artisan works company, Base and LOC postal units, a forestry
company and a camouflage factory. The RASC deployed the following types of unit in the
Base: Supply depot, field bakery, field butchery, petrol filling centre, bulk petrol company, buk
petrol storage company, Heavy Repair Shop (HRS), Vehicle Reserve Depot (VRD), Motic
Transport Stores Depot (MTSD), ambulance car company, and Line of Communication MIT
company. The RAOC allocated the following capabilities: advanced Base ordnance depot, Base:
Ordnance Depot (BOD), ordnance stores company, Advanced Ordnance Workshop (AOW,
ordnance workshop company, Port Workshop Detachment (PWD), Base Ammunition Depri
(BAD), ordnance ammunition company, armoured corps Ordnance Field Park (OP) ni
armoured corps workshop.
The Auxiliary Military Pipeer Corps (A MIP) deployed in
Labour Companies, " the title of which, denoted the task: Depot, Docks, General, Ordan.
Railway, RASC and Works, although the nomenal task: Deponended in November 19 10
22
Philson, BEFORBAT, Vol 3, p.ii.
24
For a list o AMPC Companies in the BEF; sec, Maior F 11 Rhode-Wood, A Writy fit Rope.
Pioneer Corps, pp.338-341
he use of the
erm Labour in the War Office, was greeted with little enthusiasm by Colond I Vit
Jackson late Buffs, who as the AAG at AG 14, was greeted with Vitoeing the capability, who foug
for the title Pioneer Corps. He won his campaign, although initially the departmental process added
Auxiliary Military to the name. Ibid, p.6.
25 Tbid, pp.13-15.
ding 1,776 recruits, the Training Centre had an establishment of 2,055. Philson, BEFORBAT,
Vol 3, p. 25.
27 Consis
ing of Austrian, Czech, German and Polish personnel. Rhodes-Wood, A War History of the
Royal Pioneer Corps, p. 24.
28 to Them roast atonalities cried from Palestic. id, p25.
30 WOOH, Movements, p.87. No doubt the RTO was in a dilemma over the assignment of the train
driver, who was probably the only one of the team who understood at least part of the technical work
would have been much more effective in a Railway Operating Company
31 Brigadier DJ McMullen DSO (189-1967) was appointed to the post having been seconded to
the Egyptian Co
vernment for railway duties (1920-1929) and served as the Assistant Director of
fthe Second World War, p.204.
1 avoie 5 Car, aportaion, G (Tn) dated 11 October 1939,; Lessons.
