284
A Great Feat of Improvisation
P10.6 War on Waste. Damaged packaging inevitably created product loss. (RL.CM: B3/SRB/NOR)
assigned a controller to coordinate the work of the Salvage Units' the task being reflected by the
continual round of educational and information gathering visits recorded in the war diaries."
Military equipment, including weapons, vehicles, webbing, wireless sets, tentage, ammunition
brass and accommodation stores were usually returned through the Ordnance system for repair,
reissue, return to UK, destruction or local sale, with RE and RASC specialist equipment
following a similar process through the relevant chain, although there were occasions when
limited access to, or disruption of, transportation interrupted the process." Scrap metal, tyres
and waste oil were all items that required careful management with the collection and disposal
of this material dependent to an extent upon the effort required to collate and move it, mal!
57 Ill Corps was allocated, 7, 9, 10 and 13 SUs. TNA WO 167/187: III Corps Salvage, WD, entries April
1940, with 10 SU assigned to Slst (Highland) Division a7/183 SU initially to 30th (Northumbrian)
Division.
59
The war diary for I Corps Salvage is not held in the TNA.
On 5 February 1940, 4 Division CRASC report that TO Arras could not accept any RASC veile
recoveries to the Base for 14 days. Whilst the reason is not explained in the war diary, the poor wate
conditions were probably responsible. TA Won innot lined i ReSC, WD, Femay 1959,
Taken for Granted
285
quantities in isolated locations usually being disposed of through local commercial arrangements
with the Host Nation. 0
Some materiel circulating within the BEF's Reverse Logistics system was vital to the
distribution system. Divisional HOs and Supply Columns were constantly reminding units to
retum sacks for vegetables, potatoes and bread, the reuse of which, were essential to effective
operation of the distribution system, whilst the RE were keen to recover and reuse cement
sad and unused sandbags. Units were also directed to return empty packing canvas and
as, a hoard cartons, cotton wool, paper and cardboard sheets to the Salvage Units. To save
spread thus transport, units were requested to move such items inside returning packing
«" The reintroduction of re-useable cans to the fuel distribution system created another
im in the Reverse Logistics loop that became increasingly critical to combat capability, a
rity at was initially under-pinned by the reliance on the disposable flimsy, which the
shi he BE were culturally attuned to throw away, a problem that required prompt
tention to resolve.
hide, the handling of the empty fuel 'flimsies' of which, there was soon a mounting number
trame significant ask. Scattered units were authorised to sell them locally, which of course
catch ne for financial audits, but most were returned to salvage dumps or Corps Petrol
Ruthed from where they were returned the Base POL depots. These 'tin dumps' became a
it is because the shiny containers were easily spotted from the air and prompted various
tops to reduce the signature. Flattening the tins was one solution, which also reduced the
Done qued for transportation but was usually labour intensive, although HQ 1 POLD
sound he series a diesel road roller to undertake the task. Other uses were also found
te is ch a Division instructing units to deliver them to Petrol Points for onward
Sout h yal Engineers for the revetting of defence works, 6 whilst other logisticians
at thema dunnage for box and case stacks at field sites .7
Chen and Tidy
in in if tirins, which in the regimental histories receive no attention, were
ding a day In many respects, the deployment in September 1939 created an
mit alge in the storage and issue of clothing because the small initial stocks of
ect fint met the First Contingent in the autumn did not meet the demands in
1 TH NO 16738: GH Controller of Salvage, Report on Tour of Inspection of Lines of
HA Ha: 102a Din, Dhian, Div Admin Order No No dred arced January 1940, para
AND 6814. 1 POLD RASC, WD, my 12 April 194).
TV. NO 1671235:4 Division CRASC, WD, 24 October 1939,
XI NO 67095, 1L0C Railhead Company RASC, WD, entries March 1940.
