Factory to Fire Trench
209
208
A Great Feat of Improvisation
P7.2 Munition Production and Distribution. Transportation and especially the railway, were vital in
delivering raw materials to the factories and distributing the finished products.
The Ministry of Suppl
branch line from the GWR at Caldicot Junction Monmouthshire to RNPF Caerwent in 2008. (Author)
work to improve access and storage, and difficulties appertaining to flooding and humidity, the
effective utilization of the cubic capacity remained a major challenge, whilst work to construct
Ridge Quarry for the RAF delayed the Eastlays Quarry Depot for the War Office. As a
component of the planning for a continental deployment and in anticipation of ammunition
shipments from Southampton, in 1938 the War Office also acquired a site at Westmoors near
Ferndown in Dorset and commenced construction of low profile reinforced concrete explosive
storehouses" although as it transpired, ammunition was mostly exported from Fowey in
Cornwall, Newhaven in Sussex and Newport in South Wales.
The three ESHs known as "airfax sheds remain on the site, testament to an association in the
BEF. In June 1940, with anti invasion preparations a priority and the site vulnerable to atack, wors
on expanding it as an ammunition depot ceased. The US Army was allocated the site as a Petroleu
Oils and Lubricants (POL) depot under peration BOLERO, ra store 47,250 tons of packed ul
activating it as Q-329 in July 1943. The site
Defence Petroleum Centre. See, Willia if Remained hate it Romanes, United States Army in Wais
remained in military ownership post-war and is now the
War I1, The Quartermaster Corps: Operations in the War agailst Germany, Office of the Chief of Military
History (Washington: Department of the Army, 1965), p.267.
degrund storage, whilst creating greatly improved protection, needed much greater
nestment and resulted in higher operating costs over those for surface sites as well as
into generating un-expected technical and practical issues. In 1936, the plan to store the
Cene stocks of 18 and 25 pounder and 4.5-inch artillery ammunition in Box Quarry
niemed because of the wooden boxes, in which, the munitions were packed. Not only did
= 20 prent more space than the steel equivalents but also they posed underground, a
kably greater fire risk than at a surface depot, whilst the cost of re-boxing to steel was
and to be €10,00.8 In-loading ammunition to Tunnel Quarry commenced in July 1938
e intention to eventually store 135,000 tons of mainly artillery ammunition including 2.5
rounds of 25 pounder, 1.6 million 3 and 3.7-inch AA and 500 million rounds of SAA. 59
read was however, disrupted by inadequate ventilation, which led to deterioration of
roblem not expected during intense active operations because the turnover would have
agi, so more investment was required to create the conditions conducive to long-term
In a relatively short period of time, the challenges and expense of under-ground
became clear. After the BEF was evacuated from France, growing outputs from
cated an imperative to resolve the storage problem in UK and the War Office, whilst
ting to develop CAD Corsham, returned to the concept of surface storage by expanding
com and authorizing the construction of two major surface ammunition depots, both of
it til prated,' at Nescliff in Shropshire and Kineton in Warwickshire.
it the ete titioning of the expanding munitions supply chain in the UK were
dings. The new REFs had extensive internal Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) systems
can ational Rail Network, whilst the new ammunition depots were either rail-
i rated, hereby creating an End-to-End logistic capability to the SPODs. ROF
ya sered by the London, Midland & Scottish Railway (LMS) but the key company
rag the spy of BE munitions was the Great Western Railway (GWR), which served
/ nigend, AD Bramley, CAD Corsham and the main ammunition SPODs of Fowey in
malad pot in South Wales, whilst traffic to Newhaven in Sussex was transferred
a cent alay. To service the operations of the expanding subterranean complex at
TH NO 32343. Underground Storage - Accommodation for Explosives, 57/Gen/7533 dated 5
ka 196. Minute MCO to PUS. Based upon RPI, the re-boxing cost equates to £6.738 million.
16. 3431 tround red upA RP, the reb for Expegua, Table: Tunnel Quarry
Ming me ed in gary: 0,00 protechnic, 700,00 No 36 grenades and
act sure workings, with an entrance at the Eastern end of Box Tunnel.
ine sub-depots covering an area of 1,800 acres and holding
inition. Nescliff closed as an ammunition depot in 1960 and is, at the time of
Sion, NOD training, airy in a rutal sting, whilst some of the ESts constructed during the
40) un 0 ring 150,00 ons of ammunition. Kineton remains an operational
