Everybody's Trucking
The expansion of the logistic task vehicle fleet in the British Army in the period
1935-1940
Introduction
The British Army of late 1918 was an immensely capable force, equipped with State of the Art
weapons and beginning to seize the opportunities offered by the internal combustion engine for
mobile warfare, and logistic support.
20 years on, one could have been forgiven for thinking
that time had stood still because in 1938, most commanders and defence planners, perceived
that any future campaign would be similar to late 1917, with periods of static warfare and some
limited mobile operations. Such an approach seems at odds with the wide debate during the
1930s, on the strengths of mobile forces, and the supporting experimentation with them in
the field, but given the force structure, which remained based on the infantry division, there
could only be one conclusion as to the British Army's perspective of warfare.
The story is
therefore a complex, yet thoroughly interesting one, in which Grand strategic policy, defence
finance, government taxation, military technical require ments, intand strategic pol regiment
prejudices, commercial initiatives and vehicle engineering, all combined to influence the
To support a massive expansion programme and the expeditionary force in France,
some quite remarkable improvisation had to pr enacted, in order to procure the necessary logisic
load-carriers? How this was achieved, and the lessons that were learned from executing it, is
the subject of this chapter.
For the combat aspects, see, Sec, Harold R Winton, To Change an Army, General Sir John Burnet Stat
Coloni Came Do trine, 1927-1938 (Kansas: University on Kansa Press, Sir a do gio,
Colonel D C Cameron OBE, "The Supply of Mechanized Forces in the Field', Royal United Services
Institution (RUSI) Vol LXXIV November 1929, No 496.
In this chapter, load-carrier also includes specialist types, such as vehicles for tankers, technical stores,
workshops, recovery and Heavy Equipment Transporters (HET).
Everybody's Trucking
77
Despite the travails of the inter-war period, the BEF was, in 1939, the only motorized force
to deploy in the European Theatre, although there were no specialized military logistic task
vehicles in quantity production in the United Kingdom, with which to support such formations,
so many units were equipped partially or wholly, with vehicles impressed from the civilian
sector. Given the vibrancy of the British motor industry, this may appear surprising but was a
product of British Government and War Office policy in the 1930s, which sought for financial
and economic reasons to rely on commercial trends rather than a military lead in the design
of military Wheeled Motor Transport (WMT). By the time it was motorized in 1930, the
RASC became the largest single user of WMT and logistic load-carriers, resulting in three
classifications of Army vehicles. 'A' vehicles sponsored by Master-General of the Ordnance
(MGO) 5 included tanks, Dragon tracked artillery tractors, all tracked and semi-tracks,
armoured cars and specialist combat unit WMT. 'B' vehicles, sponsored by MGO 6 covered
all Army WMT with the exception of RASC equipments, which were sponsored by QMG
3, including all load or passenger WMT on RASC unit establishments or driven by RASC
personnel, including all ambulances and fire engines. The RAOC was responsible for the
storage, issue and repair of all'A' and 'B' vehicles, whilst the RASC had its own systems for the
vehicles it sponsored 3
RASC officers employed in the Motor Transport (MT) arena were a mix of WMT
operators and mechanical engineers, who sought to forge resilience professional interfaces
with the automotive engineering and production industries, thereby generating constructive
relationships between the military and commercial spheres. This arrangement created a pool of
expertise and reinforced the fact that WMT was an adjunct of Supply, which meant there was
less emphasis on maturing the components of future Army capability. In 1925, MGO split the
staff of the Director of Artillery, with Branch Il being formed to manage the development of
Armoured Fighting Vehicles (ÁFV) and WMT, although the transfer of responsibility from
the QMG and RASC was not effective until 1927 and Director of Artillery II was re-titled
Director Mechanization? Even then, the RASC remained the largest user of WMT and
QMG remained predominately responsible for the first stage in the provision of RASC vehicles
3 The British Army was not however, fully motorized because upon mobilization, the TA yeomanry
regiments of the Ist Cavalry Division retained their horses. See, Dennis C Bateman, 'Goodbye to
Boots and Saddles, The Twilight of the British Cavalry, British Army Review, No 114 (UK MOD,
December 1996), pp.75-89.
4 For a description of RASC vehicle trials and experiments in the inter-war period, see, Major General
Patrick G Turpin CB OBE MA FCIT, The Turn of the Wheel: The History of the RASC, 1919-1939,
This arrangement continued until 1942,
Institution of the Royal Corps of Transport (Buckingham: Barracuda Books, 1988), pp. 169-179.
I, Common Problems, p.100.
Tbid, pp.51-52.
As Campagnac and Hayman observe, Director of Artillery Il had good justification in adhering to his
developments. Ibid, p.52.
and 'mechanization. The title of Director of Mechanicalization was hardly one to inspire future
